Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
General Penalty
[Adopted 12-29-1954 by Ord. No. 864]
§ 1-1. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-15-1980 by Ord. No.
1719; 5-18-1988 by Ord. No. 1842; 1-20-1993 by Ord. No. 1932]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of any
ordinance of the Borough of Hanover, now in effect or hereafter enacted and
ordained, or any rule or regulation adopted by authority of any ordinance
or resolution approved by the Council shall, upon conviction thereof, before
any Magisterial District Judge of said Borough, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $25,000 per day, per violation, for violation of industrial
wastewater pretreatment standards or requirements, $1,000 for violations
of building, housing, property maintenance or public safety ordinances, and
$600 for all other ordinances, and costs of prosecution, and, in default
of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the county jail for
not more than 30 days; provided, however, that for any violation for which
the penalty or the term of imprisonment in default of payment thereof is
specifically prescribed in any of the laws of Pennsylvania or is specifically
limited by law to a maximum amount or term less than the amount or term,
as the case may be, stipulated above, the provisions of the law shall be
controlling.
§ 1-2. Repealer.
Any specific provision of any ordinance heretofore enacted and ordained
and now in effect, prescribing a penalty for the violation thereof and/or a
term of imprisonment in default of payment thereof, is hereby repealed, and
the provisions of § 1-1 of this article shall be applicable to such ordinance
in lieu of the said penalty provision; provided, however, that the penalty
provisions enacted as a part of any ordinance granting a franchise to any
specific person, firm or corporation for electric, gas, telephone or telegraph
or other utility service, and now in effect, shall not be repealed by this
article and shall remain in effect, as enacted, until specifically repealed or
amended.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:3

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 6-27-2012 by Ord. No. 2188]
§ 1-3. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1008(b) of the Borough Code [53 P.S. § 46008(b)], the
codification of a complete body of legislation for the Borough of Hanover,
County of York, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as revised, codified and
consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by General Code, and
consisting of Chapters 1 through 370, together with an Appendix, are
hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of
the Borough of Hanover, which shall be known and is hereby designated as
the "Code of the Borough of Hanover," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-4. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of
the prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued
in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by
the Borough Council of the Borough of Hanover, and it is the intention of
said Borough Council that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such
provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-5 below, and only
changed provisions, as described in § 1-8 below, shall be deemed to be
enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-17 below.
§ 1-5. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
Except as provided in § 1-6, Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not
affected by repeal, below, all ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent
with the provisions contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are
hereby repealed as of the effective date given in § 1-17; provided, however,
that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such inconsistency, and any
valid legislation of the Borough of Hanover which is not in conflict with the
provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in full force and effect.
§ 1-6. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-5 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-5 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 12-30-2011.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Borough prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Borough or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Borough.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Borough or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Borough or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Borough.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
§ 1-6 HANOVER CODE § 1-6
1:6
§ 1-7. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-6A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-8. Changes and revisions in previously adopted ordinances.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Borough or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Borough.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the Borough for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code
as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
B. Nomenclature. Throughout the Code, references to the following
agencies or officials are updated as indicated:
(1) "Department of Environmental Resources" or "DER" to
"Department of Environmental Protection" or "DEP."
(2) "Department of Community Affairs" or "DCA" to "Department of
Community and Economic Development" or "DCED."
(3) "Justice of the Peace," "District Magistrate" and "District Justice" to
"Magisterial District Judge."
(4) "Burgess" or "Chief Burgess" to "Mayor."
(5) "Soil Conservation Service" or "SCS" to "Natural Resources
Conservation Service" or "NRCS."
(6) "Department of Highways" to "Department of Transportation."
C. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:7
§ 1-9. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-10. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-11. Filing of copy of Code.
At least one copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with
the Ordinance Book in the office of the Borough Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copy
or copies shall be certified to by the Borough Secretary, as provided by
law, and such certified copy or copies shall remain on file in the office of
the Borough Secretary, available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-12. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
nature, as set forth below, are hereby made to various ordinances and
resolutions included in the Code. These changes are enacted to bring
provisions into conformity with the desired policies of the Borough, and
it is the intent of the Borough that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code as if the legislation so changed had been previously
formally amended to read as such. All such changes and revisions shall
be deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the Code specified
in § 1-17.
(1) Original § 89-3, Annual fee for Western Union Telegraph Company,
is hereby repealed.
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-8 HANOVER CODE § 1-12
1:8
Borough Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the postbound
book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-13. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copy or copies
of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the
Borough Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Borough Council subsequent to
the effective date of this codification which the Borough Council shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances or resolutions
are printed as supplements to said Code books, at which time such
supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-14. Publication of notices.
The Borough Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the
notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability
of a copy or copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed,
held and considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the
Code for all purposes.
§ 1-15. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Borough
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
thereof, by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 1-16. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
§ 1-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:9
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough Council that this
ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-17. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after June 27, 2012.
§ 1-16 HANOVER CODE § 1-17
1:10
Chapter 5
AUDITOR
§ 5-1. Office created.
The office of Independent Auditor for the Borough of Hanover is hereby
created.
§ 5-2. Duties.
The Independent Auditor for the Borough of Hanover shall audit all
accounts of the Borough as shall be required by law.
§ 5-3. When appointed.
The Independent Auditor shall be appointed annually by resolution of
Council before the close of the fiscal year.
§ 5-4. Qualifications.
The Independent Auditor shall be a certified public accountant registered
in Pennsylvania, a firm of certified public accountants so registered or a
competent public accountant or a competent firm of public accountants.
Chapter 8
AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL
§ 1-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-4
1:11

ARTICLE I
Municipal Authority
[Adopted 11-2-1955 by Ord. No. 885]
§ 8-1. Intent.
The Council hereby signifies its intention and desire to organize an
Authority under the provisions of the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945,"
as amended.1
§ 8-2. Articles of Incorporation.
The Mayor, the President of Borough Council and the Secretary thereof
are hereby authorized and directed to execute, on behalf of the Borough
of Hanover, Articles of Incorporation for said Authority, in substantially the
following form:
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
To the Secretary of the commonwealth; Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
In compliance with the requirements of the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382,
known as "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945,"2 as amended, the Borough
of Hanover, York County, Pennsylvania, desiring to incorporate an Authority
thereunder, does hereby certify:
1. The name of the Authority is "Hanover Borough, York County,
Authority."
2. Said Authority is formed under the provisions of the Act of May 2, 1945,
P.L. 382, as amended.
3. No other Authority organized under the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382,
as amended, is in existence in or for the incorporating municipality, the
Borough of Hanover.
4. The name of the incorporating municipality is Borough of Hanover, York
County, Pennsylvania.
5. The names and addresses of its municipal authorities are as follows:
Mayor: William H. Menges, 420 Stock Street, Hanover, Pennsylvania.
President, Borough Council: Louis B. Kirkland, 312 Baltimore Street,
Hanover, Pennsylvania.
Borough Treasurer: Horace C. Thoman, 583 Broadway, Hanover,
Pennsylvania.
Secretary, Borough Council: S. Donald Michael, 109 North Franklin
Street, Hanover, Pennsylvania.
Councilmen:
1. Editor's Note: The Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 (53 P.S. § 301 et seq.) was repealed
by Act 22 of 2001 (June 19, 2001, P.L. 287, No. 22). See now the Municipality Authorities
Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
2. Editor's Note: See now the Municipality Authorities Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 8-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-2
1:13
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
First Ward: Earl W. Hanson, 306 East Middle Street, Hanover,
Pennsylvania; Paul A. Harner, 413 Fulton Street, Hanover,
Pennsylvania.
Second Ward: J. Walter McCullough, 425 McCosh Street, Hanover,
Pennsylvania; Reuben Becker, 13 Charles Street, Hanover,
Pennsylvania.
Third Ward: E. Russell Rouzer, 860 Carlisle Street, Hanover,
Pennsylvania; Fred Shoemaker, 305 Fourth Street, Hanover,
Pennsylvania.
Fourth Ward: Lauren H. Schott, 206 Fleming Avenue, Hanover,
Pennsylvania; W. Roy Attlesberger, 335 Second Avenue, Hanover,
Pennsylvania.
Fifth Ward: Louis B. Kirkland, 312 Baltimore Street, Hanover,
Pennsylvania; Roger E. Johnson, 18 Orchard Street, Hanover,
Pennsylvania.
6. The names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of the
Board of the Authority to be formed hereby are as follows:
Russell M. Shafer, Sr., 20 Fourth Street, Hanover, Pennsylvania, 5
years.
J. Walter Rohrbaugh, 229 Broadway, Hanover, Pennsylvania, 4 years.
Paul M. Garrett, 419 Baer Avenue, Hanover, Pennsylvania, 3 years.
John C. Tanger, Jr., 518 Carlisle Street, Hanover, Pennsylvania, 2 years.
Clyde R. Orndorff, 216 Potomac Avenue, Hanover, Pennsylvania, 1 year.
7. The ordinance authorizing the creation of said Authority certified from
the records of the Council of the Borough of Hanover, together with
advertisement of notice of filing these Articles of Incorporation, are
each submitted herewith.
In witness whereof, the undersigned have executed these Articles on behalf
of the Borough of Hanover and have caused to be affixed the Seal thereof
this _______ day of November 1955.
President, Borough Council
(Borough Seal)
Attest: Secretary
§ 8-3. Publication.
The President and Secretary of Borough Council are directed to cause a
notice of the substance of this article, including the substance of the above
Articles of Incorporation and of the proposed filing of the above Articles,
to be published once each in The York Legal Record, and in a newspaper
published and of general circulation in York County, as required by the
Municipality Authority Act of 1945, as amended.3
§ 8-2 HANOVER CODE § 8-4
1:14
§ 8-4. Filing of Articles of Incorporation.
The President and Secretary of Borough Council are directed to file said
Articles of Incorporation, together with the necessary proofs of publication,
with the Secretary of the commonwealth, and to do all other acts and things
necessary or appropriate to effect the incorporation of Hanover Borough,
York County, Authority.
§ 8-5. Initial project.
The initial project to be undertaken by the Authority is to acquire, hold,
construct, improve, maintain, operate, own, lease, either as lessor or lessee,
sewers, sewer systems or parts thereof, and sewage treatment work,
including works for the treating and disposing of industrial waste, in and for
the Borough of Hanover and for such other territory as it may be authorized
to serve.
§ 8-6. Membership; terms of office.
The following named persons be and they hereby are appointed as the
first members of the Board of the Authority, whose terms of office shall
commence on the date of appointment and shall be computed from January
1 next succeeding the date of incorporation:
A. Russell M. Shafer, Sr., 20 Fourth Street, Hanover, Pennsylvania, five
years.
B. J. Walter Rohrbaugh, 229 Broadway, Hanover, Pennsylvania, four years.
C. Paul M. Garrett, 419 Baer Avenue, Hanover, Pennsylvania, three years.
D. John C. Tanger, Jr., 518 Carlisle Street, Hanover, Pennsylvania, two
years.
E. Clyde R. Orndorff, 216 Potomac Avenue, Hanover, Pennsylvania, one
year.
3. Editor's Note: See now the Municipality Authorities Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 8-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-6
1:15

ARTICLE II
Parking Authority
[Adopted 9-21-1966 by Ord. No. 1323]
§ 8-7. Intent.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Hanover hereby signifies its
intention and desires to organize a Parking Authority under the provisions
of the "Parking Authority Law of 1947," as amended.4
§ 8-8. Articles of Incorporation.
The President and the Secretary of Borough Council are hereby authorized
and directed to execute on behalf of the Borough of Hanover Articles of
Incorporation for said Authority, in substantially the following form:
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
To the Secretary of the commonwealth; Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
In compliance with the requirements of the Act of June 5, 1947, P.L.
458, known as the "Parking Authority Law,"5 as amended, the Borough of
Hanover, York County, Pennsylvania, desiring to incorporate an Authority
thereunder, does hereby certify:
1. The name of the Authority is Hanover Parking Authority.
2. Said Authority is formed under the provisions of the Act of June 5,
1947, P.L. 458, as amended.
3. The name of the incorporating municipality is Borough of Hanover, York
County, Pennsylvania.
4. The names and addresses of its municipal authorities, including its
Council members, are as follows:
Mayor, John C. Harman, 504 McCosh Street.
President of Borough Council, Paul F. Worcester, 441 West Middle
Street.
Borough Treasurer, Horace C. Thoman, 583 Broadway.
Borough Secretary, Gerald E. Wertman, 270 Fleming Avenue.
Councilmen: Richard W. Brubaker, 510 Baer Avenue; Alfred J. Young, 23
Fourth Street; David K. Malcolm, 315 Broadway; Riley C. Wildasin, 302
Diller Road; Harold L. Reeves, 217 Potomac Avenue; Paul F. Worcester,
441 West Middle Street; Miles R. Fasnacht, 27 Lee Street; Richard E.
Gingrow, 203 York Street.
5. The names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of the
Board of the Parking Authority to be formed hereby are as follows:
Louis B. Kirkland, 312 Baltimore Street, 5 years.
4. Editor's Note: The Parking Authority Law (53 P.S. § 341 et seq.) was repealed by Act 22 of
2001 (June 19, 2001, P.L. 287, No. 22). See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5501 et seq.
5. Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5501 et seq.
§ 8-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-8
1:17
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
• Richard E. Strouss, 212 Frederick Street, 4 years.
Gerald Good, 273 DeGuy Avenue, 3 years.
Henry J. Snyder, 216 York Street, 2 years.
Elwood E. Riddle, 524 West Middle Street, 1 year.
In witness whereof, the undersigned have executed these Articles on behalf
of the Borough of Hanover and have caused to be affixed the Seal thereof
this _______ day of 1966.
(SEAL)
President of
Borough Council
Attest: Approved:
Secretary
Mayor
COMMONWEALTH OF
PENNSYLVANIA
COUNTY OF YORK
:
: SS
On this day of 1966, before me, the undersigned Notary Public,
personally came the above-named and whose official positions
in the Borough of Hanover are respectively President and Secretary of the
Borough Council, and who in due form of law acknowledged the foregoing
Articles of Incorporation to be the act and deed of the Borough of Hanover
for the purposes therein specified and did depose and say that the facts set
forth therein are true and correct.
Notary Public
§ 8-9. Publication of article.
The proper officers of the Borough of Hanover are hereby directed to cause
this article to be published as required by law, but setting forth only briefly
the substance of the proposed Articles of Incorporation, as permitted by
Section 4 of the Parking Authority Law, as amended.6
6. Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5501 et seq.
§ 8-8 HANOVER CODE § 8-10
1:18
§ 8-10. Publication of notice of filing.
The proper officers of the Borough of Hanover are hereby directed to cause
a notice of the proposed filing of the above Articles of Incorporation to be
published once in the York County Law Reporter and once in a newspaper
published and of general circulation in York County, as required by Section
4 of the Parking Authority Law, as amended.7
§ 8-11. Filing of Articles of Incorporation.
The President and Secretary of Borough Council are directed to file said
Articles of Incorporation, together with the necessary proof of publication,
with the Secretary of the commonwealth, and to do all other acts and things
necessary or appropriate to effect the incorporation of the Hanover Parking
Authority.
§ 8-12. Membership; terms of office.
The following named persons be and they hereby are appointed by the
President of Borough Council as the first members of the Board of the
Parking Authority, whose terms of office shall commence on the date of
appointment and shall be computed from June 1, 1966:
A. Louis B. Kirkland, 312 Baltimore Street, five years.
B. Richard E. Strouss, 212 Frederick Street, four years.
C. Gerald Good, 273 DeGuy Avenue, three years.
D. Henry J. Snyder, 216 York Street, two years.
E. Elwood E. Riddle, 524 West Middle Street, one year.
7. Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5501 et seq.
§ 8-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-12
1:19

ARTICLE III
Stormwater Authority
[Adopted 10-24-2018 by Ord. No. 2277]
§ 8-13. Intent.
It is the intent of the Borough Council of the Borough of Hanover to
organize an authority under provisions of the Municipality Authorities Act.8
§ 8-14. Name of Authority.
The name of the Authority shall be the "Borough of Hanover Stormwater
Authority."
§ 8-15. Articles of Incorporation.
The proposed Articles of Incorporation of said Borough of Hanover
Stormwater Authority are attached hereto as Exhibit "A."
§ 8-16. Members.
The first members of the Board of the Borough of Hanover Stormwater
Authority, named in the proposed Articles of Incorporation (Exhibit "A"),
are specifically appointed members of said Board for the terms set after
their respective names as set forth in the proposed Articles of Incorporation
(Exhibit "A"), commencing on the date of appointment and computed from
the first Monday in January, 2019.
§ 8-17. Authority to effect the incorporation of the Authority.
A. The President of the Borough Council is hereby authorized and directed
to execute the Articles of Incorporation of the Borough of Hanover
Stormwater Authority in substantially the form set forth in this article,
and the Borough Secretary of the Borough is hereby authorized and
directed to execute and deliver such other documents, agreements,
certificates, and instruments and to do all acts necessary or appropriate
to effect the incorporation of the Borough of Hanover Stormwater
Authority, including, but not limited to, to cause notice of the substance
of this article, including the substance of the foregoing Articles of
Incorporation, and the filing of said Articles of Incorporation, to be
published as required by the Municipality Authorities Act.
B. The President of the Borough and the Borough Secretary of the
Borough are authorized and directed to file such Articles of
Incorporation and necessary proofs of publication with the Secretary of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and to do all other things necessary
to effect the incorporation of the Borough of Hanover Stormwater
Authority, including payments of the required filing fees.
8. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 8-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-18
1:21
§ 8-18. Purposes and projects authorized.
The Borough of Hanover Stormwater Authority shall have all of the
purposes, powers, and rights as provided by Act 68 of 2013 [53 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 5607(a)(18)], and Act 123 of 2014 [53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5607 (d)(34)], and
including, but not limited to, financing working capital; acquiring, holding,
constructing, financing, improving, maintaining and operating, owning or
leasing, either in the capacity of lessor or lessee, providing financing for
insurance reserves for the following: stormwater planning, management
and implementation and establishing reasonable and uniform rates based
in whole or in part on property characteristics for the inhabitants of the
Borough, as set forth in the Articles of Incorporation.
§ 8-19. Severability.
In the event any provision, section, sentence, clause or part of this article
shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair any remaining provision,
section, sentence, clause or part of this chapter, it being the intent of this
Borough that such remainder shall be and shall remain in full force and
effect.
§ 8-18 HANOVER CODE § 8-19
1:22
Chapter 12
BOARD OF HEALTH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health rules and regulations — See
Ch. 137.
§ 12-1. Establishment; powers and duties; membership.
A Board of Health is hereby established in and for the Borough of Hanover,
in accordance with the provisions of Article XXXII of the Borough Code, as
added by the Act of 1947, P.L. 1621.9 The Board of Health shall have general
supervision over sanitary conditions within the Borough and shall perform
all the duties and may exercise all the powers vested by law in Boards of
Health in Boroughs. It shall be the duty of the Borough Council to maintain
the Board of Health at full membership, by appointment of new members as
necessary to fill vacancies caused by the expiration of terms, death, removal
from the Borough or other cause. Provided: The tenure of the members of
the present Board of Health of the Borough shall not be affected by this
chapter.
§ 12-2. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 154, approved the seventh day of May 1908, and entitled
"An Ordinance establishing a Board of Health and dividing the Borough
of Hanover into Health Districts in accordance with the Act of Assembly
approved May 11, 1893," is hereby repealed.
Chapter 16
BOROUGH MANAGER
§ 16-1. Creation of office.
The office of Borough Manager is hereby created by the Borough of
Hanover.
§ 16-2. Appointment; term.
The Manager shall be appointed by a majority of all the members of Council,
and he shall serve until the first Monday of January of the even-numbered
year succeeding his election, and until his successor qualifies.
9. Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 48101 et seq.
§ 8-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-3
1:23
§ 16-3. Qualifications. [Amended 12-16-1959 by Ord. No. 1027]
The Manager shall be chosen principally on the basis of his executive and
administrative abilities, with special reference to his actual experience in or
his knowledge of accepted practices in respect to the duties of his office, as
herein outlined.
§ 16-4. Bond.
Before entering upon his duties, the Manager shall give a bond to the
Borough of Hanover, with a bonding company as surety, to be approved by
the Council, in the sum of $5,000, conditioned for the faithful performance
of his duties. The premium shall be paid by the Borough of Hanover.
§ 16-5. Compensation.
The salary of the Borough Manager shall be established by Council from
time to time.
§ 16-6. Powers and duties.
A. The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Borough
and he shall be responsible to the Council as a whole for the proper and
efficient administration of the affairs of the Borough. His powers and
duties shall relate to the general management of all Borough business
not expressly by statute imposed or conferred upon other Borough
officers.
B. Subject to recall by ordinance of Council, the powers and duties of the
Borough Manager shall include the following:
(1) He shall supervise and be responsible for the activities of all
municipal departments, except the Police Department.
(2) He shall hire, and when necessary for the good of the service, shall
suspend or discharge, all employees under his supervision,
provided that persons covered by the civil service provisions of the
Borough Code shall be hired, suspended or discharged in
accordance with such provisions; provided further, that the
Manager shall report, at the next meeting thereafter of Council,
any action taken by authority of this subsection.
(3) He shall prepare and submit to Council before the close of the fiscal
year or on such alternate date as Council shall determine, a
suggested budget for the next fiscal year and an explanatory
budget message. In preparing the budget, the Manager or an
officer designated by him shall obtain from the head of each
department, agency, board or officer, estimates of revenues and
expenditures and other supporting data as he requests. The
Manager shall review such estimates and may suggest revisions
when submitting the suggested budget to the Council.
§ 16-3 HANOVER CODE § 16-6
1:24
(4) He shall be responsible for the administration of the budget after
its adoption by the Council.
(5) He shall hold such other municipal offices or head one or more of
the municipal departments as the Council may from time to time
direct.
(6) He shall attend all meetings of Council and its committees, with the
right to take part in the discussion, and he shall receive notice of all
special meetings of Council or its committees.
(7) He shall prepare the agenda for each meeting of Council and
supply facts pertinent thereto.
(8) He shall keep the Council informed as to the conduct of Borough
affairs; submit periodic reports on the condition of the Borough
finance and such other reports as the Council requests; and make
such recommendations to the Council as he deems necessary.
(9) He shall submit to Council, as soon as possible after the close of the
fiscal year, a complete report on the financial and administrative
activities of the Borough for the preceding year.
(10)He shall see that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits
and privileges granted by the Borough are observed.
(11)He may employ, by and with the approval of Council, experts and
consultants to perform work and to advise in connection with any of
the functions of the Borough.
(12)He shall attend to the letting of contracts in due form of law,
subject to the approval of the Solicitor, and he shall supervise the
performance and faithful execution of the same except insofar as
such duties are expressly imposed upon some other Borough officer
by statute.
(13)He shall see that all money owed the Borough is promptly paid and
that proper proceedings are taken for the security and collection of
all the Borough's claims.
(14)He shall be the Purchasing Officer of the Borough and he shall
purchase, in accordance with the provisions of the Borough Code,
all supplies and equipment for the various agencies, boards,
departments and other offices of the Borough. He shall keep an
account of all purchases and shall, from time to time or when
directed by Council, make a full written report thereof. He shall
comply with the orders, rules and regulations established by
Council governing the requisition and purchasing of all municipal
supplies and equipment.
(15) All complaints regarding services or personnel of the Borough shall
be referred to the office of the Manager. He or an officer designated
§ 16-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-6
1:25
§ 16-7. Mayor's powers and duties.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to delegate to the Borough Manager,
subject to recall by written notification at any time, any of his nonlegislative
and nonjudicial powers and duties.
§ 16-8. Limitation on Council's powers.
Neither the Council nor any of its committees or members thereof shall
dictate or attempt to dictate the hiring of any person to, or his discharge
from, employment by the Manager, or in any manner take part in the hiring,
suspending or discharging of employees in the administrative service of the
Borough except as required to do so by the civil service provisions of the
code. Except for the purposes of inquiry, the Council, its committees and
its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the
Borough Manager, and neither the Council nor any of its committees, or any
of its members, shall give orders, publicly or privately to any subordinates
of the Manager.
§ 16-9. Disability or absence.
If the Manager becomes ill or needs to be absent from the Borough, he shall
designate one qualified member of his staff, who shall perform the duties
of the Manager during his absence or disability. The person so designated
shall not perform these duties for a period longer than two weeks without
the approval of the Council.
Chapter 20
BOROUGH SECRETARY
by him shall investigate, and the Manager shall dispose of, such
complaints, and the Manager shall report thereon to Council.
§ 16-6 HANOVER CODE § 16-9
1:26
ARTICLE I
Disposition of Moneys
[Adopted 2-6-1914 by Ord. No. 240]
§ 20-1. Duties of Borough Secretary. [Amended 10-31-1968 by Ord.
No. 1411]
From and after the passage of this article, all moneys due and owing
the Borough of Hanover for licenses, privileges, rents, fees, permits and
taxes shall be paid to the Borough Secretary, who shall give a proper
receipt, license or permit covering the same and who shall countersign all
licenses granted, including those heretofore countersigned by the Borough
Treasurer, and the said Secretary shall pay the same over to the Borough
Treasurer and take his receipt therefor.
§ 20-2. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith, particularly
Ordinance No. 132 and No. 180, requiring licenses to be countersigned by
the Borough Treasurer, be and the same are hereby repealed insofar as they
are inconsistent with the provisions of this article.
§ 20-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-2
1:27
Chapter 25
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
§ 25-1. Creation; terms; appointment.
A Civil Service Commission Board is hereby created consisting of three
residents of Hanover Borough who shall serve six-year terms as authorized
by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Hanover Borough
Council shall appoint Board members from time to time as openings occur
on the Board due to term completion, death and illness.
§ 25-2. Organization.
The Commission shall organize itself on the first Monday of February of
each even-numbered year.
§ 25-3. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The Commission shall promulgate rules and regulations for conducting
examinations and developing eligibility lists for employment which must
then be reviewed and approved by Hanover Borough Council.
§ 25-4. Authority to conduct investigations.
The Commission shall conduct any investigations or inquiries which it
deems to be appropriate to conduct pursuant to the authority granted to it
by statute.
§ 25-5. Publication of decisions.
The Commission shall publish notices of its decisions as required by law.
Chapter 28
COUNCIL COMMITTEES
§ 28-1. Appointments.
On the first Monday in each even-numbered year, or as soon thereafter
as practicable, it shall be the duty of the President of the Council of
the Borough of Hanover to appoint such committees and the members
thereof as the President shall deem necessary, subject to the approval of the
Council.
§ 28-2. Duties.
The duties of said committees shall be prescribed by the President, subject
to the approval of Council, and in any event such duties shall be in the
nature of investigations and recommendations to Council.
§ 20-2 HANOVER CODE § 28-3
1:28
§ 28-3. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 330, enacted January 16, 1920, is hereby repealed.
Chapter 33
DRUG TASK FORCE
§ 33-1. Intent.
The Borough of Hanover has evidenced its intent to participate in the
Municipal Drug Task Force activities in cooperation with the
commonwealth's Office of Attorney General designed to interdict the illegal
use and trafficking of narcotics and other illegal drugs within its municipal
boundaries as well as within the boundaries of nearby communities.
§ 33-2. Intergovernmental cooperative activities.
This agreement may include intergovernmental cooperative activities with
adjacent and nearby municipal governments as part of a regional effort to
interdict illegal drug activities.
§ 33-3. Use of police force.
The Borough of Hanover shall utilize the services of its police force, both
full-time as well as part-time, under the conditions set forth in the
agreement and in compliance with the Municipal Police Jurisdiction Act, 42
Pa.C.S.A. § 8953.
§ 33-4. Procedures to be established.
The Borough of Hanover shall establish, pursuant to the terms of the
agreement which is attached hereto and incorporated as a part of this
chapter,10 appropriate procedures to comply with all relevant provisions of
the agreement and relevant regulations, direction and guidance from the
Office of the Attorney General.
§ 33-5. Term of agreement.
The term of the agreement shall commence on March 19, 1992, and may be
terminated at any time upon 30 days' written notice.
§ 33-6. Purpose and objectives of agreement.
The purpose and objectives of the agreement include region-wide
coordination of municipal police activities in an effort to combat illegal
narcotics and drug trafficking.
10.Editor's Note: The agreement is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 28-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-7
1:29
§ 33-7. Financing of agreement.
The agreement shall be financed with the assistance of funds supplied by
the Office of the Attorney General of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 33-8. Organizational structure.
The organizational structure necessary to implement the terms of this
agreement shall be covered by directives, procedures and guidance from
the Office of the Attorney General and other area Police Departments.
§ 33-9. Property.
All property, real or personal, acquired, managed or disposed of pursuant to
this agreement shall be in accordance with both the terms of the agreement
as well as the directives, procedures and guidance of the Office of the
Attorney General.
§ 33-10. Municipality responsible for employees.
The municipality shall retain responsibility for the management, control and
direction of its employees, with assistance, financial or otherwise, from the
Office of the Attorney General.
§ 33-11. Effective date.
The effective date of this chapter shall be the 18th day of March 1992.
Chapter 38
EMPLOYEE WORK REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pension plans — See Ch. 62. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 88.
§ 38-1. Hours of work.
The workweek of all employees of the Borough of Hanover who are
represented by a formal organized bargaining unit shall be consistent with
the latest contract between that bargaining unit and the Borough of
Hanover, said contracts to be authorized and executed from time to time
by formal resolutions adopted by the Council of the Borough of Hanover.
The workweek of all full-time salaried and hourly rated employees of the
Borough of Hanover not represented by a formal bargaining unit shall be 40
hours in length. The work schedules shall be set for each department of the
Borough by the respective department head and approved by the Borough
Manager.
§ 33-7 HANOVER CODE § 38-2
1:30
§ 38-2. Overtime. [Amended 2-26-2014 by Ord. No. 2202]
Overtime shall be paid to all personnel represented by a bargaining unit in
conformity with the latest contract. Salaried employees not represented by
a bargaining unit shall not receive extra compensation for overtime work,
but instead shall be granted compensory time off at the discretion of the
department head subject to approval by the Borough Manager. Hourly rated
employees not represented by a bargaining unit shall receive overtime pay
at the rate of 1 1/2 times the employee's hourly rate. Overtime pay shall
apply to all work performed in excess of 40 hours in a scheduled work week
and shall apply in all work performed other than the employees' regular
schedule.
§ 38-3. Paid holidays.
All employees represented by a bargaining unit shall receive paid holidays
in conformity with the last contract effected for that particular bargaining
unit as executed by Borough Council. All salaried and hourly rated
employees not represented by a bargaining unit shall receive holiday
benefits as set forth in the latest contract with the American Federation of
State, County and Municipal Employees (AFSCME), AFL-CIO-Council 89.
§ 38-4. Paid vacations. [Amended 2-26-2014 by Ord. No. 2202]
All employees represented by a bargaining unit shall receive paid vacation
in conformity with the last contract effected for that particular bargaining
unit, as executed by Borough Council. All salaried and hourly rated
employees hired prior to March 1, 2014, not represented by a bargaining
unit shall receive vacation benefits as set forth in the latest contract with
the American Federation of State and County and Municipal Employees
(AFSCME), ALFCIO-Council 89. Any employee not represented by a
bargaining unit hired after February 28, 2014, shall receive vacation
benefits as set forth in the latest contract with the American Federation of
State and County and Municipal Employees (AFSCME), AFLCIO-Council 89
but with the following exceptions: Maximum carry-over per year: five days;
maximum accumulation: 30 days.
§ 38-5. Paid sick leave. [Amended 2-26-2014 by Ord. No. 2202]
All employees represented by a bargaining unit shall receive paid sick leave
in conformity with the last contract effected for that particular bargaining
unit as executed by Borough Council. All salaried and hourly rated
employees not represented by a bargaining unit hired prior to March 1,
2014, shall receive paid sick leave benefits as set forth in the latest contract
with the American Federation of State and County and Municipal
Employees (AFSCME), ALFCIO-Council 89. Any employee not represented
by a bargaining unit hired after February 28, 2014, shall receive sick leave
benefits as set forth in the latest contract with the American Federation of
State and County and Municipal Employees (AFSCME), AFLCIO-Council 89
but with the following exceptions: Employee shall begin accruing sick leave
§ 38-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-5
1:31
from date of hire at 80 hours per year or 1.54 hours per forty-hour work
week or 10 days per year; after 120 months the accrual rate increases to
2.31 hours per forty-hour work week or 15 days per year; with a maximum
accrual of 30 days. On termination of employment due to retirement, layoff,
or voluntary resignation, all salaried and hourly rated employees hired
prior to March 1, 2014, not represented by a bargaining unit shall receive
such compensation for unused sick leave as shall be set forth in the latest
contract with the American Federation of State, County and Municipal
Employees (AFSCME), AFLCIO-Council 89. On termination of employment
due to retirement, layoff, or voluntary resignation, all salaried and hourly
rated employees hired after February 28, 2014, not represented by a
bargaining unit shall receive such compensation for unused sick leave as
shall be set forth in the latest contract with the American Federation of
State, County and Municipal Employees (AFSCME), AFLCIO-Council 89,
but with the following exception: maximum 30 days payout.
§ 38-6. Part-time employees. [Amended 2-26-2014 by Ord. No.
2202]
The benefits of premium pay for overtime, paid holidays, paid vacation and
paid sick leave provided in this chapter shall not be granted to part-time
salaried and part-time hourly employees. For the purposes of this section,
"part-time" is defined as less than 25 hours per work week.
§ 38-7. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 955 and all prior amendments thereto, to wit, Ordinance
Nos. 1134, 1170, 1317, 1398, Section 3 of Ordinance No. 1411, 1469, 1500,
1564, 1606 and 1652, are hereby repealed.11
§ 38-8. Drug and alcohol testing. [Added 10-18-1995 by Res. No.
650]
A. Policies adopted. The Borough of Hanover adopts the following policies
in regard to drug and alcohol testing.
B. Adherence to federal requirements. Federal testing requirements will
be followed as same may be adopted and legislated from time to time.
C. Medical Review Officer. The Health Officer of the Borough of Hanover
will act as the Medical Review Officer.
D. Information availability. Information on the testing program as outlined
by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation will be made
available to all Hanover Borough employees required to hold
commercial driver's license status on an annual basis to assure that
employees are familiar with program requirements.
11.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 955, adopted 5-21-1958, and the amendments thereto
comprised former Ch. 37, Employees Regulations.
§ 38-5 HANOVER CODE § 38-8
1:32
Chapter 43
FIRE COMMISSIONER; FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firemen's Relief Association — See Ch. 47.
Fire drivers pension plan — See Ch. 62, Art.
III.
Open burning — See Ch. 159.
Fire lanes — See Ch. 204.
Fire limits — See Ch. 207.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 212.
§ 43-1. Fire Commissioner.13
E. Procedure upon failing tests. Those employees failing drug and alcohol
testing will be referred to the Medical Review Officer for further
evaluation, testing and, if needed, treatment/rehabilitation. Following
that course of treatment shall be retesting, during which absences for
treatment/rehabilitation will be treated as sick leave/disability leave.
Following treatment/rehabilitation and a return, after retesting,
disciplinary action can be pursued in cases where rehabilitation advice
is not followed and further test failures occur.
F. Testing guidelines. Testing procedures will be consistent with those
outlined by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania's Department of
Transportation in its publication "Employee Guide to CDL Drug and
Alcohol Testing," as same may be revised from time to time to meet
federal regulations.12
A. The Fire Commissioner shall be appointed by a majority of all members
of Hanover Borough Council at an annual salary as determined and
fixed by Council. He shall serve at pleasure of Council in accordance
with civil service regulations.
B. The Fire Commissioner shall be directly responsible to the Borough
Manager in the exercise and performance of his duties.
C. Immediately upon appointment, the Fire Commissioner shall sever all
ties and membership, if any heretofore exist, in any fire company of the
Borough of Hanover, except as is necessary to be protected and enjoy
the benefits of the Firemen's Relief Association.14
12.Editor's Note: This publication is on file in the Borough offices.
13.Editor's Note: Section 1 of Ord. No. 2216, adopted 4-22-2015, states that all references to
the title “Fire Commissioner” in Ch. 43 and other chapters and sections of the Code shall
include the title of “Fire Chief” or other position designated by the Borough Council as
the senior executive officer of the Borough Fire Department.
14.Editor's Note: See Ch. 47, Firemen's Relief Association.
§ 38-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-1
1:33
§ 43-2. Assistants to Fire Commissioner. [Amended 10-9-1968 by
Ord. No. 1408; 12-4-1996 by Ord. No. 1994; 1-23-2002 by Ord. No.
2049; 11-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2095; 12-27-2006 by Ord. No. 2117;
4-22-2015 by Ord. No. 2216]
D. The Fire Commissioner shall be responsible for the administration and
enforcement of the Hanover Borough Fire Prevention Code.15
E. The Fire Commissioner shall have the direction and control of all the
fire apparatus of the Borough of Hanover. At fire scenes, he shall have
the sole and absolute authority in fighting, extinguishing and
preventing the spread of conflagrations and, for this purpose, shall have
full power and authority to do all acts and deeds which are necessary to
the proper and lawful attainment of these ends. The Fire Commissioner
shall establish working assignments with his assistants to make sure
that there is sufficient coverage when he is absent from the Borough.
He shall see that fire hydrants and alarm systems are tested and kept in
good repair, and shall have direct supervision of moving, changing and
locating of fire hydrants and alarms, subject to the approval of Borough
Council. He shall make reports to Council in the manner and form
prescribed by Council concerning work done by him and the Fire
Department and shall make recommendations on supplies and
equipment. He shall not leave the Borough without notice to the
Borough Manager and to the Assistant Chiefs. Council shall maintain at
its expense a telephone at the residence of the Fire Commissioner for
fire communications. [Amended 9-3-1969 by Ord. No. 1456]
A. The Deputy Fire Chief shall serve as the person second in command to
the Fire Chief.
B. The Deputy Fire Chief shall represent the Fire Department in the
absence of the Fire Chief and provide responsible administrative
support to the Fire Chief. The Deputy Fire Chief shall have the specific
duties; shall meet the specific physical, educational and experimental
qualifications; and shall have the licenses, certifications, knowledge,
skills and abilities as set forth in the job description as adopted from
time to time by the Borough Council.
C. The Fire Company fire duty officers, who may be elected from time to
time by the volunteer companies participating in the Hanover Fire
Department designated by the Hanover Borough Council to serve the
Borough, may be designated by resolution of the Hanover Borough
Council as assistants to the Fire Chief. The Fire Chief may designate
one volunteer fire company primary fire line officer known as "Captain"
or some other designation denoting the fire line command officer or
former such officer to act as Fire Chief or Deputy Fire Chief (as
applicable) in the absence of the Fire Chief and the Deputy Fire Chief.
Such designations must be submitted to and approved by the Borough
Manager and ratified by the Hanover Borough Council. These
15.Editor's Note: See Ch. 212, Fire Prevention.
§ 43-1 HANOVER CODE § 43-2
1:34
§ 43-3. Fire apparatus drivers.
§ 43-4. Fire Department.
§ 43-5. Interference with Fire Department; tampering with hydrants
or alarms prohibited.
Any person or persons interfering with, obstructing or delaying any member
of the Fire Department in the discharge of his duties or damaging or
tampering with any fire hydrant or alarm shall be guilty of a violation of this
chapter.
appointments may be altered from time to time or suspended at the
discretion of the Borough Manager, with Council's concurrence, at
intervals of not less than one year.
D. The duties of the assistants to the Fire Chief shall be to assist the Fire
Chief in the performance of his duties under his direction and
supervision.
A. Fire apparatus drivers shall be appointed by Council under civil service
regulations.
B. Fire apparatus drivers shall be members of the Fire Department of the
Borough of Hanover and under the supervision and direction of the Fire
Commissioner. Their duties are to include manning and maintaining the
equipment of the Borough and any other duties as may be directed by
the Fire Commissioner in connection with the fire protection of the
Borough.
C. Council shall determine the number of fire apparatus drivers and the
compensation for same.
A. The Fire Commissioner and his assistants, the fire apparatus drivers
and the fire companies and the members thereof, now or hereafter duly
authorized and recognized by the Borough, shall constitute the Fire
Department of the Borough and shall, under the direction and
supervision of the Fire Commissioner, have entire jurisdiction and
management in the fighting of fires, preventing the spread thereof,
removal and custody of property, removal of dangerous building or
other property, with the right to enter buildings and premises affected
or likely to be affected or deemed necessary in the performance of their
duties.
B. The Fire Department and its members, when authorized by the Fire
Commissioner, are hereby authorized to enter any building or premises
for the purpose of examining property and conditions with the view to
fire protection and prevention, and for the purpose of discovering the
causes and results of fires. These results are to be reported to Council
in monthly reports of activities as prescribed by Council.
§ 43-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-6
1:35
§ 43-6. Use of fire apparatus outside Borough limits. [Amended
4-16-1969 by Ord. No. 1435; 6-16-1971 by Ord. No. 1514]
No fire apparatus shall leave the Borough without permission of the Fire
Commissioner or his designated representative. The official giving such
permission shall direct which apparatus shall be used outside of the
Borough. Such permission shall be given only upon the following conditions:
A. Mutual-aid response.
(1) Request for the use of Borough fire-fighting apparatus must be
made by the Fire Commissioner, Assistants to the Fire
Commissioner, Chief or Assistant Chief, or the President of an
organized fire company situated within a radius of 30 miles of the
Borough, and such organized fire company shall have posted the
names of such authorized officials with the Fire Commissioner of
the Borough.
(2) Arrangements shall have first been made with a fire company
adjacent to the Borough to stand by to render assistance in the
event of fire within the Borough while the Borough equipment shall
be absent from the Borough.
B. Direct response.
(1) Request for the use of Borough fire-fighting apparatus must be
made by such persons, firms or corporations who shall have prior
thereto filed a written application with the Borough Fire
Commissioner for such direct response and shall have complied
with the following:
(a) Submitted unto the Borough Fire Commissioner written
clearance from the fire companies subject to first response in
the location of applicant.
(b) Paid unto the Borough Secretary an annual fee of $100.
(c) Shall agree to pay unto the Borough the sum of $100 for each
response requested by applicant.
(d) Shall have satisfactorily complied with all fire-prevention
directives of the Borough Fire Commissioner and shall have
granted permission for inspection of applicant's premises by
the Borough Fire Commissioner for such purposes.
§ 43-6 HANOVER CODE § 43-7
1:36
§ 43-7. Salaries. [Amended 2-21-1968 by Ord. No. 1384; 10-9-1968
by Ord. No. 1408; 12-28-1968 by Ord. No. 1422; 12-26-1970 by Ord.
No. 149716]
The salaries of the Fire Driver, Fire Commissioner, Acting Fire
Commissioner and Deputy Fire Commissioner shall be fixed by resolution of
Council.
§ 43-8. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of
this chapter, and specifically Ordinance No. 1026, entitled "An Ordinance
Providing for the Appointment of a Fire Chief, a First and Second Assistant
Fire Chief and a Fire Inspector of the Fire Department of the Borough
of Hanover; Defining their Duties and Powers; and Providing Penalties for
Disobedience of their Orders," enacted December 16, 1959, as amended,
are hereby repealed.
Chapter 47
FIREMEN'S RELIEF ASSOCIATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Commissioner; Fire Department — See
Ch. 43.
§ 47-1. Recognition; appropriation.
The Hanover Firemen's Relief Association be and is hereby recognized as
such by the Council of the Borough of Hanover, in accordance with Act
No. 307 of the 1929 Session, General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, and there shall be appropriated to it each year the amount of
money received by the Borough from the state as a tax upon premiums of
foreign fire insurance companies, in accordance with said Act.
Chapter 52
INTERMUNICIPAL AGREEMENTS
16.Editor's Note: Approved by Mayor 12-28-1970.
§ 43-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-1
1:37

ARTICLE I
Local Government Trust
[Adopted 4-20-1994 by Ord. No. 1963]
§ 52-1. Establishment; adoption.
This governmental unit shall join with other local governmental units in
accordance with the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act17 and other similar
acts by becoming a settlor of the Pennsylvania Local Government
Investment Trust (the "trust") and entering into the declaration of trust,
which is adopted by reference with the same effect as if it had been set out
verbatim in this section, and a copy of which shall be filed with the minutes
of the meeting at which this article was adopted.18
§ 52-2. Authorization to purchase shares.
This governmental unit is authorized to purchase shares in the trust from
time to time with available funds and to redeem some or all of those shares
from time to time as funds are needed for other purposes, subject to the
terms and restrictions of the declaration of trust referred to in § 52-1.
These actions are to be taken by the officers designated for this purpose,
pursuant to general or specific instructions by the governing body of this
governmental unit.
§ 52-3. Trustees.
The trustees of the trust are designated as having official custody of this
governmental unit's funds which are invested by the purchase of shares in
the trust.
§ 52-4. Findings; determinations.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the following
matters are specifically found and determined:
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the declaration of trust
referred to in § 52-1.
B. This governmental unit's participation in the trust shall be terminable
at any time by ordinance/resolution, subject to the terms and
restrictions of the declaration of trust referred to in § 52-1.
C. The declaration of trust and the purchase of its shares are for the
purpose of investing this governmental unit's funds in obligations which
are otherwise legal investments, as part of a pooled arrangement with
other local governmental units, thereby achieving economic and other
advantages of pooled investments, and the powers and scope of
17.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
18.Editor's Note: Said declaration of trust is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 52-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-4
1:39
authority delegated are set forth in the declaration of trust referred to
in § 52-1.
D. It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from
funds of this governmental unit except through the purchase of shares
in the trust.
E. The trust shall be managed by a Board of Trustees as set forth in the
declaration of trust and the bylaws provided for therein.
F. Shares may be repurchased and redeemed from time to time as this
governmental unit may determine to be necessary or appropriate to
meet its cash investment requirements in accordance with the terms
and restrictions of the declaration of trust referred to in § 52-1.
G. The trust shall be empowered to enter into contracts for policies of
group insurance and employee benefits, including social security, for its
employees.
§ 52-4 HANOVER CODE § 52-4
1:40
ARTICLE II
York County Regional Chesapeake Bay Pollutant Reduction Plan
[Adopted 12-23-2014 by Ord. No. 2211; amended in its entirety
8-23-2017 by Ord. No. 2259]
§ 52-5. Authorization.
The cooperation with other nearby municipalities to implement an Amended
and Restated Regional Chesapeake Bay Pollutant Reduction Plan and to
share in the costs of administering it is hereby authorized.
§ 52-6. Agreement.
A. The Amended and Restated Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement
for the Implementation of the York County Regional Chesapeake Bay
Pollutant Reduction Plan (the "Agreement") is attached hereto as
Exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference.19 Provisions of the
Agreement include the following.
(1) Background.
(2) Guiding Principles.
(3) Organization.
(4) Meetings.
(5) Authority of Management Committee.
(6) Implementation of Agreement.
(7) Financing.
(8) Effective Date.
(9) Term.
(10) Termination and Wind-Up.
(11) Applicable Law.
(12) Integration.
(13) No Oral Modification.
(14) Severability.
(15) Representation by Counsel.
(16) Counterparts.
(17) Execution by Facsimile or Electronic Scanning.
19.Editor's Note: Said Exhibit A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 52-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-6
1:41
§ 52-7. Adoption.
This article is adopted pursuant to the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act,
53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301. et seq., and the authority granted herein shall continue
from year to year while the Municipality cooperates pursuant to the
Agreement.
§ 52-8. Staff and officials.
The staff and officials of the Municipality are directed and empowered to
take all actions necessary or convenient to implement this article and the
Agreement.
(18) Fees and Costs.
(19) Signatures.
(20) Prior Participants.
(21) Cost Sharing Exhibit.
(22) Participant Listing.
B. The Municipality is hereby authorized to enter into the Agreement.
Further, the Municipality may modify the Agreement by subsequent
resolution or ordinance.
§ 52-6 HANOVER CODE § 52-8
1:42
ARTICLE III
Hanover Area Fire and Rescue
[Adopted 12-28-2016 by Ord. No. 2255]
§ 52-9. Establishment of Commission.
§ 52-10. Term.
The municipalities agree to establish the Commission effective on the date
that the governing bodies for all the municipalities have adopted and
approved this agreement by ordinance, and authorize the proper municipal
officials to execute the same to govern and operate the District; provided
that the Commission will commence the provision of Services on January 1,
2018. The Commission will deliver the services set forth in § 52-9A above
for an initial term of seven years commencing on January 1, 2018. Neither
municipality shall withdraw from the Commission within the initial sevenyear
term. If either municipality desires to withdraw from the Commission
at the end of the initial seven-year term, it shall provide written notice
of such intention no later than the date 12 months prior to the end of
the initial term of this agreement, and the Commission shall be dissolved
in accordance with the provisions of § 52-17 below. Upon dissolution, the
Commission shall return to the withdrawing municipality property in
proportion to the property contributed at the creation of the commission.
§ 52-11. Financial matters.
The fiscal year of the Commission shall be the calendar year. The
municipalities agree to supply the necessary resources, funding and
personnel to effectively maintain the functions of the District and to assist
the Commission in carrying out its duties and responsibilities under this
A. Services. The municipalities agree that the Commission shall be
established and that the Commission shall assume the responsibilities
and functions of the individual municipalities for the operation and
management of the District to include providing the following services,
either directly or through third-party contractors: firefighting services;
rescue services; and ambulance emergency and transport services. The
fire protection and emergency services provided shall include
education; fire prevention programs; fire extinguisher inspections;
residential rental unit inspections; commercial, business, industrial and
school inspection services; standby ambulance service at public events;
fire police; and SCUBA water rescue services.
B. Authority. The Commission shall have the authority and power to raise
and expend funds for the purpose of providing its services, specifically,
the authority to engage in fundraising activities and acquire supplies,
vehicles and major equipment. The individual municipalities will retain
power to enact fire codes and regulations but hereby empower to the
Commission the responsibility for the enforcement of same, including
but not limited to fire inspections.
§ 52-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-11
1:43
agreement to better serve the residents of each of the respective
municipalities.
§ 52-12. Capital contributions.
The physical assets of the fire departments of each of the municipalities will
be transferred to the Commission prior to January 1, 2018.
A. Start-up period. Initial start-up costs of the Commission shall be shared
equally by the municipalities. The Commission shall periodically invoice
the municipalities during the start-up period for costs and expenses
incurred or anticipated and the municipalities shall promptly remit
payment.
B. Fiscal year 2018. The costs and expenses of the Commission shall be
shared equally by the municipalities in accordance with the budget for
fiscal year 2018, attached hereto and incorporated herein and marked
"Exhibit A."20
C. Budget. On or before October 1 of each fiscal year of the Commission,
the Commission shall submit a draft budget for the following fiscal year
to each of the municipalities. Each municipality shall approve or reject
the draft budget prior to December 1 of the then current fiscal year. If
approved by each of the municipalities, the Commission shall adopt the
budget; if rejected by one or more of the municipalities, the
Commission shall operate in accordance with its then current budget
with adjustments for personnel costs and expenses (including health
insurance) as reflected in the Commission's collective bargaining
agreement and for any new debt service.
D. Ongoing funding. Beginning with fiscal year 2018, the municipalities
shall contribute financial funding for the operation of the District, each
bearing 50% of such costs and expenses. Each municipality will make a
quarterly payment to the Commission with payment dates being
January 2, April 1, July 1 and October 1. The Commission will maintain
an operational fund and a capital fund. The operational fund budget will
include a transfer to the capital fund.
A. Hanover Borough contribution. The following constitutes the capital
contribution of Hanover Borough: The Wirt Park Fire Station, 201
North Franklin Street, Hanover, Pennsylvania 17331; The Clearview
Fire Station, 411 North George Street, Hanover, Pennsylvania 17331;
miscellaneous furnishings and equipment and the following fire
vehicles:
2011 KME Engine
2003 KME Engine
2001 KME Engine
20.Editor's Note: Said exhibit is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 52-11 HANOVER CODE § 52-12
1:44
§ 52-13. Governance.
2015 Sutphen Aerial
2011 Ford Expedition
2012 Chevy P/U Utility
B. Penn Township contribution. The following constitutes the capital
contribution of Penn Township: The station located at 204 Clover Lane,
Hanover, PA 17331; miscellaneous furnishings and equipment and the
following fire vehicles:
2004 Sutphen Engine
2008 Sutphen Engine
2001 E-One Aerial
2011 Ford Expedition
2002 Chevy Tahoe
C. On January 1, 2018, the Commission will assume any and all debt
associated with any of the physical assets contributed to the
Commission by the municipalities.
A. The Commission shall consist of seven voting members and three
nonvoting members selected as follows:
(1) Volunteer representatives. Two members shall be selected by the
volunteer fire company or companies serving the District. The term
of these members shall be for one year, but the same members can
be reappointed yearly by the volunteer fire company or companies.
(2) Municipal representatives. Each municipality shall select from its
respective governing council or commission two members to serve
as members of the Commission. These members will serve two-year
terms, provided that in the initial year, one member appointed by
each municipality shall have an initial term of one year.
(3) Member at large. One member shall be a resident and/or local
business owner appointed at large by the six appointed
Commission members. The member at large of the Commission
shall not be an elected official of the municipalities. The
representative shall serve for three years.
(4) Nonvoting members. The three nonvoting members of the
Commission shall be the appointed Fire Chief, or designee, and the
appointed Manager of each municipality, or his or her appointed
designee.
B. There shall be no term limits for any member of the Commission. No
paid employee of the Commission shall be eligible to serve as a voting
member of the Commission. Members of the Commission shall serve
without pay. The Commission shall select one of its members as
§ 52-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-13
1:45
§ 52-14. Personnel.
The Commission shall hire a full-time employee to be known as the "Fire
Chief" who shall be the chief operating officer of the Fire District and
who shall serve under the direction and supervision of the Commission.
The Fire Chief shall serve as an ex officio member of the Commission
but with no voting rights. The Fire Chief shall appoint assistant/deputy
chiefs/administrative assistant subject to the approval of the Commission.
The Commission shall designate rank and job descriptions to all positions
created by the Commission. All paid firefighters of the municipalities on
December 31, 2017, shall become employees of the Commission on January
1, 2018.
§ 52-15. Collective bargaining agreements.
Current firefighters employed be each of the municipalities are covered
under collective bargaining agreements. Effective January 1, 2018, the
collective bargaining unit will be recertified to represent the firefighters
then employed by the Commission.
§ 52-16. Expansion of Commission.
Effective January 1, 2018, the Commission will expand the scope of the
District in accordance with an agreement with Penn Township Volunteer
Emergency Services, the Eagle Volunteer Fire Department, the Clearview
Volunteer Fire Department and the Penn Township Fire Police to
incorporate each of their operations into the Commission. Thereafter, the
Commission may enter into agreements with additional municipalities or
volunteer fire companies to further expand the Commission. Additional
members may be added to the Commission after approval by the joining
municipality by ordinance or resolution, agreeing to the terms and
conditions of the Commission and by contribution all of its fire suppression
assets to the commission, and a payment of an amount equal to what its
proportional share the operational budget would have been if it had been
a member at the beginning of the fiscal year reduced by the percentage
of the fiscal year that has expired on the date the municipality becomes a
Chairman and one of its members as Vice Chairman. The Commission
shall also select a Secretary who may be a member of the Commission
or a nonmember. In the event that the Secretary is a nonmember of the
Commission, the Secretary may receive compensation as determined
by the Commission. Each voting member of the Commission shall have
one vote. Each member (other than the member at large) shall serve
as a representative of the entity appointing that member and as a
representative of that entity shall report on the actions of the
Commission to the governing body of the appointing entity. A copy of
the initial bylaws of the Commission is attached hereto, incorporated
herein and marked "Exhibit B."21
21.Editor's Note: Said exhibit is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 52-13 HANOVER CODE § 52-16
1:46
member of the Commission. The joining municipality's yearly contribution
will be calculated the same as all other members with the adoption of the
next fiscal budget.
§ 52-17. Dissolution of Commission.
The municipalities agree that, in the event of the dissolution of this
agreement, by agreement of all the members of the Commission at the time
of dissolution; or the cession of operation of the District; or the withdrawal
from the Commission of one of the municipalities, all property, equipment
and assets of any kind belonging to the Commission shall become the
property of the municipalities in proportion to their respective contributions
to the Commission. Such proportionate share is to be determined at the
time of the dissolution of the agreement and shall be in the same proportion
as the withdrawing municipality's capital contribution.
§ 52-18. Immunity and claims.
§ 52-19. When effective; amendments and execution.
The agreement shall become effective on the date that the governing body
for all of the municipalities has adopted and approved the agreement by
ordinance, and authorizes the proper municipal officials to execute the
same. The implementation of the District shall proceed on the following
timetable:
A. Immunity. The services performed and the expenditures incurred under
this agreement shall be deemed for public and governmental purposes,
and all immunities from liabilities enjoyed by the municipalities within
their boundaries shall extend to their participation in services outside
their boundaries and within the District.
B. Insurance. The Commission shall maintain liability insurance coverage
against claims arising out of its activities in amounts deemed adequate
by the Commission. Each municipality and the Commission agree to
cause any insurance policy providing liability coverage against claims
arising out of the Commission's activities, whether within or outside its
municipal boundaries, to contain a waiver of subrogation clause or
endorsement under which the insurance company waives its right of
subrogation against any municipality as to any and all causes of action
or claims against all other municipalities hereto which may arise out of
activities hereunder. The Commission shall be a named insured under
such policies, and a certificate evidencing such coverage shall be
supplied to the municipalities annually. The municipalities shall be
named as additional insureds under such policies.
C. Apportionment. For purposes of liability, in actions arising out of
regional fire services, to the extent any such claims are not covered by
liability insurance, each municipality shall be liable in the same
proportion as it is for the funding assessment during the period the
services in question were rendered.
§ 52-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-19
1:47
A. The municipalities shall approve the agreement by ordinance, execute
this agreement, and cause the name, "Hanover Area Fire and Rescue
Commission" to be filed with the Pennsylvania Department of State.
B. The Commission shall begin operations on the date that both of the
municipalities shall have approved and executed this agreement,
provided that the District shall be fully operational and provide the
services contemplated in this agreement on January 1, 2018.
§ 52-19 HANOVER CODE § 52-19
1:48
ARTICLE IV
Intergovernmental Insurance Cooperative
[Adopted 12-27-2017 by Ord. No. 2266]
§ 52-20. Authorization.
The Borough of Hanover shall join the charter municipalities and other
municipal entities by entering into the aforesaid Intergovernmental
Cooperation Agreement (which is attached hereto and incorporated herein
by reference)22 in order to participate in the Intergovernmental Insurance
Cooperative.
§ 52-21. Contractual arrangements.
Said Cooperative shall select and contract with a common insurance carrier
in order to provide employee benefits, including, but not limited to, medical,
prescription, dental, vision, life and disability insurance. The Borough
hereby delegates power and authority to the Cooperative to enter into
said contractual arrangements for said insurance benefits for Borough
employees.
§ 52-22. Agreement to be binding.
Said Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement shall be binding upon
those governmental entities which shall now or at any time in the future opt
to enter therein and become members of the Cooperative.
§ 52-23. Compliance with terms and policies.
The Borough of Hanover agrees to be bound by and to comply with the
terms of the Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement, including the
terms related to the members' financial obligations thereunder and the
policies and protocols as may be established by the Cooperative and as
required by law.
§ 52-24. Term of agreement.
The term of the Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement shall be
indefinite, subject to the terms thereof related to the termination of a
member's participation therein either by the action of a member or of the
Cooperative.
§ 52-25. Board of Directors.
The business of the Cooperative shall be managed by a Board of Directors,
made up of seven representatives from the municipal members of the
Cooperative, which shall have the authority as set forth in the Agreement,
including the authority to retain professional advisors, employees, agents,
and professional service providers.
22.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 52-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-26
1:49
§ 52-26. Personal property.
The Cooperative may acquire, hold or dispose of personal property.
§ 52-27. Authority of Board.
The Board of Directors of the Cooperative shall have the authority to
perform and carry out, or delegate to others to perform and carry out, on
behalf of the Cooperative and its members each and every act necessary,
convenient or desirable to carry out the purposes of the Cooperative as
more specifically set forth in Article VI of the Agreement.
§ 52-26 HANOVER CODE § 52-27
1:50
Chapter 55
LIBRARY
§ 55-1. Acceptance of deed and title.
The site, ground and building, and the deed and title therefor as executed
by the said Howard E. Young and Martha E. Young, his wife, bearing date
the 30th day of September 1911, and now tendered to the Mayor and
Borough Council of the Borough of Hanover, Pennsylvania, be and the same
are hereby accepted upon the terms and conditions and for the uses and
purposes specified; and in further evidence of such acceptance, is hereby
ordered and directed to be immediately recorded.
§ 55-2. Establishment; use of moneys or bequests.
A public library be, and the same is, hereby established in the said building
and upon the grounds and property so granted and donated by the said
Howard E. Young and Martha E. Young, to be established, maintained,
supported and improved out of any money or bequests now held or which
may hereafter be acquired or received by the Borough of Hanover, or its
successor, for library purposes; which moneys or bequests shall be applied
and used by the Borough for the benefit of said public library in the same
manner and under the same management and control as herein provided
and stipulated with regard to the Dr. J. P. Smith Fund.
§ 55-3. Investment of fund; application of income.
The whole of the fund received by the Borough from the estate of Dr. J. P.
Smith be invested by the Borough and the income therefrom applied to the
maintenance and management of the said library.
§ 55-4. Investment restrictions; creation of Financial Commission.
In the investment of the said Dr. J. P. Smith Fund and other funds or property
acquired or received by the Borough of Hanover for library purposes, only
such investment shall be made as shall be recommended by a Financial
Commission, which is hereby created, consisting of three members, to wit:
the President of the Hanover Savings Fund Society, or in case of his refusal
or neglect to act, the Cashier or other proper officer acting in that capacity
for said institution; the President of the First National Bank of Hanover,
or in case of his refusal or neglect to act, the Cashier or other proper
officer acting in that capacity for said institution; and the President of the
People's Bank of Hanover, or in case of his refusal or neglect to act, the
Cashier or other proper officer acting in that capacity for said institution;
and in the event of the refusal or neglect of any of the aforesaid officers
to act, then the vacancy or vacancies shall be filled, first, by the President
of the Farmers' State Bank of Hanover, or in case of his refusal or neglect
to act, the Cashier or other proper officer acting in that capacity for said
institution; second, by a person or persons appointed by the Mayor of the
§ 52-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-4
1:51
Borough of Hanover, or his successor, and approved by the Borough Council
of said Borough, or their successors, provided that such appointment so
made by the Mayor to a vacancy in said Financial Commission shall only be
for an unexpired term, and until a member from the class from which such
Financial Commission is to be selected shall indicate by writing addressed
to said Mayor his willingness to accept a position on said Commission and
serve on the same.
§ 55-5. Soliciting members and recommendations.
The Mayor be directed to call upon the President of the Hanover Saving
Fund Society, the President of the First National Bank of Hanover and the
President of the People's Bank of Hanover for the purpose of requesting
them to comprise said Commission; to recommend investments of the said
fund, and that the Borough authorities adopt the recommendations of the
said Commission.
§ 55-6. Library Governing Board.
In the use and maintenance of said public library, the Borough authorities
shall adopt the recommendations (provided such recommendations are such
as can be legally adopted) of a Library Governing Board, to be composed
of nine members, three of whom shall be the Financial Commission, to
be selected as provided in the above paragraph; three of whom shall be
appointed by the Mayor of the Borough of Hanover, or his successor, and
approved by the Borough Councils of said Borough, or their successors;
and three of whom shall be appointed by the Hanover Public Library
Association, a corporation created by decree of the Court of Common Pleas
of York County, Pennsylvania, who shall be subject to the approval of said
Borough Councils. The members to be appointed by the Mayor and the
Hanover Library Association shall serve, one for one year, one for two years
and one for three years, respectively, and until their successors shall be
appointed, and their successors thereafter shall serve for the term of three
years.
§ 55-7. Commencement of Commission and Board.
The term of office for the above-mentioned Financial Commission and
Library Governing Board begins February 1, 1910.
Chapter 62
PENSION PLANS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Employee work regulations — See Ch. 38.
Fire Commissioner; Fire Department — See
Ch. 43.
Police Department — See Ch. 75.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 88.
§ 55-4 HANOVER CODE § 55-7
1:52
ARTICLE I
Chief of Police Pension Plan
[Adopted 5-2-1973 by Ord. No. 1579]
§ 62-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established in the Borough of Hanover for the benefit of
the Chief of Police of the Borough of Hanover a pension plan and pension
fund. The pension plan shall be known as the "Hanover Borough Chief of
Police Pension Plan," but hereafter in this article shall be referred to as the
"pension plan." The pension fund shall be known as the "Hanover Borough
Chief of Police Pension Fund," but hereafter in this article shall be referred
to as the "pension fund."
§ 62-2. Administration of plan and fund.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Hanover is hereby authorized to
maintain and administer the said pension plan and the pension fund or to
appoint an agent, hereinafter referred to as "agent," for such term or terms
as the Borough Council shall establish, to administer the pension plan and
pension fund and to enter into an agency agreement with the said agent.
The agency agreement shall permit the agent to manage and operate the
pension fund and to receive, hold, invest and disburse any sum or sums as
may be necessary to carry out the pension plan. The Borough Council will
determine the form and terms of any such agency agreement. The agent
may be a natural person or persons, a corporation with trust powers, the
Borough Council of the Borough of Hanover or a committee composed of
some members of the Borough Council of the Borough of Hanover.
§ 62-3. Eligibility for retirement; vesting. [Amended 12-30-1981 by
Ord. No. 1738]
A. The Chief of Police of the Borough of Hanover shall be eligible to retire
upon 20 years' service or attaining the age of 60 years, whichever shall
be later.
B. Should the Chief of Police, before completing superannuation
retirement age and service requirements but after having completed 12
years of total service, for any reason cease to be employed as the Chief
of Police by the Borough of Hanover, he shall be entitled to vest his
retirement benefits by filing with the governing body, within 90 days of
the date he ceases to be the Chief of Police, a written notice of his
intention to vest. Upon reaching the date which would have been his
superannuation retirement date if he had continued to be employed as a
full-time police officer, he shall be paid a partial superannuation
retirement allowance determined by applying the percentage his years
of service bears to the years of service which he would have rendered
had he continued to work until his superannuation retirement date to
gross pension, using, however, the monthly average salary during the
appropriate period prior to his termination of employment.
§ 62-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-4
1:53
§ 62-4. Mandatory retirement age; monthly pension rate. [Amended
12-19-1973 by Ord. No. 1608; 12-30-1981 by Ord. No. 1738]
A. The mandatory retirement age of the Chief of Police is hereby fixed at
the age of 60 years; provided, however, that in no event shall the Chief
of Police be compelled to retire prior to attaining eligibility for full
pension benefits as provided under Ordinance No. 1547 of the Borough
of Hanover, enacted May 17, 1972, or the latest amendments to or
revisions thereof.23
B. Upon retirement, the Chief of Police shall receive a monthly pension
equal to 1/2 his average monthly salary for the last 36 months prior to
his retirement. Such pension benefit for any month shall be computed
as the sum of:
(1) Any pension benefits due from the Hanover Borough Police Pension
Plan (established by Ordinance No. 1547, enacted May 17, 197224).
(2) Benefits from this pension fund to the extent necessary to bring the
total benefits in any month up to 1/2 the aforesaid monthly average
salary.
(3) Cost-of-living adjustments shall be applied to the normal retirement
benefit placed into effect as of the date of retirement. Such cost-ofliving
benefit shall be the lesser of either 6% of the normal
retirement benefit or the percent of the actual cost-of-living
increase based on the consumer price index, all urban consumers,
as published by the United States Department of Labor and
Industry, 1967, base equals 100 for the preceding calendar year.
Because of the time lag in publishing the consumer price index
reports, such adjustments shall start on April 1 of the first calendar
year following retirement and shall continue on an annual basis
with April 1 of each calendar year being the anniversary date for
starting such readjustment, and same shall continue to be figured
on each April 1 following retirement until the aggregate of all costof-
living adjustments equals 30% of the normal retirement benefit
based on Subsection B(1) above. The adjustment for cost of living
made on the April 1 date first following retirement shall be
prorated on number of full months following retirement date to the
April 1 date applied to a twelve-month period times the maximum
annual adjustment set forth above in this subsection.
C. Such monthly retirement benefits shall be payable during the lifetime of
the retiring Chief of Police.
23.Editor's Note: See now Article IV, Police Pension Plan, of this chapter.
24.Editor's Note: See now Article IV, Police Pension Plan, of this chapter.
§ 62-4 HANOVER CODE § 62-5
1:54
§ 62-5. Beneficiaries.
A benefit shall be payable to the widow, or, if no widow survives or if she
survives and subsequently dies or remarries, then to the surviving child
or children under the age of 18 years of the Chief of Police who, at the
time of his death, was retired or was eligible to retire. The amount of the
monthly widow's or children's benefit shall be equal to 1/2 of the amount of
the monthly pension the Chief of Police was receiving or would have been
receiving had he retired on the date of death. Monthly payments to the
widow cease upon the widow's death or remarriage, and monthly payments
to the child or children cease upon the child or children attaining the age of
18 years.
§ 62-6. Service as police reserve.
The Chief of Police retiring under the pension plan established by this
article shall be subject to service, from time to time, as police reserve,
in case of riot, tumult or preservation of the public peace until unfitted
for such service, when he may be finally discharged by reason of age or
disability.
§ 62-7. Funding.
The pension plan and pension fund for the Chief of Police of the Borough of
Hanover established by this article shall be funded in the following manner:
§ 62-8. Expenses of administration.
The expenses of the administration of this pension plan, including
compensation of an actuary or of an agent for the fund, shall be paid by the
Borough of Hanover and not by the pension fund.
A. By payment made by the Chief of Police to the Borough Treasurer of the
refund of all moneys paid by the Chief of Police into the fund of the
Hanover Borough Police Pension Plan (established by Ordinance No.
1547, enacted May 17, 197225), together with the interest thereon as
provided. Such payment shall be made at the time of retirement, as
herein provided, and upon receipt of the refund as provided by Section
17 of said Ordinance No. 1547.26
B. By annual appropriations made by the Borough of Hanover, as
determined by an actuarial study of the moneys to be received from the
Chief of Police as provided under Subsection A above, compared with
the pension benefits to be paid hereunder.
25.Editor's Note: See now Article IV, Police Pension Plan, of this chapter.
26.Editor's Note: See now Article IV, Police Pension Plan, of this chapter.
§ 62-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-9
1:55
§ 62-9. Actuary.
The Borough Council shall from time to time designate an actuary whose
duties shall be to perform the services required of an actuary under the
provisions of the applicable laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 62-10. Payments free from debts, contracts, etc.
All payments under the pension plan shall, to the fullest extent permitted
by law, be free and clear of any of the debts, contracts, engagements,
anticipations or liability to levy, attachment, execution or sequestration
against the recipient and shall not be subject to sale, assignment, transfer,
claim, judgment or bankruptcy proceedings against the recipient of such
payments, whether voluntary or involuntary.
§ 62-9 HANOVER CODE § 62-10
1:56
ARTICLE II
Borough Employees Pension Plan
[Adopted 6-14-1966 by Ord. No. 1311; last amended in its entirety
2-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2145]
§ 62-11. Enactment of plan.
The attached amendment and restatement of the Borough of Hanover
Employees Pension Plan is enacted. The Borough Manager, as the agent
of the employer, is hereby authorized and directed to execute the attached
amendment and restatement of the plan.27
27.Editor's Note: The Borough of Hanover Employees Pension Plan is included at the end of
this chapter.
§ 62-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-11
1:57

ARTICLE III
Fire Drivers Pension Plan
[Adopted 6-22-1966 by Ord. No. 1313; last amended in its entirety
2-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2146]
§ 62-12. Enactment of plan.
The attached amendment and restatement of the Borough of Hanover Fire
Drivers' Pension Plan is enacted. The Borough Manager, as the agent of
the employer, is hereby authorized and directed to execute the attached
amendment and restatement of the plan.28
28.Editor's Note: The Borough of Hanover Fire Drivers Pension Plan is included at the end of
this chapter.
§ 62-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-12
1:59

ARTICLE IV
Police Pension Plan
[Adopted 5-17-1972 by Ord. No. 1547; last amended in its entirety
2-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2147]
§ 62-13. Enactment of plan.
The attached amendment and restatement of the Borough of Hanover Police
Pension Plan is enacted. The Borough Manager, as the agent of the
employer, is hereby authorized and directed to execute the attached
amendment and restatement of the plan.29
29.Editor's Note: The Borough of Hanover Police Pension Plan is included at the end of this
chapter. Resolution No. 927, adopted 12-23-2009, authorized officers of the Borough to
amend the pension plan in order to comply with Act 600 of 1956 (53 P.S. § 767 et seq.), as
amended by Act 51 of 2009, the Emergency and Law Enforcement Personnel Death
Benefits Act (53 P.S. § 891 et seq.). Pursuant to Act 600, as amended, the Borough sets
employee contributions to the Police Pension Plan by resolution. (See Section 6.2 of the
Plan.) Said resolutions are on file in the Borough offices.
§ 62-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-13
1:61
Chapter 70
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
320.
Zoning — See Ch. 370.
§ 70-1. Creation of Department and Commission; powers and
duties.
Pursuant to the provisions contained in the Borough Code, and in order to
carry the said provisions into effect, there is hereby created in the Borough
a Planning Department. In addition, there is created a Borough Planning
Commission, which shall be in charge of the Planning Department and shall
have all the powers and duties conferred upon it by law and any other
powers vested in it by law or ordinance.
§ 70-2. Composition; compensation. [Amended 5-7-1969 by Ord. No.
1437]
The Borough Planning Commission shall consist of seven members, who
shall be appointed by the Council and shall serve without compensation,
except that they shall be reimbursed for expenses incurred in carrying out
their Commission duties.
§ 70-3. Annual report; employees; appropriations.
The Borough Planning Commission shall make an annual report to the
Borough Council, showing their transactions and recommendations. They
may employ planning technicians and other persons, whose salaries and
wages, together with other necessary expenses of the Commission, shall
be provided for at the discretion of the Borough Council by proper
appropriations and resolutions. The Commission may also receive and
expend for the purposes of its planning work any gifts, grants and
appropriations of money from any other source, including commonwealth,
federal or local funds, and may contract with governmental or private
agencies or individuals with respect thereto.
§ 70-4. Comprehensive plan.
The Planning Commission shall have the power and duty to make, adopt and
maintain a comprehensive plan for the physical development of the Borough
and the surrounding territory. Said comprehensive plan shall include,
among other things, a land use plan, a thoroughfare plan, a community
facilities plan and a public improvements program. In the preparation of
the comprehensive plan, the Commission should study population trends,
existing land use, the economic base, traffic, existing thoroughfare system
§ 62-13 HANOVER CODE § 70-4
1:62
and other factors related to the development of the community. The purpose
of the comprehensive plan should be to accomplish a coordinated and
harmonious development of the community and its environs in accordance
with present and future needs. The Commission would have the continuing
responsibility for maintaining the comprehensive plan in an up-to-date
condition, and in so doing would review and make recommendations to
the Borough Council on all ordinances which pertain to the physical
development of the Borough.
§ 70-5. Service as Zoning Commission; zoning regulations.
The Planning Commission shall serve as the Zoning Commission and may,
in pursuance of its duties, prepare or cause to be prepared a zoning
ordinance30 for consideration of the Borough Council. The Commission
shall have a continuing responsibility to review the ordinance and make
recommendations as to proposed amendments.
§ 70-6. Land subdivision regulations.
The Planning Commission shall prepare and present to Council land
subdivision regulations.31 The Commission shall assist Council to administer
said regulations by reviewing and recommending to Council action to be
taken on subdivisions submitted in accordance to established procedures.
Chapter 75
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Pension Plan — See Ch. 62, Art. IV.
§ 75-1. Composition. [Amended 5-5-1965 by Ord. No. 1271;
12-20-1967 by Ord. No. 1373; 4-20-1994 by Ord. No. 1964]
The members of the police force of the Borough of Hanover may consist of a
Chief of Police, a Lieutenant, five Sergeants and such number of patrolmen
as Council may from time to time prescribe.
§ 75-2. Appointment; duration; retirement regulations. [Amended
2-17-1960 by Ord. No. 1029; 11-15-1972 by Ord. No. 1558]
Every member of the police force shall be appointed by the Borough Council
from a list of eligible applicants certified to the Borough Council by the
Police Civil Service Commission of the Borough in the manner prescribed
by law and shall hold his position until his voluntary retirement or until
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 370, Zoning.
31.Editor's Note: Included as Ch. 320, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 70-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-2
1:63
his removal for cause in the manner prescribed by law or until he shall
reach the age of 60 years, at which time he shall automatically be retired
from active duty; provided, however, that in no event shall a member be
compelled to retire prior to attaining eligibility for pension benefits as
established by the Borough of Hanover for members of the police force.
Policemen automatically retired by reason of age shall be subject to service
as police reserve until unfitted therefor by age or disability, when they may
be finally discharged. While on duty as a police reserve, they shall be paid
as wages, in addition to any regular pension, such sum as the Council may
determine.32
§ 75-3. Classifications. [Amended 5-5-1965 by Ord. No. 1271;
12-20-1967 by Ord. No. 1373]
§ 75-4. Salaries. [Amended 1-4-1967 by Ord. No. 1340; 12-20-1967
by Ord. No. 1373; 12-28-1968 by Ord. No. 1421; 12-26-1970 by Ord.
No. 149633]
The salaries of the members of the police force shall be fixed by resolution
of Council.
A. For the purpose of determining the amount of salaries payable to and
the competency of the members of the police force, the following
classifications are hereby established for all members of the police
force, with the exception of the Chief of Police:
(1) Lieutenant.
(2) Sergeant.
(3) Patrolman.
(4) Probationary patrolman.
B. All appointees, as members of the police force, with the exception of the
Chief of Police and present members of the police force, shall be
classified at the time of their respective appointments as probationary
patrolmen. Hereafter, all members of the police force, with the
exception of the Chief of Police, shall submit to periodic examination by
the Police Civil Service Commission of the Borough for advancement to
next higher pay grade or pay increment, as hereinafter defined within
the salary schedule under § 75-4, regardless of whether the next higher
pay grade or increment falls in a new classification or within the
present classification of the respective member. Such examination shall
be held at such intervals as the Police Civil Service Commission, with
the approval of Council, shall determine.
32.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 62, Art. IV, Police Pension Plan.
33.Editor's Note: Approved by Mayor 12-28-1970.
§ 75-2 HANOVER CODE § 75-5
1:64
§ 75-5. Supervision. [Amended 2-17-1960 by Ord. No. 1029;
4-20-1994 by Ord. No. 1964]
The supervision of the members of the police force in the performance of
the ordinary duties of their respective offices shall be vested in the Mayor.
§ 75-6. Rules and regulations. [Amended 2-17-1960 by Ord. No.
1029]
The Police Civil Service Commission is hereby authorized and empowered to
adopt, subject to the approval of the Borough Council, rules and regulations
as to any and all matters affecting the police force.
§ 75-7. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective on the first day of June 1942.
Chapter 80
RECORDS
§ 75-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-7
1:65

ARTICLE I
Disposition of Public Records
[Adopted 7-18-1973 by Ord. No. 1593]
§ 80-1. Legislative authority.
Public records of the Borough of Hanover shall from time to time be
disposed of in accordance with the Municipal Records Act of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.34
§ 80-2. Schedule and regulations for disposition.
Such public records shall be disposed of only in conformance with schedules
and regulations which shall be made and promulgated by the Local
Government Records Committee as established by said Act of the
Legislature.
§ 80-3. Approval of disposition.
Each individual act of disposition shall be approved by resolution of the
Borough of Hanover, and certification must be obtained from the
Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission that such disposal is in
accordance with the aforesaid established schedule.
34.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 1381 et seq.
§ 80-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-3
1:67

ARTICLE II
Open Records Policy
[Adopted 12-23-2008; amended in its entirety 7-22-2015 by Res. No.
1103]
§ 80-4. Hours of access.
All public records of the Borough of Hanover, as defined by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Right to Know Law of 2008, shall be
available for access 8:00 a.m. until 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, at the
office of the Borough Secretary, 44 Frederick Street, Hanover, Pennsylvania
17331.
§ 80-5. Record inspection.
A. Upon the submission of a right-to-know request, any person that is a
legal resident of the United States may inspect public records in the
Hanover Borough office, 44 Frederick Street, Hanover, Pennsylvania
17331, during regular office hours. Copies of public record documents
shall be made by the Borough Secretary, as time permits, at a cost of
$0.25 per side copied. Items will be mailed at cost only if items are paid
for in advance.
B. Copies of other documents, not governed under the Pennsylvania Rightto-
Know Law of 200835 and the Pennsylvania Office of Open Records,
shall be made by the Borough Secretary or his/her designee, as time
permits, at a cost of $0.35 per side copied. Items will be mailed at cost
only if items are paid for in advance.
C. Certification of documents as true and correct and notarized copies of
Borough documents are available from the office of the Borough
Secretary for $5.
D. The Code of the Borough of Hanover, as maintained in electronic form,
shall be available for review on the Borough's website. Access to the
Code is available via computer at the Hanover Borough Office and
Guthrie Memorial Library (2 Library Place, Hanover, Pennsylvania)
during regular hours, without charge.
E. Copies of Police Department accident reports and Fire Department
incident reports shall be available for a cost of $15 per report, during
regular office hours, Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
35.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 67.101 et seq.
§ 80-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-5
1:69
Chapter 84
RECREATION BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and other public areas — See Ch. 259.
§ 84-1. Establishment; composition.
A. Pursuant to the provisions of the Borough Code, a Recreation Board is
hereby created and established for the Borough of Hanover, said Board
to consist of five persons, one of whom shall be a member of the School
Board of the School District of the Borough of Hanover when appointed,
and one of whom shall be a member of Borough Council when
appointed.
B. Financial Commission. [Added 5-1-1991 by Ord. No. 1894]
(1) In the investment of funds raised for a Recreation Board
Endowment and other funds or property acquired or received by
the Borough of Hanover for recreation purposes, only such
investment shall be made as shall be recommended by the
Financial Commission, which is hereby created consisting of three
members, as follows:
(a) One individual, appointed by the Hanover Borough Council,
who shall have management experience in local private
banking or savings institutions or as a self-employed
businessman or businesswoman who as part of his or her work
responsibilities must invest business funds and make
purchases of equipment and materials.
(b) One individual, appointed by the Hanover Public School
System Board of Directors, who shall have management
experience in local private banking or savings institutions or as
a self-employed businessman or businesswoman who as part of
his or her work responsibilities must invest business funds and
make purchases of equipment and materials.
(c) One individual from the Hanover Recreation Board, appointed
by the Hanover Recreation Board, who shall have management
experience in local private banking or savings institutions or as
a self-employed businessman or businesswoman who as part of
his or her work responsibilities must invest business funds and
make purchases of equipment and materials.
(2) In the event of the refusal or neglect of any of the aforesaid bodies
to act, then the vacancy or vacancies shall be filled by a person
§ 80-5 HANOVER CODE § 84-1
1:70
§ 84-2. Appointments; terms of office.
The members of the Board shall be appointed by the Borough Council of
the Borough of Hanover and shall serve for terms of five years or until
their successors are appointed, except that the members of such Board first
appointed shall be appointed for such terms that the term of one member
shall expire annually thereafter.
§ 84-3. Compensation; vacancies.
Members of the Recreation Board shall serve without pay, and vacancies in
such Board occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled for
the unexpired term in the same manner as original appointments.
§ 84-4. Elections; employees. [Amended 12-16-1981 by Ord. No.
1735]
§ 84-5. Powers and duties. [Amended 12-16-1981 by Ord. No. 1735]
The Recreation Board appointed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall have the authority to advise the Borough Manager and the Borough
Council on the proper supervision and maintenance of recreation places.
§ 84-6. Acceptance of moneys; fund.
appointed by the Mayor of the Borough of Hanover and approved
by the Borough Council.
(3) All Financial Commission members shall serve terms of five years
and shall be full members of the Hanover Recreation Board.
A. The members of the Recreation Board hereby established shall elect
their own Chairman and Secretary and select all other necessary
officers to serve for a period of one year.
B. The Recreation Board may advise the Borough Manager on the
selection of Recreation Directors and personnel standards to provide
proper supervision and operation of recreation activities. The Borough
Manager or his appointed staff with designated employment powers, as
provided by Chapter 16, Borough Manager, as amended, shall be
responsible for all employment matters required to operate recreation
programming.
A. The Recreation Board may accept any grant, gift, bequest or donation
of services, equipment, real estate or money, from any individual or
group, to be used as specified by the donor or by the terms of
acceptance.
B. A separate perpetual endowment fund shall be established to be used
for changes and improvements to recreation facilities under the
supervision of the Financial Commission. Only interest earnings from
the fund shall be used for improvements or changes which shall in no
§ 84-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-6
1:71
§ 84-7. Amendments.
This chapter may be amended, repealed or modified at any time by another
ordinance regularly adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of
Hanover.
Chapter 88
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Employee work regulations — See Ch. 38. Pension plans — See Ch. 62.
§ 88-1. Annual compensation fixed.
§ 88-2. Public copy to be filed.
A copy of the current salary ordinances and resolutions shall be kept on
file by the Secretary of the Borough of Hanover for the examination and
inspection of the public.
case be normal maintenance or upkeep items. Final determination in
regards to whether a change in facility is for an improvement or a new
facility will rest with the Financial Commission. [Added 5-1-1991 by
Ord. No. 1894]
C. A maintenance endowment fund shall be established to be used for
specific gifts and bequests given to maintain a specific park, play field
or playground area or equipment. This fund shall be placed under the
supervision of the Financial Commission. Only interest earnings from
the fund shall be used to maintain the facility or facilities itemized in
the gift or bequest. Final determination as to the use of money for
maintenance will rest with the Financial Commission. [Added
8-21-1991 by Ord. No. 1898]
A. The officers and employees of the Borough and the annual
compensation, payable in installments as Council may determine, shall
be determined in the annual salary ordinance.
B. Council shall by resolution determine such other officers and employees
of the Borough and the compensation payable thereto as Council shall
from time to time deem necessary and advisable.
§ 84-6 HANOVER CODE § 88-2
1:72
Chapter 92
SHADE TREE COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Shade trees — See Ch. 294. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 316.
§ 92-1. Establishment.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Borough Code, a Shade Tree Commission
is hereby created and established for the Borough of Hanover.
§ 92-2. Composition.
The Shade Tree Commission shall be composed of three residents of the
Borough of Hanover, who shall be nominated by an appropriate committee
of the Borough Council, appointed by the Mayor and approved by the
Borough Council.
§ 92-3. Compensation; vacancies.
The members of the Shade Tree Commission shall serve without
compensation, and vacancies in such Commission occurring other than by
expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner
as original appointments.
§ 92-4. Terms of office.
The members of the Shade Tree Commission shall serve for terms of five
years, or until their successors are appointed, except that the terms of the
members of such Commission first appointed shall be one member for a
term of three years, one for a term of four years and one for a term of five
years.
§ 92-5. Jurisdiction.
The Shade Tree Commission shall have exclusive custody and control of the
shade trees within the right-of-way lines of the public streets and highways
in the Borough of Hanover.
§ 92-6. Powers.
The Shade Tree Commission is authorized to plant, remove, maintain and
protect shade trees within the right-of-way lines of the public streets and
highways in the Borough of Hanover.
§ 88-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-7
1:73
§ 92-7. Officers.
The members of the Shade Tree Commission shall elect their own Chairman
and Secretary and select all other necessary officers.
§ 92-8. Hiring of personnel.
The Shade Tree Commission may employ and pay such superintendents,
engineers, foresters, tree wardens or other assistants as the proper
performance of the duties devolving upon it shall require, within the limits
of the appropriation made by the Borough Council for such purposes.
§ 92-9. Regulations for care and protection of trees.
The Shade Tree Commission may make, publish and enforce regulations
for the care and protection of the shade trees within the right-of-way lines
of the public streets and highways in the Borough of Hanover. No such
regulation shall be in force until it has been approved by the Borough
Council and until it has been published two times in a newspaper of general
circulation published in the Borough of Hanover.
§ 92-10. Annual report.
The Shade Tree Commission shall annually report in full to the Borough
Council its transactions and expenses for the last fiscal year of the Borough.
Chapter 96
SOCIAL SECURITY
§ 96-1. Decision to participate.
It is the considered opinion of this body that the extension of the social
security system to employees and officers of the Borough of Hanover will
be a great benefit, not only to the employees of the Borough by providing
that said employees and officers may participate in the provisions of the oldage
and survivors insurance system, but will also be of great benefit to the
Borough of Hanover by enabling it to attract and retain in employment the
best of personnel and thus increase the efficiency of its government.
§ 96-2. Execution of plan and agreement; commencement.
The 1951 Session of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, in regular session, enacted a statute, known as "Act No.
491,"36 which is the enabling Act provided for in Section 218 of Public
Law 734, 81st Congress,37 which designated the Secretary of Labor and
Industry of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to act as the state agency
to implement the coverage of employees and officers under the said old-
36.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 201 et seq.
37.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 418.
§ 92-7 HANOVER CODE § 96-2
1:74
age and survivors insurance system. The Borough of Hanover is hereby
authorized to execute and deliver to the state agency a plan or plans, and
agreement, required under Section 6 of said enabling Act38 and the Social
Security Act, to extend coverage to employees and officers of the Borough
of Hanover and do all other necessary things to effectuate coverage of
employees and officers under the old-age and survivors insurance system.
The plan and agreement hereby authorized shall extend coverage to all
employees and officers of the Borough of Hanover excepting the classes
enumerated in Subsection (d) and Paragraphs (3), (5) and (6) of Subsection
(c) of Section 218 of the Federal Social Security Act,39 as last amended
by the Act of June 28, 1952, 66 Stat. 285. Such plan and agreement shall
provide that the participation of this Borough of Hanover shall commence as
of January 1, 1951. The Borough of Hanover shall pay such amounts into the
contribution fund as provided in Section 4 of the enabling Act,40 for wages
received by such employees and officers of the Borough of Hanover from
January 1, 1951, until December 31, 1952.
§ 96-3. Payroll deductions; Borough contributions.
The Borough Secretary is hereby authorized to establish a system of payroll
deductions as of January 1, 1953, to be matched by payments by the
Borough of Hanover, to be made into the contribution fund of the Social
Security Act through the office of the state agency, and to make charges of
this tax to the fund or funds from which wage or salary payments are issued
to employees of the Borough of Hanover. Such payments are to be made
in accordance with the provisions of the law and regulations promulgated
by the state agency and the federal security administrator. Such payments
which are delinquent shall bear interest at the rate of 1/2% of 1% per month
until such time as payments are made.
§ 96-4. Appropriations; authority to enter agreement.
Appropriation is hereby made from the proper fund or funds of the Borough
of Hanover in the necessary amount to pay into the contribution fund as
provided in Section 4 of the enabling Act41 and in accordance with the plan
or plans and agreement. Authority is given to the Mayor and the Secretary
of the Borough of Hanover to enter into an agreement with the state agency,
which agreement shall be in accordance with Act No. 491 and with Section
218 of the Social Security Act.42
38.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 206.
39.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 418(c)(3), (5) and (6) and (d).
40.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 204.
41.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 204.
42.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 201 et seq. and 42 U.S.C. § 418.
§ 96-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-4
1:75
Chapter 100
STREETLIGHTING CONTRACTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 316.
§ 100-1. Illumination of streets.
Henceforth, the streets and highways of said Borough shall be lighted at the
expense of said Borough during the night or such portions of the night as
the Borough Council of said Borough shall from time to time by resolution
prescribe, by means of electricity, gas, gasoline, kerosene or other systems
of illumination, as said Borough Council may from time to time prescribe.
§ 100-2. Terms of contract; time limit.
The said Borough Council shall make contracts for the lighting of the
streets and highways of said Borough, as aforesaid, with any individual or
corporation desiring to furnish light for such purpose, upon the best terms
obtainable for the kind of light prescribed by said Borough Council, but no
such contract shall be for a longer term than 10 years.
§ 100-3. Execution of contracts.
Said contracts for the lighting of the streets and highways of said Borough
shall be executed in the corporate name of the Borough of Hanover by the
Mayor of said Borough, and the Secretary of the said Borough Council shall
affix thereunto the Corporate Seal of the Borough of Hanover, attested by
the said Secretary.
Chapter 105
TAX COLLECTOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 325.
§ 105-1. Borough responsibilities.
A. The Hanover Borough will provide information to the Tax Collector
regarding additions to, exonerations from or changes to the tax
duplicates. This will represent an authorization to affect tax billings for
The Hanover Borough.
§ 96-4 HANOVER CODE § 105-1
1:76
§ 105-2. Full payment required.
The Tax Collector must collect in full all taxes. The Borough will not accept
partial payments. Reference: Tax Collector's Manual, Section 10,
"Installment Payments," last paragraph, states: "In the absence of a local
ordinance or resolution to establish installment payments there is nothing
in the law authorizing the Tax Collector to take partial payments. As a
convenience to the taxpayer, many Tax Collectors allow complete payment
of one or more specific taxes included on a tax bill as a partial payment."
§ 105-3. Exemptions.
§ 105-4. Accounts.
B. The Borough Office is responsible for tax accounting procedures and
will work with the Tax Collector regarding all Borough taxes. Any
questions concerning remittance, etc., shall be directed to an employee
appointed by the Borough Manager at (717) 637-3877.
C. Borough Council will authorize appropriate requests for
reimbursements of appropriate expenses, through the Borough
Treasurer. Requisitions should be forwarded to:
Hanover Borough
44 Frederick Street
Hanover, PA 17331
A. Any exemptions or exoneration request made by the Tax Collector must
contain supporting evidence that taxes were paid in another taxing
district, or the taxpayer had insufficient income for the tax year. In the
case of death, taxes are exempt.
B. Any exemption request made by the Tax Collector must be supported by
Exhibit D, except for accidental or incorrect billings which will be
documented in periodic exoneration request listings submitted by the
Tax Collector. Tax exemption for low-income persons over 62 years of
age with an annual income of less than $5,000. [Added 10-19-1994 by
Res. No. 632C; amended 4-16-1997 by Ord. No. 2000]
A. Hanover Borough Council shall require the Tax Collector to maintain an
interest-bearing account. Reference: Tax Collector's Manual, Section
13, states: ". . .Funds may be deposited in an interest-bearing account
before they are paid over to the taxing district. The Tax Collector only
serves as trustee of the funds; any interest earned on the tax moneys
belongs to the taxing district, not to the Tax Collector. All interest
earned should be credited to the proper taxing district and paid over
monthly or sooner as the taxing district requires. . ."
(1) Interest is to be remitted on a monthly basis using the "Tax
Collector's Interest Remittance Form" (Exhibit A).43
§ 105-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-4
1:77
§ 105-5. Remittances.
The Council of the Borough of Hanover requires remittance at least once a
month and/or within one week when collections amount to $10,000 or more.
Reference: Tax Collector's Manual, Section 13, states: "At a minimum, the
Tax Collector is required to pay over tax receipts to the treasurer of that
taxing district on or before the 10th day of every month. The taxing district
may require more frequent payments by ordinance or resolution."
§ 105-6. Reports.
(2) All checks should be made payable to the Hanover Borough and
forwarded to:
The Hanover Borough Treasurer
44 Frederick Street
Hanover, PA 17331
(3) Monthly copies of the bank statement must be attached to the Tax
Collector's Interest Remittance Form and forwarded to the
Treasurer's office for verification of bank interest.
(4) No commission will be paid on interest remitted.
B. The Tax Collector may use the Borough's taxpayer identification
number if the first line of the bank account the Tax Collector establishes
indicates: "The Hanover Borough Tax Account."
A. The Council of the Borough of Hanover requires the Tax Collector to
submit monthly reports by the 10th day of each month for the previous
month's activity. Reference: Tax Collector's Manual, Section 7, "Reports
to Taxing Districts," first paragraph, states: "The Tax Collector is
required to make periodic reports to the taxing district. These reports
are due by the 10th day of each month for the previous month's activity,
but can be required more frequently by the taxing district by ordinance
or resolution."
(1) Separate remittance reports must be completed for each tax year
(Exhibit B).44
(2) The Borough maintains its tax accounting at face tax value;
therefore, rebate and penalty amounts will be appropriately
reflected. The report must show rebate 2% and penalty 10%
amounts as applicable. The report should also include the bill
number, account number, bill date, date paid, status of payment
(discount, par or penalty), beginning and ending balances for each
tax by tax year. Reference: Section 7, "Reports to Taxing Districts,"
43.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Borough offices.
44.Editor's Note: Exhibit B is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 105-4 HANOVER CODE § 105-6
1:78
§ 105-7. Refunds.
The Council of the Borough of Hanover notes that when a refund is required
and the Borough is being requested to do the refund that the Tax Collector
prepare the Tax Refund Request Form (Exhibit C).45 Reference: the Tax
Collector's Manual, Section 10, "Errors in Duplicate," first paragraph,
states: "If the amount of tax listed on the duplicate is incorrect, the Tax
Collector has no authority to correct the error. The Tax Collector must
accept in payment the exact amount shown on the duplicate. Refunds of
taxes paid in error may be made only by the taxing district. Checks for the
amount of refund must be issued directly by the treasurer of the taxing
second paragraph, states: "The report is to list all taxes collected
for the taxing district for the reporting period. It is to list the
names of taxpayers and amounts collected from each, including
discounts and penalties. It must carry a total of all taxes collected
with discounts and penalties for the reporting period."
(3) If refunds are applicable in order to appropriately record the same,
the gross amount of taxes collected must be reflected on a
remittance report. Total refunds issued must be reflected on a
separate remittance report with appropriate documentation. The
refund total(s) in each column must be indicated with a minus (-)
sign. The difference between the two reports should equal the
check amount being forwarded.
(4) The Borough requires all forms to be signed and dated.
(5) One check may be issued for multiple remittance and refund
reports for the appropriate month for which the report is being
prepared. A separate check should be issued for deposits or
refunds for which a report will be prepared for the subsequent
month.
(6) All remittances should be made payable to The Borough of Hanover
and forwarded to the Borough Treasurer at 44 Frederick Street,
Hanover, PA 17331.
(7) Incomplete or improperly completed remittance reports could
delay commission payments.
B. In addition to the monthly reports, a quarterly report reflecting year-todate
activity for each tax and each tax year should be submitted with
monthly reports. Balances on the monthly reports must agree with
balances on year-to-date (quarterly) reports. The Tax Collector will be
available to review all reports as needed, but at least quarterly, with
taxing district personnel present. These meetings will be held at a time
and place agreed upon by all. [Added 10-19-1994 by Res. No. 632C]
45.Editor's Note: Exhibit C is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 105-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-7
1:79
district. The Tax Collector has no authority to make refunds from the tax
collection account."
§ 105-8. Commissions.
The Tax Collector's compensation shall be set by the Hanover Borough
Council in accordance with the Local Tax Collection Law46 by enactment of
an ordinance.
§ 105-9. Monthly real estate tax reports.
§ 105-10. Annual reconciliation.
Tax Collectors shall reconcile (settle) balance due on the tax duplicate
with the Borough Office in January each year, prior to the release of the
A. The Tax Collector signature shall verify to the Borough that the tax was
paid and on what basis.
B. The Tax Collector shall forward a copy of the request form to the
Borough Treasurer and shall retain a copy for their records.
C. The Treasurer, upon receipt of the request, will proceed with the refund
process.
A. Commissions will be calculated by the Borough Treasurer based on the
remittance reports submitted.
B. Remittance reports must be received seven days prior to the scheduled
payroll for processing with that payroll.
C. The commission schedule for tax year 2014 duplicates (real estate and
per capita) is: [Amended 1-23-2013 by Res. No. 1031]
(1) Commission set at $0.25 per capita tax bill collected.
(2) Commission set at 0.95% of total real estate tax collected.
D. No compensation shall be paid on taxes of which the Tax Collector is
exonerated or which are reported to the Tax Claim Bureau.
E. This rate of compensation shall apply regardless of whether the taxes
are collected during the discount, par or penalty periods.
A. Real estate tax reports will be distributed to the Tax Collector monthly,
as close to the 10th of the month as possible.
B. Check the report and advise the Borough as soon as possible if there
are any discrepancies. Reference: Section 8 of the Tax Collector's
Manual, Interim Real Estate Taxes: "All affected taxpayers are to be
sent interim tax notices by the Tax Collectors within 10 days after
receipt of duplicate additions."
46.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
§ 105-7 HANOVER CODE § 105-10
1:80
succeeding year's tax duplicate. Reference: Tax Collector's Manual, Section
14, under "Settlement of Accounts," states: "A Tax Collector must settle the
current year's duplicate before receiving the duplicate for the next year."
§ 105-11. Annual settlement of tax duplicate.
A. This will be a reconciliation for total only. Liens will not be turned in at
this time. Liens will still be filed prior to the end of April each year.
B. A letter will accompany an annual summary report asking the Tax
Collector to reconcile the tax duplicate total and balance to the
Borough's balance due.
C. The letter must be signed and returned to the Borough Treasurer, prior
to release of the next year's Borough tax duplicate.
D. As the reconciliation letter is received from the Tax Collector, the
Borough will notify the Assessment Office it is appropriate to release
the Borough's tax duplicate for the succeeding year.
A. The Tax Collector is required to settle the tax duplicate of the previous
year on or before the last working day of April each year. Reference: Tax
Collector's Manual, Section 14, "Settlement of Accounts," second
paragraph, states: "Settlement must be made before the last day of
April of the year following the issuance of the duplicate so the Tax
Collector can make a return of all unpaid real estate taxes to the county
tax claim bureau. Since any current duplicate must be settled before a
new duplicate is issued, settlement for county and municipal taxes
usually occurs around the end of the calendar year."
B. March's monthly accounting report will be used to settle the accounts
considering:
(1) Balance due.
(2) Lien lists for delinquent real estate taxes will be turned over to the
Tax Claim Bureau; copy forwarded to the Treasurer's office.
(3) Lien lists for per capita taxes will be turned over to York Adams Tax
Bureau47; copy forwarded to the Treasurer's office.
(4) The exoneration list of per capita taxes is to be approved by the
Hanover Borough Council as required by the Tax Collector, but no
later than March each year. This list must include account number,
name, bill number, bill date, face amount and reason for
exoneration.
(5) Lien list and exoneration totals will be deducted from the balance
due.
47.Editor's Note: Per Borough Council agreement, “Berkheimer Associates” was changed to
“York Adams Tax Bureau.”
§ 105-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-11
1:81
§ 105-12. Annual Department of Community and Economic
Development reports.
The Tax Collector shall furnish a copy of the annual report submitted to
the Department of Community and Economic Development to the Borough
of Hanover. Reference: Tax Collector's Manual, Section 7, "Annual Tax
Collector Reports," first paragraph, states: "Each elected Tax Collector must
file an annual report on forms prepared and furnished by the Department of
Community and Economic Development with the Department and with the
Clerk of the Court of Common Pleas."
§ 105-13. Construal of provisions.
The Tax Collector shall be required to mail old tax billings, collect taxes
and deposit all funds received in the manner directed above. This resolution
shall not enlarge, restrict or change the duties of the Tax Collector under
existing law.
§ 105-14. Settlement dates and cutoffs for collection. [Added
10-19-1994 by Res. No. 632C]
As recommended and requested by the Hanover Borough Tax Collector,
the following settlement dates and cutoffs for collection of same will be
followed:
Chapter 110
WARD BOUNDARIES
(6) Balance remaining represents balance for which the Tax Collector
is still responsible, which could include interim billings, balance
which have not yet been remitted, etc. A report by tax year and
appropriate tax listing the name, bill number, account number and
outstanding par amount should be included with the report to
verify the remaining balances.
A. The previous year's per capita taxes will be submitted for settlement
with the January 10th monthly reports.
B. All interim billings up to the last day of June for the previous year will
be settled with the full billings for the previous tax year.
C. All interim billings for July through the last day of December will be
submitted for settlement with the next year's full billings.
D. The Tax Collector can bill back five years for taxes due by residents
responsible for same.
§ 105-11 HANOVER CODE § 110-1
1:82
§ 110-1. First Ward boundaries.
The First Ward of the Borough of Hanover shall be and hereby is established
and described as follows:
Beginning from a corner at the center-line intersection of North Railroad
Street and East Chestnut Street; thence along the center line of East
Chestnut Street in a northeasterly direction to the center-line intersection
of East Chestnut Street and Broadway; thence along the center line of
Broadway in a northeasterly direction to a point on the Borough of
Hanover-Penn Township boundary line; thence along the Borough of
Hanover-Penn Township boundary line by various courses and distances in
a southeasterly direction to an intersection point at the center line of the
Penn Central Railroad; thence along the center line of the Penn Central
Railroad by various courses and distances in a southwesterly direction to
a center-line intersection point of the Penn Central Railroad and Center
Street; thence along the Borough of Hanover-Penn Township boundary line
in a southerly direction to a center-line intersection point of the Borough
of Hanover-Penn Township boundary line and Baer Avenue; thence along
the center line of Baer Avenue in a northwesterly direction to the centerline
intersection of Baer Avenue and East Middle Street; thence along the
center line of East Middle Street in a southwesterly direction to the centerline
intersection of East Middle Street and South Railroad Street; thence
along the center line of South and North Railroad Street in a northwesterly
direction to the center-line intersection of North Railroad Street and East
Chestnut Street, the place of beginning.
§ 110-2. Second Ward boundaries.
The Second Ward of the Borough of Hanover shall be and hereby is
established and described as follows:
Beginning from a corner at the center-line intersection of North Railroad
Street and East Chestnut Street; thence along the center line of North
Railroad Street in a northeasterly direction to the center-line intersection
of North Railroad Street, North Street and Eichelberger Street; thence
along the center line of Eichelberger Street in a northwesterly direction to
a point on the Borough of Hanover-Penn Township boundary line; thence
along the Borough of Hanover-Penn Township boundary line by various
courses and distances in an easterly direction to a point on the center line
of Broadway; thence along the center line of Broadway in a southwesterly
direction to the center-line intersection of Broadway and East Chestnut
Street; thence along the center line of East Chestnut Street in a
southwesterly direction to the center-line intersection of East Chestnut
Street and North Railroad Street, the place of beginning.
§ 110-3. Third Ward boundaries.
The Third Ward of the Borough of Hanover shall be and hereby is
established and described as follows:
§ 110-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-3
1:83
Beginning from a corner at the center-line intersection of High Street and
the Penn Central Railroad; thence along the center line of High Street in
a northwesterly direction to a point at the center-line intersection of High
Street and Third Street; thence along the center line of Third Street in a
westerly direction to a point of intersection with the York-Adams County
and Hanover Borough boundary line; thence along said boundary line in a
northerly direction to a point of intersection with the center line of WHVR
Road; thence along the Borough of Hanover-Penn Township boundary line
by various courses and distances in an easterly direction to a corner at
the center-line intersection of WHVR Road and Carlisle Street; thence
along the center line of Carlisle Street in a northwesterly direction to
the Borough of Hanover-Penn Township boundary line; thence along the
Borough of Hanover-Penn Township boundary line by various courses and
distances in a southeasterly direction to a point of intersection with the
center line of Eichelberger Street extended; thence along the center line
of Eichelberger Street extended and Eichelberger Street in a southeasterly
direction to the intersection point of North Street, North Railroad Street
and Eichelberger Street; thence along the center line of North Railroad
Street in a southerly direction to the center-line intersection of North
Railroad Street and the Penn Central Railroad; thence along the center line
of the Penn Central Railroad in a southwesterly direction to the center-line
intersection point of the Penn Central Railroad and High Street, the place
of beginning.
§ 110-4. Fourth Ward boundaries.
The Fourth Ward of the Borough of Hanover shall be and hereby is
established and described as follows:
§ 110-3 HANOVER CODE § 110-4
1:84
Beginning from a corner at the center-line intersection of the Penn Central
Railroad and North Railroad Street; thence along the center line of North
and South Railroad Street in a southeasterly direction to a point at the
center-line intersection of South Railroad Street and East Middle Street;
thence along East and West Middle Street in a southwesterly direction
to a point at the intersection of the center line of West Middle Street
with the Borough of Hanover-Penn Township boundary line; thence along
the Borough of Hanover-Penn Township boundary line by various courses
and distances in a northwesterly direction to an intersection point of the
Borough of Hanover-Penn Township boundary line and the center line of
the Penn Central Railroad; thence along the center line of the Penn Central
Railroad in a southwesterly direction to a point at the intersection of the
center line of the Penn Central Railroad with the York-Adams County and
Hanover Borough boundary line; thence along said boundary line in a
northerly direction to a point of intersection with the center line of Third
Street; thence along the center line of Third Street in an easterly direction
to a point of intersection with the center line of High Street; thence along
the center line of High Street in a southeasterly direction to a point of
intersection with the center line of the Penn Central Railroad; thence along
the center line of the Penn Central Railroad in a northeasterly direction to
the center-line intersection point of the Penn Central Railroad and North
Railroad Street, the place of beginning.
§ 110-5. Fifth Ward boundaries.
The Fifth Ward of the Borough of Hanover shall be and hereby is established
and described as follows:
Beginning from a corner at the center-line intersection of East Middle
Street and Baer Avenue; thence along the center line of Baer Avenue in
a southeasterly direction to a point at the intersection of the center line
of Baer Avenue with the Borough of Hanover-Penn Township boundary
line; thence along the Borough of Hanover-Penn Township boundary line
by various courses and distances in a southwesterly direction to an
intersection point of the Borough of Hanover-Penn Township boundary line
and the center line of West Middle Street; thence along the center line of
West and East Middle Street in a northeasterly direction to an intersection
point of East Middle Street and Baer Avenue, the place of beginning.
§ 110-6. Filing of plan with Secretary.
A plan of the Borough of Hanover setting forth the within described
boundaries of the five wards shall be filed with the Secretary of the Borough
of Hanover.
§ 110-7. Authorization to execute and file documents.
The proper officers of the Borough of Hanover be and the same hereby are
authorized and directed to execute and file such documents and perform all
such acts as shall be necessary to accomplish the within reapportionment,
§ 110-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-7
1:85
including but not limited to the filing with the County Commissioners of
York County, Pennsylvania, a copy of this chapter and a copy of the plan
herein referred to.
§ 110-8. Effective date. [Added 1-17-1973 by Ord. No. 1566]
The provisions of this chapter shall become effective January 1, 1975.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 120
ADVERTISING MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
§ 120-1. License required to distribute advertising matter.
[Amended 12-29-1954 by Ord. No. 854]
From and after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for
any person or persons, firm or corporation, to throw, place or be a party
to throwing or placing, either as principal or as agent, of any circular or
handbill or other advertising matter upon any highway in the Borough, or
on or in any vehicle, pole, post or other object in or on any thoroughfare, or
to throw or place any advertising matter on the steps, entrance or premises
of any building in the Borough, or to hand any advertising matter to any
person in or on any thoroughfare in the Borough, without first having taken
out a license as hereinafter provided. Provided, no license granted under
this chapter shall authorize the holder of such license to distribute, cast or
post any advertising matter in any manner or upon any object as prohibited
by law.
§ 120-2. Issuance of license; fee; duration.
Licenses as herein provided for shall be issued by the Mayor, which officer
shall have full power to refuse, suspend or revoke such license. The fee for
such license shall be $1. The periods during which such licenses shall be
effective are hereby fixed as follows: from January 1 to June 30, and from
July 1 to December 31; and any applicant for a license shall be required to
pay the aforesaid license fee of $1 in full, regardless of what portion of the
respective license period may have expired.
§ 120-3. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 417, approved the 20th day of April 1928, is hereby
specifically repealed, and all ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting
with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed.
§ 110-7 HANOVER CODE § 120-3
1:86
Chapter 126
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
§ 120-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-3
1:87

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 126-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context in which the word
is used clearly indicates otherwise:
ANIMAL — Any dog, cat, domesticated animal or nondomesticated animal.
AT LARGE — An animal which is off the premises of the owner, such as
upon a public highway, street, alley, park or any other public land or upon
property of another person other than the owner and not being secured by
means of a leash, cord, chain or other device so that it cannot stray or not
being accompanied by or under the reasonable control of a person; voice
control alone shall not be considered as under the reasonable control of a
person.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Hanover, York County, Pennsylvania.
DOMESTIC PET — A pet, such as a dog or cat, domesticated so as to live
and breed in a tame condition.
FERAL CAT — A cat existing in a natural state, not domesticated, or having
reverted from domestication to a wild state.
MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle which is a self-propelled road vehicle or
off-road vehicle, commonly wheeled, that does not operate on rails, such
as trains or trains, and used for the transportation of passengers, or
passengers and property.
NUISANCE — An animal shall be considered a nuisance if it habitually
trespasses upon or damages private or public property, annoys or harms
Borough residents or others or is kept, harbored, walked or exercised, or
allowed to run at large in violation hereof.
NUISANCE CAT — Any unowned free-roaming cat that is partially socialized
or unsocialized to humans and tends to resist contact with humans, is not
altered and habitually trespasses upon or damages either private or public
property or annoys or harms lawful users or occupants thereof.
OWNER — Includes every person, firm, corporation or other entity having
a right of property in any animal which is kept or harbored, or permitted,
or suffered to be within the limits of the Borough of Hanover, York County,
Pennsylvania, as well as every person, firm, corporation or entity occupying
any premises within the limits of the Borough of Hanover, York County,
Pennsylvania, permitting an animal to remain on or about his, her or its
premises. Any person having a right of property in, having custody of or who
harbors or permits an animal to remain on or around his or her property.
PERSON — A natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or
similar legal entity.
§ 126-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-1
1:89
POLICE OFFICER — Any person employed by the Borough whose duty it
is to preserve peace or to make arrests or to enforce any law, including
auxiliary policemen.
STRAY CAT — Any cat whose owner or keeper from time to time allows the
cat to run free of the property of the owner or keeper.
§ 126-2. Nuisances prohibited.
A. Disturbing the peace.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any owner to keep or harbor any domestic
pet which habitually barks, howls, screeches, bays, or yelps
incessantly or which in any way or manner unreasonably disturbs
the peace and quiet of any person in the vicinity, or which disturbs
or endangers the comfort, repose or health of persons in the
vicinity. The keeping or harboring of any such domestic pet is
hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(2) It shall not be necessary to establish that any occurrence has lasted
for any specific period of time in order to find a violation of this
section. However, continuous making of any loud or harsh noise by
a domestic pet for more than one-half hour on any one occasion
shall give rise to the presumption that the domestic pet on the
premises has disturbed the peace and quiet of persons in the
vicinity and has disturbed or endangered the comfort, repose or
health of persons in the vicinity. Such domestic pets are hereby
declared a nuisance.
(3) In any legal proceeding brought to prosecute an alleged violation of
this section, if it shall be determined that a domestic pet has
disturbed the peace and quiet of persons in the vicinity or has
disturbed or endangered the comfort, repose or health of persons
in the vicinity by unseemly noise as hereinbefore set forth, it shall
be conclusively presumed that the owner of the domestic pet has
permitted the occurrence to have happened.
B. No person shall allow the frequent and habitual disruption of the
comfort, repose, or health of persons in the neighborhood by domestic
pets.
C. It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow a domestic pet to defecate in
or upon any public street, public property or private property (other
than that of the owner), unless the defecation is immediately removed
from the public or private property by the owner or person in control of
the domestic pet.
D. It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow a domestic pet to be
harbored or kept in unsafe, offensive or unsanitary conditions so as to
create offensive or foul odors or so as to create a danger, risk or
infringement upon or to the health, safety, welfare, or comfort of its
neighbors or the public.
§ 126-1 HANOVER CODE § 126-2
1:90
§ 126-3. Running at large.
§ 126-4. Impounding.
Any police officer, law enforcement officer or other authorized official of
the Borough is hereby authorized to seize and detain any animal running at
large in violation of § 126-3 or any animal concerning which information has
been received that such animal has been running at large. Notice of such
seizure shall be given to the person in whose name the license, if any, was
issued, or his agent, or to the person who the officer or official otherwise
knows to be the owner, advising said person to claim such animal within
48 hours after receipt thereof. In the event that the animal does not bear
a proper license tag and the owner or agent is not known, the animal will
be held for a minimum of five days, after which the procedure outlined in
§ 126-5 for the disposition of any unclaimed animal will be followed. The
owner or claimant of an animal so detained shall pay a fine as imposed
under the animal laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, together with
a charge as established from time to time by resolution of the Borough
Council for room and board or the daily charge of the shelter where the
E. It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow a domestic pet to scratch,
dig, burrow, chew or otherwise damage any public or private property
(other than that of the owner).
A. No person shall permit any dog owned by him or under his supervision
or control to run at large at any time upon the public streets, alleys,
highways, or public grounds of the Borough, or upon the private
property of any other person or upon any property other than property
belonging to the owner of such dog or to a person under whose
supervision or control of such dog is being kept. A dog must be firmly
secured by means of a leash, cord, chain or other device so that it
cannot stray, or must be accompanied by or under the reasonable
control of some person.
B. Any police officer, law enforcement officer or other authorized official of
the Borough is hereby authorized and empowered to seize and detain
any dog which is found running at large in the Borough, or upon any
property other than the property of the owner of such dog or the
property of a person under whose supervision or control such dog is
being kept, and which is unaccompanied by the owner or such other
person when such police officer, law enforcement officer or authorized
official of the Borough is in pursuit or the presence of such dog.
C. The provisions of this section shall apply to all dogs found running at
large in violation of this section, irrespective of payment for or issuance
of any license in respect to the dog involved.
D. The Borough Council is hereby empowered and authorized to engage
the services of a qualified and suitable person to enforce the provisions
of this section.
§ 126-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-4
1:91
animal is kept, whichever amount is greater. No animal shall be returned to
the owner or claimant until said fine and expense or charges shall be paid.
§ 126-5. Disposition of any unclaimed animal.
If after 48 hours of receipt of such notice as set forth in this section or a
minimum of five days after the animal is taken into custody where the owner
of the animal is unknown, such animal (licensed or unlicensed) has not
been claimed, the police officer, law enforcement officer or other authorized
official of the Borough shall convey such animal to a shelter, animal rescue,
or foster care. No animal shall be sold for the purpose of vivisection or
research or be conveyed in any manner for such purposes.
§ 126-6. Transportation of animals.
No person shall transport by motor vehicle on any public highway, street,
road or alley an animal, unless such animal is safely enclosed within the
motor vehicle or protected by a container, cage, cross tether or other device
to prevent the animal from falling from, being thrown from or jumping from
said motor vehicle.
§ 126-7. Animals left unattended in vehicles.
No person shall leave an animal in any unattended motor vehicle without
adequate ventilation, sanitary conditions or in such a manner as to subject
the animal to extreme temperature which adversely affects the health or
safety of the animal.
§ 126-8. Licenses and shots.
On or after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for a person
to own, keep, harbor or permit a dog to be housed in the Borough that has
not been licensed and that has not been vaccinated against rabies. Proof of
such licensing and vaccination shall be permanently attached to the dog's
collar for ease of identification. Collars must be worn at all times when the
dog is outdoors or indoors where the dog may be in contact with the general
public.
§ 126-9. Nuisance, stray or feral cats
A. It is unlawful to be the owner of a nuisance cat. Any owner of a cat
causing a nuisance as defined below shall be in violation of this article
and subject to the penalties herein. The following shall be deemed a
nuisance in fact:
(1) Any cat which causes damage to the property of anyone other than
the owner.
(2) Any cat that is a vicious animal in that it may cause injury to any
person/animal or property or may be a hazard to public safety.
(3) Any cat which causes unreasonable fouling of the air by odors.
§ 126-4 HANOVER CODE § 126-9
1:92
§ 126-10. Investigation; complaints; enforcement
(4) Any cat which causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or
surroundings.
(5) Any cat which defecates on any public property, sidewalk, park or
building or on any private property without the consent of the
owner of such property, unless the person owning, having a
proprietary interest in, harboring, or having care, charge, control,
custody, or possession of such animal shall immediately remove any
such defecation to a proper trash receptacle.
(6) Any cat which whines, calls or makes other disturbing noises in an
excessive or continuous manner.
(7) Any cat which attacks other domestic animals.
(8) Any cat which is determined by the Borough of Hanover Code
Enforcement Officer to be offensive or dangerous to the public
health, safety, or welfare.
B. It shall be unlawful for a person other than the owner to intentionally
provide food, water, or other forms of sustenance or care to a nuisance
cat, stray cat or feral cat without assuming full responsibility for the cat
by providing the cat with continued humane treatment, which shall
include proper food, water, shelter, veterinarian care, rabies
vaccination, and alteration of the cat.
C. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any cat to permit such cat to run
free outside the residence, whether on or off the property of its owner
or keeper unless such cat has been:
(1) Neutered or spayed to prevent procreating; and
(2) Immunized against rabies in compliance with Pennsylvania law.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to create conditions that are
attractive to wild animals such as skunks, rats, rodents, raccoons,
opossums, or similar animals.
A. Upon receipt of a complaint by one or more persons alleging the
presence of a possible nuisance, stray or feral cat, the Borough of
Hanover Code Enforcement Officer may investigate the complaint to
determine if in fact the animal is a nuisance, stray or feral cat.
B. Upon determination by the Borough of Hanover Code Enforcement
Officer that the cat is a nuisance, stray or feral cat, the following action
may be taken:
(1) The Borough of Hanover Code Enforcement Officer may order the
owner of a nuisance cat to have the animal altered at the owner's
expense.
§ 126-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-10
1:93
§ 126-11. Notices of violations.
(2) A citation or order may be issued to the owner of the nuisance cat
for failure to comply with any applicable provision of this article.
(3) The cat in question may be impounded. All costs associated with
impounding, to include boarding fees, shall be the responsibility of
the owner. Such costs shall be paid in full prior to the owner
reclaiming the cat. If the owner fails to reclaim the cat, the owner
shall still be responsible for such costs. Notice shall be provided to
the owner and the procedure outlined in §§ 126-4 and 126-5 above
shall be followed.
A. Whenever a person (including a Borough police officer or official) shall
complain to the Borough of Hanover or Code Enforcement Officer
concerning a violation of any provision hereof, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall determine if the complaint is accurate and, if so, shall
notify the owner of the domestic pet that a complaint has been received
and that the owner must immediately take whatever steps are
necessary to terminate the offensive conduct (the "notice").
B. In the event that the offensive conduct continues after the Code
Enforcement Officer gives the notice as set forth in Subsection A, then,
upon the filing of a written complaint by a resident, or the Code
Enforcement Officer concerning the continued violation of this chapter,
then the Code Enforcement Officer shall, upon verification of the facts
that form the basis of the complaint, issue to the owner a citation in
accordance with Article IV, Enforcement, of this chapter.
C. Any person and/or owner violating any provisions of Article I will be
issued a notice of violation and, if the conduct is not corrected, a
citation will be filed with the local magisterial district justice as outlined
in accordance with Article IV, Enforcement of this chapter.
§ 126-10 HANOVER CODE § 126-11
1:94
ARTICLE II
Residential Chickens
§ 126-12. Permit required; fees; revocation of permits; appeals.
A. Permit. No person, corporation, limited liability company, partnership
or other entity shall raise, harbor or keep chickens within the Borough
without having first obtained a valid permit to do so from the Borough.
No fowl or poultry other than chickens may be kept, harbored or
permitted to reside on real property situate in the Borough.
B. Application. In order to obtain a permit to raise, harbor or keep
chickens, an applicant shall submit an application on the forms
provided by the Borough.
C. Fees. An applicant for a permit shall pay, in full at the time of
submission, a fee for such permit, which fee shall be set by resolution of
Borough Council from time to time.
D. Permit requirements. In order for a permit to be issued, the following
requirements must be met:
(1) All requirements of this article shall be met.
(2) All fees related to issuance of a permit shall have been paid in full.
(3) The tract of land on which the chickens are to be kept shall contain
a single- or two-family dwelling only and shall be occupied and used
as such.
E. Issuance of permit. The Borough shall issue a permit within 30 days of
receipt of the application and upon all requirements having been met. A
Borough representative shall inspect the subject property prior to
issuance or renewal of a permit and the applicant shall make the
property available for such inspection.
F. Denial, suspension or revocation. The Borough may deny, suspend or
revoke any permit issued hereunder for any of the following reasons:
(1) Any false statements on any application or other information
required to be given by the applicant or permit holder.
(2) Failure to pay any fee or penalty required by this article or
resolution of Borough Council.
(3) Failure to correct deficiencies noted in violation notices within the
time specified in such notice.
(4) Failure to comply with any provision of this article
G. Notification. A decision to revoke, suspend or deny a permit shall be in
writing, delivered by certified mail or in person to the address indicated
on the application. If such certified mail is not picked up by the
§ 126-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-12
1:95
§ 126-13. Number and gender of chickens allowed.
§ 126-14. Where permitted.
Chickens shall be permitted within any zoning district provided the
conditions set forth herein have been met.
§ 126-15. Noncommercial purposes.
Chickens kept under this article may be kept for personal use and
consumption only and permittees shall not engage in any commercial sales,
breeding or other commercial endeavor with regard to the chickens or eggs
generated thereby. The eggs must be for the owner's personal use and
cannot be sold.
§ 126-16. Chicken coops or enclosures.
applicant, it may be sent by ordinary mail to the address provided by
the applicant. Such notice shall state the reasons for the action.
H. Effect of revocation. When a permit is revoked, an applicant may not
reapply for a new or reissued permit for a period of two years from the
date of revocation.
I. Appeals. The revocation, suspension or denial of a permit may be
appealed, in writing, to the Borough Council within 30 days of such
action. The appeal shall be heard at the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the Borough Council following receipt of the written appeal.
The written appeal shall set forth the basis for such appeal. A written
decision of Borough Council shall be issued within 30 days of hearing
the appeal and such decision shall be deemed final and binding.
A. A permittee shall be permitted a maximum of four chickens per lot,
regardless of the size of the lot.
B. No roosters are permitted. Only hens are allowed.
A. Chickens must be kept in a coop, enclosure or fenced area at all times.
B. No chicken coops, enclosures or fenced areas shall be permitted in the
front or side yard of any lot.
C. A building permit shall be obtained for all chicken coops and fencing for
containing the chickens. For the purpose of this article, a chicken coop
will be considered an accessory building (not connected to main
structure) under the zoning ordinance and must meet all regulations
relating to accessory buildings in applicable Borough ordinances.
D. Coops, enclosures and fenced areas shall be kept in a clean, dry, odorfree,
neat and sanitary condition at all times.
§ 126-12 HANOVER CODE § 126-16
1:96
§ 126-17. Control and safety of chickens.
§ 126-18. Violations and penalties
E. Coops and enclosures shall provide adequate ventilation and adequate
sun/shade and must be reasonably impermeable to rodents, wild birds
and predators, including dogs, cats, raccoons, and the like.
A. The control and safety of chickens shall be the responsibility of the
permittee at all times.
B. Chickens shall be provided with access to feed and clean water at all
times. Feed and water shall be rendered inaccessible to rodents, wild
birds and predators. Uneaten food shall be removed in a timely manner.
C. Manure shall be stored in a fully enclosed structure or watertight
container. Storage of manure on a property shall be limited to a
container equivalent to no more than a thirty-gallon garbage can at any
one time. The coop, enclosure, fenced area and surrounding area shall
be kept free of trash and accumulated feces. If the storage of manure is
found to be a nuisance, the Borough reserves to right to further limit
the manner or location of such storage.
D. Chickens shall not be permitted to roam off of the permitted tract of
land. If the owner of the chickens fails to keep the chickens on his/her
land, it will be grounds for the Borough to revoke the permit in addition
to any other remedies set forth herein.
E. A permittee shall take action necessary to reduce the attraction of
rodents and predators and the potential infestation of insects and
parasites. A permittee shall remove or have treated any sick chickens or
those found to be infested with parasites or insects.
F. Dead chickens shall be removed and disposed of immediately upon
discovery.
G. No dog, cat or other domesticated animal which kills a chicken off the
permitted tract of land shall, for that reason alone, be considered a
dangerous or aggressive animal.
A. The following acts shall be deemed to be violations of this article:
(1) The keeping of chickens without a permit or the keeping of
chickens in violation of any provision of this article.
(2) Permitting any owner, renter, lessee or other occupant of a
property to keep chickens on a property in violation of this article.
(3) Keeping chickens inside of any dwelling unit.
(4) The slaughtering of chickens.
§ 126-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-18
1:97
B. Any person and/or owner violating any provisions of Article II shall be
issued a notice of violation and if the violation is not corrected, a
citation will be filed with the local magisterial district justice as outlined
in accordance with Article IV, Enforcement, of this chapter.
§ 126-18 HANOVER CODE § 126-18
1:98
ARTICLE III
Repealer; Severability
§ 126-19. Repealer; effect on other provisions.
§ 126-20. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable, and if any of its provisions
shall be held to be unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid, such decision shall
not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of this chapter. It is
hereby declared as the legislative intent that this chapter would have been
adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid provision not been
included herein.
A. The provisions of any ordinances in effect upon the date of passage of
this chapter which are contradictory to the terms hereof are hereby
revoked and rendered null and void.
B. The provisions of this chapter, as far as they are the same as those of
ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of this chapter,
are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and not as new
enactments. The provisions of this chapter shall not affect any suit or
prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any right or penalty
or to punish any offense under the authority of any ordinance repealed
by this chapter.
§ 126-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-20
1:99

ARTICLE IV
Enforcement
§ 126-21. Penalties.
A. Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to a summary criminal proceeding before the magisterial district justice
as provided by the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, as may be
amended from time to time. Upon finding of a violation, a fine shall be
imposed of not less than $100 nor more than $500, together with court
costs and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough of
Hanover in prosecution of the violation. Any person who fails to pay the
fines, court costs and attorneys' fees within 30 days of the imposition
thereof may be subject to imprisonment for a period of time not to
exceed 15 days.
B. For any subsequent offense, a person shall be charged with a
misdemeanor of the third degree and upon conviction, shall be fined not
less than $500 nor more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution and
reasonable attorneys' fees or to imprisonment for not more than 90
days or both.
C. Each day in which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a
separate violation hereof.
§ 126-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-21
1:101
Chapter 130
AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Vehicle impoundment — See Ch. 339.
Abandoned or junked vehicles — See Ch. 342.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 346.
§ 130-1. Establishment or enlargement.
From and after the passage of this chapter, it shall be unlawful to establish
in the Borough of Hanover any automobile graveyard or to enlarge any
existing automobile graveyard in the Borough of Hanover.
§ 130-2. Removal of gas and oil.
No gas or oil shall be permitted to remain in any motor vehicle stored in
any graveyard, it being hereby directed that, upon the storing of any motor
vehicle in such graveyard, all gas and oil shall be drained and removed.
Chapter 133
AWNINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Building regulations — See Ch. 150.
Signs; street encroachments — See Ch. 298.
§ 133-1. Short title.
This chapter shall hereafter be known and may be cited as the "Awning
Ordinance" of the Borough of Hanover.
§ 133-2. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of
the public health, safety and welfare. To protect the public, among other
purposes, such provisions are intended to provide for safe streets and walks
and protection from fire.
§ 133-3. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivatives shall have the meanings given herein. When not
§ 126-21 HANOVER CODE § 133-3
1:102
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and
words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
AWNING — A fixed or retractable awning, as defined herein.
AWNING, FIXED — A fixed, roof-like structure supported by a frame or
bracketing extending outward from the face of a building, and constructed
so as to provide shelter or shade.
AWNING, RETRACTABLE — A structure fastened to the exterior of a
building, which, in a closed position, does not extend or project more than
12 inches from the face of such building, and which, when opened to its
functioning position by the operation of folding arms or other device, is
constructed so as to provide shelter or shade.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Hanover.
BOROUGH MANAGER — The Borough Manager of the Borough of Hanover
or his authorized agent.
INCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL — Any material acceptable by the National
Board of Fire Underwriters for use, and their regulations governing
materials used within the fire zone and outside the fire zone shall apply, as
the case may be.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PUBLIC WAY — Any thoroughfare or place for public vehicular or
pedestrian traffic.
§ 133-4. Conformity of awnings.
No awning shall hereafter be erected, altered or repaired except as
specifically permitted herein within the Borough, except in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 133-5. Enforcement.
A. Permits.
(1) When required. No person shall erect or permit to be erected any
awning which projects or would project over or into a public way
within the Borough until a permit therefor has been secured from
the Borough Secretary. No person shall alter or repair or replace
more than 25% of the surface area of any awning, nor alter or
repair more than 25% of the supporting members of any awning
which projects or would project over or into a public way within the
Borough, until a permit has been secured from the Borough
Secretary. Said 25% shall be cumulative, whether said alteration,
repair or replacement be made at one time or over a period of time.
§ 133-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-5
1:103
§ 133-6. Fixed awnings.
(2) Fee. The fee for any permit grantable under this section shall be $5.
Such fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of the permit or the
erection, alteration or repair of any awning.
(3) Revocability. Any permit granted under the provisions of this
section shall be revocable by the Borough when the Borough
Manager finds the awning to be unsafe and that it is for the best
interest of the Borough that such permit be revoked.
B. Compulsory removal. The Borough Manager shall have the right to
compel the removal of any awning erected, altered or repaired in
violation of this section.
C. Warning signs. During the erection, alteration or repair of any awning
as permitted under the provisions of this section, warning signs shall be
posted to warn passersby against danger from said operations.
D. Inspection. Permittees under this section shall, upon completion of the
erection, alteration or repair of any awning for which the permit was
granted, immediately report the same to the Borough Manager, and the
Borough Manager shall thereupon immediately inspect the
construction of said awning for the purposes of enforcing the provisions
of this chapter and assuring that said structure is erected in a safe and
workmanlike manner.
A. Permitted locations.
(1) Over doors and windows of any building. Fixed awnings,
conforming to the provisions of this chapter, shall be permitted on
any building.
B. Prohibited locations.
(1) Interference with exits, etc. Every fixed awning shall be located as
not to interfere with the operation of any exterior standpipe,
stairway or exit from the building.
(2) Awning as fire escape landing. No fixed awning shall be used as a
landing for any fire escape or exterior stair.
(3) Protracted window coverage. No fixed awning shall extend below
the upper 60% of any window opening.
C. Construction.
(1) Incombustible material. Fixed awnings, including supporting
frames, arms, brackets and other devices, shall be constructed
throughout of incombustible material, except that glass or other
fragile material shall not be used in any part of such awning.
§ 133-5 HANOVER CODE § 133-6
1:104
§ 133-7. Retractable awnings.
(2) Wind pressure and dead load requirements. Fixed awnings shall be
designed and constructed to withstand a wind pressure of not less
than 20 pounds per square foot, applied in any direction, and to
receive dead loads incidental to service performed.
(3) Rigid support from building. Fixed awnings shall be supported
entirely from the building by rigid attachment of frames or
brackets thereto.
(4) Corroding or mildew prohibited. Fixed awnings shall be
constructed only of corrosion- or mildew-resisting material or
materials adequately protected against corrosion or mildew.
(5) Drainage. When the design or location of a fixed awning is such
that the drainage from the structure creates or will create a
nuisance or hazard to the public, such awning shall be equipped
with gutters, spouting and drains adequate to eliminate such
nuisance and hazard.
(6) Length and width. There shall be no limitation on the permitted
length or width of fixed awnings, provided they conform to the
other provisions of this chapter.
(7) Angle of slope. No fixed awning shall extend from a building with a
slope less than an angle of 30° from the horizontal.
D. Projection over public ways. No part of a fixed awning less than 14 feet
above the existing or permitted grade of a public way under such
awning shall extend closer than two feet to the vertical plane passing
through the nearest curbline, and in no case shall any part of a fixed
awning extend beyond the vertical plane passing through the nearest
curbline.
E. Clearance over public ways.
(1) Pedestrian traffic. No part of a fixed awning projecting over a
public way shall be less than seven feet above the existing or
finished grade under said awning where pedestrian traffic only is a
consideration. It shall be permissible to have hanging below the
lowest rigid point of a fixed awning, a flexible material such as
canvas or some other similar material, which shall be no longer
than six feet two inches above the existing or finished grade under
said awning.
(2) Vehicular traffic. No part of a fixed awning projecting over a public
way shall be less than 14 feet above the existing or finished grade,
where vehicular traffic is a consideration for clearance.
A. Permitted locations.
§ 133-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-7
1:105
§ 133-8. Advertising; identification.
(1) Over doors and windows of any building. Retractable awnings,
conforming to the provisions of this chapter, shall be permitted on
any building.
B. Prohibited locations.
(1) Interference with exits, etc. Every retractable awning shall be
located as not to interfere with the operation of any exterior
standpipe, stairway or exit from the building.
C. Construction.
(1) Incombustible material. Retractable awnings, including supporting
frames, arms, brackets and other devices, shall be constructed
throughout of incombustible material.
(2) Rigid support from building. Retractable awnings shall be
supported entirely from the building by rigid attachment of frames
or brackets thereto.
(3) Noncorrodible framework. The framework of retractable awnings
shall be constructed only of corrosion- or mildew-resisting material
or materials adequately protected against corrosion or mildew.
(4) Length and width. There shall be no limitation on the permitted
length or width of retractable awnings provided they conform to
the other provisions of this chapter.
D. Projection over public ways. No part of a retractable awning less than
14 feet above the grade of a public way under such awning shall extend
closer than two feet to the vertical plane passing through the nearest
curbline, and in no case shall any part of a retractable awning extend
beyond the vertical plane passing through the nearest curbline.
E. Clearance over public ways.
(1) Pedestrian traffic. No part of the framework of a retractable awning
projecting over a public way shall be less than seven feet above the
existing or finished grade under said awning when pedestrian
traffic only is a consideration. It shall be permissible to have
hanging below the framework of a retractable awning, a flexible
material such as canvas or some other similar material, which shall
be no lower than six feet two inches above the existing or finished
grade under such said awning.
(2) Vehicular traffic. No part of a retractable awning projecting over a
public way shall be less than 14 feet above the existing or finished
grade, when vehicular traffic is a consideration for clearance.
F. Drainage. No retractable awning shall be maintained over a public way
so as to create a drainage nuisance or hazard to the public.
§ 133-7 HANOVER CODE § 133-8
1:106
§ 133-9. Repealer.
Specific sections. Section 3, Subsections (a) and (b), of Ordinance No. 726,
enacted May 17, 1950, as set forth under Chapter IV, Section 8, Subsections
(a) and (b), of the Code of Ordinances of the Borough of Hanover; and
Ordinance No. 700, enacted July 20, 1949, as set forth under Chapter IV,
Sections 11 to 16, inclusively, of the Code of Ordinances of the Borough of
Hanover, are hereby repealed.
Chapter 137
BOARD OF HEALTH RULES AND REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Board of Health — See Ch. 12.
Food handlers — See Ch. 217.
A. Advertising. No advertising shall be placed on any awning, except that
the name of the owner and/or the business, industry or pursuit
conducted within the premises may be painted or otherwise
permanently placed in a space not exceeding eight inches in height on
the front and side portions thereof.
B. Identification. Every awning erected shall bear a sign or inscription of
letters not less than 1/2 inch in size, stating the name and address of
the person, firm or corporation erecting the awning.
§ 133-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-9
1:107

Part 1
[Adopted 7-8-1908BBoyarOdr Rd.u Nleos. A1n6d1 ;R Aemguelnadteiodn1s0-31-1968 By Ord.
No. 1411]
ARTICLE I
Organization and Rules
§ 137-1. Adoption by Borough.
The following plan of organization and rules governing the same adopted by
the Board of Health of the Borough of Hanover, and the following Sanitary
Regulations proposed and adopted by said Board, be and the same are
hereby adopted and approved.
§ 137-2. Establishment of rules and regulations by Board of Health.
In compliance with the provisions of the Act of Assembly approved May 11,
1893, and May 29, 1907, the Board of Health of the Borough of Hanover
does hereby establish and formally declare the following rules and
regulations, to which amendments and additions may at any time hereafter
be made and published, as sanitary conditions of the Borough may demand.
§ 137-3. Meetings. [Amended 10-31-1968 by Ord. No. 1411;
5-19-1993 by Ord. No. 1937]
The stated meetings of this Board shall be held on the first Monday of
January, March, June and September.
§ 137-4. Quorum.
A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum.
§ 137-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-4
1:109

ARTICLE II
Regulations
§ 137-5. Nuisances.
Any and every person who creates, continues or maintains any nuisance,
so adjudged by the Board of Health within this Borough, shall be deemed
guilty of a violation of this Part 1 and shall be liable for the expense of the
abatement and remedy thereof.
§ 137-6. Businesses requiring permits; conditions of issuance.
No person or company shall erect or maintain within the limits of this
Borough any manufactory or place of business dangerous to life or
detrimental to health, or where unwholesome, offensive or deleterious
odors, gases, smoke or exhalations are generated, such as tanneries,
refineries, manufactories of starch, glue, leather, chemicals, fertilizers or
gas, without the permit of the Board of Health, and all such establishments
shall be kept clean so as not to be offensive or prejudicial to public health;
nor shall any offensive or deleterious waste substances, refuse or injurious
matter be allowed to accumulate upon the premises, or be thrown or
allowed to run into any place. And every person or company conducting
such manufacture or business shall use the most approved and all
reasonable means to prevent the escape of smoke, gases and odors, and to
protect the health and safety of all operatives employed therein.
§ 137-7. Permits required for stables and pens; conditions of
issuance. [Amended 12-29-1954 by Ord. No. 843]
No person, firm or corporation shall build or maintain any stable or any
pigpen, or shall keep any horse, cattle, sheep, goat or pig at any place
within the Borough of Hanover, without specific permission by the Board of
Health of said Borough. Such permission shall be granted in cases where,
in the judgment of the Board of Health, it will not result in annoyance to
persons using the highways, residing or conducting business in the vicinity
of the premises for which such permit applies, or in the creation of a menace
to the health of the Borough or to sanitary conditions therein. The factors
to be considered by the Board of Health in granting or refusing any such
permit shall include: the location of the premises; the distance of the stable
or pen from any highway, water source, dwelling or place of business; the
number and kind of animals to be kept; and the housing facilities to be
provided for such animals and the sanitation therein. Such permit shall be
held subject to specific conditions prescribed by the Board of Health for
each case, such conditions to relate to the location of the stable or pen,
the kind and the maximum number of animals to be kept on the premises,
the maintenance of prescribed standards of sanitation, and the elimination
of factors tending to create nuisances or annoyances. At any time, if the
character of the neighborhood changes in that it becomes more built up,
the Board of Health may revoke any permit previously granted under this
§ 137-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-7
1:111
section, or may prescribe additional conditions to be adhered to by the
holder of such permit.
§ 137-8. Waste liquids.
No wash water and no water or other liquid from kitchen, sink, bathroom,
stable, privy vault, cesspools or other places, except only water
uncontaminated and inoffensive, shall be drained, emptied or permitted to
enter upon any street, alley, square or park of this Borough.
§ 137-9. Sale of foods. [Amended 12-29-1954 by Ord. No. 843]
No meat, fish or fowl, or any other food, not packed in a container or closed
package and not intended to be washed or to have an inedible skin removed
therefrom before eating, shall be exposed for sale in the Borough unless
covered or in a covered case.
§ 137-10. Unfit foods.
No putrid or decaying vegetables, fruits, fish, shellfish, game, poultry or
meat, or any meat that is unwholesome or otherwise unfit for human food,
shall be sold or exposed for sale within this Borough.
§ 137-7 HANOVER CODE § 137-10
1:112
Part 2
[AdEoapttiendg AAsn Idn Ddirciantkeidn gIn E Astratbicllies hHmisetnotrsies]
ARTICLE III
Regulations; Permits
[Adopted 5-1-1967 by Ord. No. 1348]
§ 137-11. Statutory authority; regulations approved.
§ 137-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULTERATION OF FOOD — The condition of a food:
A. This article is hereby amended to include the attached document, the
provisions of the Department of Agriculture, Chapter 46,48 issued under
the Food Act (31 P.S. §§ 20.1 to 20.1849); the Public Eating and Drinking
Place Law (35 P.S. §§ 655.1 to 655.1350); and Section 1705(d) of the
Administrative Code of 1929 [71 P.S. § 445(d)], unless otherwise noted.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall fail, neglect or
refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this subsection shall be
subject to the penalties as provided for in Chapter 1, Article I, of the
Borough's Code. [Added 9-9-2009 by Ord. No. 2153]
B. The following regulations, as adopted by the Board of Health of the
Borough of Hanover at a meeting held May 1, 1967, are hereby
approved by the Council of the Borough of Hanover.
If it bears or contains any poisonous or deleterious substance in a
quantity which may render it injurious to health;
A.
If it bears or contains any added poisonous or deleterious substance for
which no safe tolerance has been established by regulation, or in excess
of such tolerance if one has been established;
B.
If it consists in whole or in part of any filthy, putrid or decomposed
substance, or if it is otherwise unfit for human consumption;
C.
If it has been processed, prepared, packed or held under insanitary
conditions, whereby it may have become contaminated with filth, or
whereby it may have been rendered injurious to health;
D.
If it is in whole or in part the product of a diseased animal or an animal
which has died otherwise than by slaughter; or
E.
48.Editor's Note: See 7 Pa. Code Chapter 46.
49.Editor's Note: 31 P.S. §§ 20.1 to 20.18 were repealed 11-23-2010 by P.L. 1039, No. 106. See
now 3 Pa.C.S.A. § 5721 et seq.
50.Editor's Note: 35 P.S. §§ 655.1 to 655.13 were repealed 11-23-2010 by P.L. 1039, No. 106.
See now 3 Pa.C.S.A. § 5701 et seq.
§ 137-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-12
1:113
CORROSION-RESISTANT MATERIAL — A material which maintains its
original surface characteristics under prolonged influence of the food,
cleaning compounds and sanitizing solutions which may contact it.
EASILY CLEANABLE — Readily accessible and of such materials and finish
and so fabricated that residue may be completely removed by normal
cleaning methods.
EQUIPMENT — All stoves, ranges, hoods, meatblocks, tables, counters,
refrigerators, sinks, dishwashing machines, steam tables and similar items
other than utensils used in the operation of a food-service establishment.
FOOD — Any raw, cooked or processed edible substance, beverage or
ingredient intended, in whole or in part, for human consumption.
FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES — Those surfaces of equipment and utensils
with which food normally comes in contact and those surfaces with which
food may come in contact or which drain back onto surfaces normally in
contact with food.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the Borough of Hanover or his
authorized representative.
ITINERANT RESTAURANT — Operation of a restaurant for a temporary
period in connection with a fair, church, carnival, circus, public exhibition
or other similar gatherings.[Added 11-6-1967 by Ord. No. 1370]
POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD — Any perishable food which consists,
in whole or in part, of milk or milk products, eggs, meat, poultry, fish,
shellfish or other ingredients capable of supporting rapid and progressive
growth of infectious or toxigenic microorganisms.
RESTAURANT — Any restaurant, coffee shop, cafeteria, short order cafe,
luncheonette, tavern, mobile food vendor, food vending machine, soda
fountain and other eating and drinking establishments, as well as kitchens
or other places in which food or drink is prepared for sale
elsewhere.[Added 11-6-1967 by Ord. No. 1370]
SAFE TEMPERATURE — As applied to potentially hazardous food, shall
mean an internal temperature of 45° F. or below, and 140° F. or above.
SANITIZE — Effective bactericidal treatment of clean surfaces of equipment
and utensils by a process which has been approved by the Department as
being effective in destroying microorganisms, including pathogens.
SINGLE-SERVICE ARTICLES — Cups, containers, lids or closures; plates;
knives, forks, spoons, stirrers, paddles; straws, place mats, napkins, doilies,
wrapping materials and all similar articles which are constructed, wholly or
in part, from paper, paperboard, molded pulp, foil, wood, plastic, synthetic
or other readily destructible materials, and which are intended by the
manufacturers and generally recognized by the public as for one usage only,
then to be discarded.
If its container is composed in whole or in part of any poisonous
or deleterious substance which may render the contents injurious to
health.
F.
§ 137-12 HANOVER CODE § 137-12
1:114
TEMPORARY PUBLIC EATING OR DRINKING PLACE — Any public eating
or drinking place which operates at any location for a period of time not
to exceed two consecutive days in connection with a fair, carnival, circus,
public exhibition or similar transitory gathering.[Amended 8-11-1999 by
Ord. No. 2024]
UTENSILS — Any tableware and kitchenware used in the storage,
preparation, conveying or serving of food.
§ 137-13. Permits. [Amended 10-6-1993 by Ord. No. 1940]
§ 137-14. Inspection of restaurants.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a restaurant in the
Borough of Hanover who does not possess an unrevoked permit from
the Health Officer. Such permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place.
Only persons who comply with the requirements of these regulations
shall be entitled to receive and retain such permit. A person conducting
an itinerant restaurant shall also be required to secure a permit. All
mobile restaurants, such as lunch wagons, shall be required to have an
identification sign on the outside of the vehicle displaying the
restaurant's name and identifying it by number if it is one of a number
of several vehicles operating under the same name.
B. Any itinerate restaurant acting as a temporary public eating or drinking
place shall register for a permit from the Health Officer. Such permit
shall be posted in a conspicuous place. Only persons complying with
permit regulations shall be entitled to receive such a permit. Itinerate
permits shall be issued to all itinerate restaurants on a fee schedule as
established from time to time by Hanover Borough Council. [Added
8-11-1999 by Ord. No. 2024]
A. At least once every three months the Health Officer and his
representative shall inspect every restaurant located within the
Borough of Hanover. In case the Health Officer or his representative
discovers the violation of any major item of sanitation, he shall make a
second inspection after the lapse of such time as he deems necessary
for the infraction to be remedied, and the second inspection shall be
used in determining compliance with the requirements of these
regulations. Any violation of the same item of these regulations on such
second inspection may call for immediate suspension of permit.
B. An inspection report shall be made at time of inspection. One copy of
said report shall be posted by the Health Officer in a suitable
conspicuous place in the restaurant and the said inspection report shall
not be defaced or removed by any person except the Health Officer.
Another copy of the inspection report shall be filed with the records of
the Health Department.
§ 137-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-14
1:115
§ 137-15. Examination and condemnation of unwholesome or
adulterated food or drink.
C. The person operating the restaurant shall upon request of the Health
Officer permit access to all parts of the establishment and shall permit
examination of any or all records of food purchased.
A. Samples of food, drink and other substances may be taken and
examined by the Health Officer as often as may be necessary for the
detection of unwholesomeness or adulteration. The Health Officer may
condemn and forbid the sale of, or cause to be removed or destroyed,
any food or drink which is unwholesome or adulterated.
B. Storage, display and serving of food and drink. All food and drink shall
be so stored, displayed and served as to be protected from dust, flies,
vermin, depredation and pollution by rodents, unnecessary handling,
droplet infection, overhead leakage and other contamination. No
animals or fowl shall be kept or allowed in any room in which food or
drink is prepared or stored. All means necessary for the elimination of
flies, roaches and rodents shall be used.
C. Food supplies. All food in public eating or drinking places shall be clean,
wholesome, free from spoilage and safe for human consumption. No
hermetically sealed, nonacid and low acid food which has been
processed in a place other than a commercial food processing
establishment shall be used.
(1) Only pasteurized fluid milk and fluid milk products shall be used or
served. Dry milk and milk products may be reconstituted in the
establishment if used for cooking purposes only.
(2) All milk and fluid milk products for drinking purposes shall be
purchased and served in the original, individual container in which
they were packaged at the milk plant, or shall be served from an
approved bulk milk dispenser: Provided that cream, whipped
cream or half-and-half, which is to be consumed on the premises,
may be served from the original container of not more than onequart
capacity or from a dispenser approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Health for such service, and for mixed drinks
requiring less than 1/2 pint of milk, milk may be poured from onequart
or one-half-gallon containers packaged at a milk plant.
(3) All oysters, clams and mussels shall be from sources approved by
the Pennsylvania Department of Health: Provided that when the
source is outside the state, it shall be one which is certified by the
state of origin or the United States Public Health Service.
(4) Shellstock shall be identified with an official tag giving the name
and certificate number of the original shellstock shipper and the
kind and quantity of shellstock. Fresh and frozen shucked oysters,
clams and mussels shall be packed in nonreturnable containers
§ 137-14 HANOVER CODE § 137-15
1:116
identified with the name and address of the packer, repacker or
distributor, and the certificate number of the packer or repacker
preceded by the abbreviated name of the state. Shellfish, crabs and
lobsters, if served in the shell, must be served in the original shell;
but the reuse of such shells as food containers in the preparation
or serving of food is prohibited.
D. Food protection. All food while being stored, prepared, displayed,
served or sold at public eating or drinking places, or during
transportation between such establishments, shall be protected from
contamination and stored in such a manner as to prevent rodent
harborage and permit ease of cleaning. All perishable food shall be
stored at such temperatures as will protect against spoilage. All
potentially hazardous food shall be maintained at safe temperatures,
except during necessary periods of preparation and service. Raw fruits
and vegetables shall be washed before use. Stuffings, poultry, stuffed
meats and poultry, and pork and pork products shall be thoroughly
cooked before being served. Individual portions of food once served to
the customer shall not be served again: Provided that wrapped food
which has not been unwrapped and which is wholesome may be
reserved. Tongs, forks, spoons, picks, spatulas, scoops and other
suitable utensils shall be provided and shall be used by employees to
reduce manual contact with food to a minimum. For self-service by
customers, similar implements shall be provided.
E. Only such poisonous and toxic materials as are required to maintain
sanitary conditions and for sanitization purposes may be used or stored
in public eating or drinking places. Poisonous and toxic materials shall
be identified and shall be used only in such manner and under such
conditions as will not contaminate food or constitute a hazard to
employees or customers. When not in use, poisonous and toxic
materials shall be stored in cabinets which are used for no other
purpose, or in a place which is outside the food-storage, foodpreparation
and cleaned-equipment-and-utensils storage rooms.
Bactericides and cleaning compounds shall not be stored in the same
cabinet or area of the room with insecticides, rodenticides or other
poisonous materials.
F. Each cold-storage facility used for the storage of perishable food in
nonfrozen state shall be provided with an indicating thermometer
accurate to +2° F. located in the warmest part of the facility in which
food is stored, and of such type and so situated that the thermometer
can be easily and readily observed for reading. Wet storage of packaged
food shall be prohibited.
G. Frozen food shall be kept at such temperatures as to remain frozen,
except when being thawed for preparation or use. Potentially hazardous
frozen food shall be thawed at refrigerator temperatures of 45° F. or
below, or under cool potable running water 70° F. or below, or quickthawed
as part of the cooking process, or by any other method
satisfactory to the Pennsylvania Department of Health.
§ 137-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-15
1:117
§ 137-16. Sanitation requirements for restaurants.
All restaurants shall comply with all of the following items of sanitation:
H. Stuffings, poultry and stuffed meats and poultry shall be heated
throughout to a minimum temperature of 165° F. with no interruption of
the initial cooking process.
I. Potentially hazardous custards, cream fillings or similar products which
are prepared by hot or cold processes, and which are used as puddings
or pastry fillings, shall be kept at safe temperatures, except during
necessary periods of preparation and service, and shall meet the
following requirements as applicable:
(1) Pastry fillings shall be placed in shells, crusts or other baked goods
either while hot, not less than 140° F., or immediately following
preparation if a cold process is used; or
(2) Such fillings and pudding shall be refrigerated at 45° F. or below in
shallow pans immediately after cooking or preparation, and held
thereat until combined into pastries or served.
(3) All completed custard-filled and cream-filled pastries shall, unless
served immediately following filling, be refrigerated at 45° F. or
below promptly after preparation and held thereat pending service.
J. Dispensing scoops, spoons and dippers used in serving frozen desserts
shall be stored, between uses, either in an approved running-water
dipper well, or in a manner approved by the Pennsylvania Department
of Health.
A. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) The floor surfaces in kitchens, in all other rooms and areas in which
food is stored or prepared and in which utensils are washed, and in
walk-in refrigerators, dressing or locker rooms and toilet rooms,
shall be of smooth, nonabsorbent materials, and so constructed as
to be easily cleanable: Provided that the floors of nonrefrigerated
dry-food-storage areas need not be nonabsorbent. All floors shall be
kept clean and in good repair. Floor drains shall be provided in all
rooms where floors are subjected to the flooding-type cleaning or
where normal operations release or discharge water or other liquid
waste on the floor. All exterior areas where food is served shall be
kept clean and properly drained, and surfaces in such areas shall
be finished so as to facilitate maintenance and minimize dust.
(2) The walls and ceilings of all rooms shall be kept clean and in good
repair. All walls or rooms or areas in which food is prepared, or
utensils or hands are washed, shall be easily cleanable, smooth,
light-colored and shall have washable surfaces up to the highest
level reached by splash or spray.
§ 137-15 HANOVER CODE § 137-16
1:118
(3) The walking and driving surfaces of all exterior areas where food is
served, such as drive-in restaurants, patio service, chuck-wagon
service, and barbecues shall be kept clean and free of debris, and
shall be properly drained so that water will not accumulate. Such
areas shall be surfaced with concrete or asphalt, or with gravel or
similar material effectively treated to facilitate maintenance and to
minimize dust.
B. Lighting. All areas in which food is prepared or stored or utensils are
washed, handwashing areas, dressing or locker rooms, toilet rooms and
garbage and rubbish-storage areas shall be well lighted. During all
cleanup activities, adequate light shall be provided in the area being
cleaned, and upon or around equipment being cleaned.
C. Ventilation. All rooms in which food is prepared or served or utensils
are washed, dressing or locker rooms, toilet rooms and garbage or
rubbish-storage areas shall be well ventilated. Ventilation hoods and
devices shall be designed to meet the standards of the Department to
prevent grease or condensate from dripping into food or onto foodpreparation
surfaces. Filters, where used, shall be readily removable
for cleaning or replacement. Ventilation systems shall comply with
applicable state and local fire-prevention requirements.
D. Dressing rooms and lockers: Adequate facilities shall be provided for
the orderly storage of employees' clothing and personal belongings.
Where employees routinely change clothes within the establishment,
one or more dressing rooms or designated areas shall be provided for
this purpose. Such designated areas shall be located outside of the food
preparation, storage and serving areas, and the utensil-washing and
storage areas: Provided that when approved by the licensor, such an
area may be located in a storage room where only completely packaged
food is stored. Designated areas as well as dressing rooms shall be
provided with lockers or other suitable facilities and shall be kept clean.
E. Miscellaneous.
(1) All parts of the establishment and its premises shall be kept neat,
clean and free of litter, garbage and rubbish. Cleaning operations
shall be conducted in such a manner as to prevent contamination of
food and food-contact surface. None of the operations connected
with a public eating or drinking place shall be conducted in any
room used as living or sleeping quarters. Soiled linens, coats and
aprons shall be kept in suitable containers until removed for
laundering. No live birds or animals shall be allowed in any area
used for the conduct of public eating- or drinking-place operations:
Provided that guide dogs accompanying blind persons may be
permitted in dining areas.
(2) Vacuum cleaning, wet cleaning or other dustless methods of floor
and wall cleaning shall be used; or dust-arresting sweeping
compounds and pushbrooms shall be employed; and all such
§ 137-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-16
1:119
§ 137-17. Doors and windows.
When flies are prevalent, all openings into the outer air shall be effectively
screened and doors shall be self-closing, unless other effective means are
provided to prevent the entrance of flies.
§ 137-18. Sanitary facilities and controls.
cleaning, except emergency floor cleaning, shall be done during
those periods when the least amount of food is exposed, such as
after closing or between meals.
A. Water supply.
(1) The water supply shall be adequate, of a safe, sanitary quality
which meets the requirements of the Department. Hot and cold
running water under pressure shall be provided in all areas where
food is prepared, or equipment, utensils or containers are washed.
(2) When bottled water is used in an establishment it shall be from a
source under permit from the Department.
(3) Ice used for any purpose shall be made from water which comes
from a safe and satisfactory source; and shall be used only if it has
been manufactured, stored, transported and handled in a sanitary
manner. All ice shall meet the bacteriological standards for
drinking water.
B. Sewage disposal. All sewage shall be disposed of in a manner which will
not be injurious to the health of the patrons.
C. Plumbing. Plumbing shall be so sized, installed and maintained as to
carry adequate quantities of water to required locations throughout the
establishment; as to prevent contamination of the water supply; as to
properly convey sewage and liquid wastes from the establishment to
the sewerage or sewage-disposal system; and so that it does not
constitute a source of contamination of food, equipment or utensils, or
create an insanitary condition or nuisance.
D. Toilet facilities.
(1) Each public eating or drinking establishment shall be provided with
adequate, conveniently located toilet facilities for its employees
and patrons: Provided that when approved by the licensor, public
eating or drinking places may be authorized to use toilet facilities
not located directly within such establishments.
(2) Toilet fixtures shall be of sanitary design and readily cleanable.
Toilet facilities, including rooms and fixtures, shall be kept in a
clean condition and in good repair. The doors of all toilet rooms
shall be self-closing. Toilet tissue shall be provided. Easily
§ 137-16 HANOVER CODE § 137-18
1:120
§ 137-19. Food equipment and utensils.
cleanable receptacles shall be provided for waste materials, and
such receptacles in toilet rooms for women shall be covered.
E. Handwashing facilities. Each public eating or drinking place shall be
provided with adequate, conveniently located handwashing facilities for
its employees, including a lavatory or lavatories equipped with hot and
cold or tempered running water, hand-cleansing soap or detergent, and
approved sanitary towels or other approved hand-drying devices. Such
facilities shall be kept clean and in good repair. Where hot and cold
running water is provided, and the temperature of the hot water is
above 110° F., a mixing valve or combination faucet shall be provided.
Handwashing facilities shall be located within or immediately adjacent
to all toilet rooms or vestibules. In all new establishments and
establishments which are extensively altered, handwashing facilities
shall also be located within the area where food is prepared. In no
instance can it be more than 50 feet from any work area. Lavatories
shall be adequate in size and number and shall be so located as to
permit convenient and expeditious use by all employees.
F. Garbage and rubbish disposal. All garbage and rubbish containing food
wastes shall, prior to disposal, be kept in leakproof, nonabsorbent
containers which shall be kept covered with tight-fitting lids when filled
or stored, or not in continuous use. All other rubbish shall be stored in
containers, rooms or areas in an approved manner. The rooms,
enclosures, areas and containers used shall be adequate for the storage
of all food waste and rubbish accumulating on the premises. Adequate
cleaning facilities shall be provided, and each container, room or area
shall be thoroughly cleaned after each emptying or removal of garbage
and rubbish. All garbage and rubbish shall be disposed of with
sufficient frequency and in such a manner as to prevent a hazard to
health.
G. Insect and rodent control. Effective measures shall be taken to protect
against the entrance into the establishment, and the breeding or
presence on the premises, of insects and rodents.
A. Sanitary design, construction, operation and installation of equipment
and utensils.
(1) All utensils and all show and display cases or windows, counters,
shelves, tables, chairs, refrigerating equipment, sinks and other
equipment or utensils shall be so constructed as to be cleaned
easily, durable, and shall be kept in good repair; and the foodcontact
surfaces of such equipment and utensils shall, in addition,
be easily accessible for cleaning, nontoxic, corrosion-resistant and
relatively nonabsorbent. All equipment shall be designed, installed
and operated in accordance with the criteria set forth by the
National Sanitation Foundation, Automatic Merchandising Health
Industry Council, Baking Industry Sanitation Standards Committee
§ 137-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-19
1:121
and the Committee for 3-A Sanitary Standards for Dairy Equipment
or other nationally recognized testing laboratory or agency.
Utensils containing or plated with cadmium, lead or zinc shall
not be used. Provided that solder containing lead may be used
for jointing. All glassware, china, crockery, pottery and utensils
or equipment of a similar character or coating shall be free from
breaks, cracks and chipped places.
(2) All equipment shall be so installed and maintained as to facilitate
the cleaning thereof and of all adjacent areas.
(3) Single-service articles shall be made from nontoxic materials and
shall have been manufactured, packaged, transported, stored and
handled in a sanitary manner, and shall be used only once.
B. Cleaning and sanitization of equipment and utensils.
(1) All eating or drinking utensils shall be thoroughly cleaned and
sanitized after each usage.
(2) All kitchenware and food-contact surfaces of equipment used in the
preparation or serving of food or drink and all multiuse foodstorage
utensils, exclusive of cooking surfaces of equipment, shall
be thoroughly cleaned after each use; provided that food-contact
surfaces of equipment or utensils which will be heated in the
baking or cooking process of food preparation to above 140° F.
shall not be required to be sanitized prior to usage. Cooking
surfaces of equipment shall be cleaned at least once a day. All
utensils and food-contact surfaces of equipment used in the
preparation or storage of potentially hazardous food shall be
thoroughly cleaned and sanitized prior to such use. Nonfoodcontact
surfaces of equipment shall be cleaned at such intervals as
to keep them in a clean and sanitary condition. After cleaning and
until use, all food-contact surfaces of equipment and utensils shall
be so stored and handled as to be protected from contamination.
(3) When manual dishwashing is employed, equipment and utensils
shall be thoroughly washed in a hot detergent solution which is
kept reasonably clean, and then shall be rinsed free of such
solution. Thermometers accurate to plus 3° F. shall be provided
convenient to the sink to permit frequent checks of the water
temperature. All eating and drinking utensils and, where required,
the food-contact surfaces of all other equipment and utensils shall
be sanitized by one of the following methods:
(a) Immersion for at least 1/2 minute in clean hot water at a
temperature of at least 170° F.; or
(b) Immersion for a period of at least one minute in a sanitizing
solution containing:
§ 137-19 HANOVER CODE § 137-19
1:122
[1] At least 50 ppm of available chlorine at a temperature not
less than 75° F.; or
[2] At least 12.5 ppm of available iodine in a solution having a
pH not higher than 5.0 and a temperature of not less than
75° F.; or
[3] Any other chemical-sanitizing agent which has been
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Pennsylvania
Department of Health to be effective and nontoxic under
use conditions and for which a suitable field test is
available. Such sanitizing agents in use solutions shall
provide the equivalent bactericidal effect of a solution
containing at least 50 ppm of available chlorine at a
temperature not less than 75° F.
(c) Equipment too large or impractical to treat by methods (a) or
(b) above may be treated:
[1] With live steam from a hose, in the case of equipment in
which steam can be confined; or
[2] By rinsing with boiling water; or
[3] By spraying or swabbing with a chemical sanitizing
solution of at least twice the minimum strength required
for the particular sanitizing solution when used for
immersion sanitization.
(4) Except as hereinafter provided, no proprietor of a public eating or
drinking place within this commonwealth shall conduct or cause to
be conducted manual washing and sanitization of utensils unless
there is in use a three-compartment sink for this purpose; provided,
however, that those licensing jurisdictions in which greater than
50% of the establishments are employing manual means of washing
and sanitization of utensils and equipment do not have threecompartment
sinks, shall submit for approval to the Department a
plan for the orderly transition to effect compliance with the
provisions of § 137-14B.
(5) Sinks used for manual washing and sanitizing operations shall be of
adequate length, width and depth to permit the complete
immersion of the equipment and utensils, and each compartment of
such sinks shall be supplied with hot and cold running water.
(6) Where there is a need for a device to discard liquid waste, or slop
sink, such device or sink shall be provided in addition to the threecompartment
sink.
(7) When hot water is used as the sanitizing agent in manual
operations, dish baskets shall be of such design as to permit
§ 137-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-19
1:123
complete immersion of the utensils and equipment components
being sanitized therein.
(8) Dishwashing machines, including prewashing units, shall be
designed, constructed, installed, maintained and operated in
accordance with the standards of the Department and shall also
meet the following criteria where applicable:
(a) When chemicals are relied upon for sanitization, they shall be
of a class or type approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Health, and shall be applied in such concentration and for such
a period of time as to provide effective bactericidal treatment
of the equipment and utensils.
(b) An easily readable thermometer shall be provided to each tank
of the dishwashing machine which will indicate to an accuracy
of plus 3° F. the temperature of the water or solution therein.
In addition, a thermometer of equal accuracy shall be provided
which will indicate the temperature of the final rinse as it
enters the manifold. All thermometers shall be so placed as to
be easily read by the operator, and so located as not to be
unduly exposed to breakage.
(c) The wash and final rinse cycles of all machines shall be
automatically timed.
(d) The flow pressure of the final rinse water shall not be less than
15 nor more than 25 pounds per square inch in the line at
machine.
(e) Appropriate connections shall be provided to enable the
testing of the temperature and pressure of the final rinse
water. The plumbing connections shall be located immediately
adjacent to the supply side of the valve control in the line
carrying the final rinse water to the dishwashing machine.
(f) When automatic cold-water glass washers are employed for
washing and sanitizing glasses, the following provisions shall
be met:
[1] The washer shall be self-cleaning and sanitizing.
[2] All used water shall flow out of the washer immediately
following use.
[3] The washer must contain brushes or employ other
effective means which will adequately clean both the
inside and outside of the glass.
[4] The detergent sanitizer used shall be one that is expressly
for use in cold-water glass washers and is effective.
§ 137-19 HANOVER CODE § 137-19
1:124
§ 137-20. Health and disease control.
[5] Any other type of machine, device or facilities and
procedures may be approved by the Department for
cleaning or sanitizing equipment and utensils if it can be
readily established that such machine, device or facilities
and procedure will routinely render equipment and
utensils clean to sight and touch and provide effective
bactericidal treatment.
[6] Public eating or drinking places which do not have
adequate and effective facilities for cleaning and sanitizing
utensils shall use single-service articles.
A. No employee with any disease in a communicable form, or who is a
carrier of such disease, shall work in any public eating or drinking place
in any capacity which brings him into contact with the production,
handling, storage or transportation of food or equipment used in public
eating or drinking places; and no proprietor shall employ in any such
capacity any such person, or any person suspected of having any
disease, in a communicable form, or of being a carrier of such disease.
Any employee who has a discharging or infected wound, sore or lesion
on hands, arms or any exposed portion of the body, shall be excluded
from those operations which will bring him into contact with food,
beverages, utensils or equipment used in public eating or drinking
places.
B. When suspicion arises as to the possibility of transmission of infection
from any employee, the licensor is authorized to require any or all of the
following measures:
(1) The immediate exclusion of the employee from eating or drinking
place; and/or
(2) The immediate closing of the eating or drinking place concerned
until, in the opinion of the licensor, no further danger of disease
outbreaks exists; and/or
(3) Restriction of the employee's services to some area of work where
there would be no danger of transmitting disease; and/or
(4) Adequate medical examinations of the employee and of his
associates, with such laboratory examinations as may be indicated.
C. Cleanliness. All employees shall wear clean outer garments, maintain a
high degree of personal cleanliness and conform to hygienic practices
while on duty. They shall wash their hands thoroughly in an approved
handwashing facility before starting work, and as often as may be
necessary to remove soil and contamination. No employee shall resume
work after visiting the toilet room without washing his hands with soap
and warm water.
§ 137-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-20
1:125
§ 137-21. Restaurants which may operate.
From and after 12 months from the date on which these regulations take
effect, no restaurant shall be operated within the Borough of Hanover, or
its police jurisdiction, unless it conforms with the requirements of these
regulations. Provided, that when any restaurant fails to qualify, the Health
Officer may take steps to suspend the permit.
§ 137-22. Reinstatement of permit.
§ 137-23. Medical examination of employees and disease control.
No person who is affected with a disease in a communicable form or is a
carrier of such disease shall work in any restaurant, and no restaurant shall
employ any such person or any person suspected of being affected with any
disease in a communicable form or of being a carrier of such disease. If the
restaurant manager suspects that any employee has contracted any disease
in a communicable form or has become a carrier of such disease, he shall
notify the Health Officer immediately. A placard containing this section shall
be posted in all toilet rooms.
§ 137-24. Procedure when infection suspected.
When suspicion arises as to the possibility of transmission of infection from
a restaurant employee, the Health Officer is authorized to require any or all
of the following measures:
D. Hair nets, headbands, caps or other effective hair covering shall be
used by employees engaged in the preparation and service of food to
keep hair from food and food-contact surfaces.
E. Persons engaged in the preparation, handling or service of food shall
not use tobacco in any form while in equipment- and utensil-washing or
food preparation areas: Provided that designated locations in such
areas may be approved by the licensor for smoking where no
contamination hazards will result.
A. Any restaurant the permit of which has been suspended may at any
time make application for the reinstatement of the permit.
B. Within one week after the receipt of a satisfactory application
accompanied by a statement signed by the applicant to the effect that
the violation, provision or provisions of these regulations have been
conformed with, the Health Officer shall make a reinspection, and then,
after as many additional reinspections as he may deem necessary to
assure himself that the applicant is again complying with the
requirements, and, when the findings indicate compliance, shall
reinstate the permit.
A. The immediate exclusion of the employee from all restaurants;
§ 137-20 HANOVER CODE § 137-24
1:126
§ 137-25. Enforcement interpretation.
These regulations shall be enforced by the Health Officer in accordance
with the interpretation thereof contained in the current edition of the U.S.
Public Health Service Code Regulating Eating and Drinking Establishments,
a certified copy of which shall be on file at the Borough Clerk's office.
§ 137-26. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provisions of these regulations shall be fined
net more than $100 at the discretion of the court having jurisdiction. Each
and every violation of the provisions of this regulation shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 137-27. Area.
No application for license to operate a snack bar, lunchroom, restaurant
or victualing house on premises for which no license has previously been
granted will be approved by the Board of Health unless the area to be
occupied is sufficiently large to permit a suitable arrangement of kitchen,
washing and sanitary facilities, and seating accommodations for patrons
without excessive crowding.
§ 137-28. Construction of buildings.
No such application will be approved unless the premises to be occupied
are located in a building of such construction that floors, walls, ceilings and
cellar can always be kept in a sanitary condition.
§ 137-29. Plans of layout.
All prospective applicants for such license, before letting any contracts for
construction of appliances, must file with the Board of Health detailed plans
of the premises to be occupied and of the proposed layout.
§ 137-30. Health examinations of food handlers.
All employees who handle food or drink during preparation or serving, or
who come in contact with any eating or drinking utensils or containers or
other equipment, or who are employed in an establishment in which food
or drink is prepared or served, shall comply with the provisions of Borough
Ordinance No. 762 requiring yearly examinations. These health certificates
shall be filed in a manner prescribed by the Health Officer.
B. The immediate closing of the restaurant concerned until no further
danger of disease outbreak exists;
C. Adequate medical examination of the employee and of his associates,
with such laboratory examination as may be indicated.
§ 137-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-31
1:127
§ 137-31. Swab testing and culture of eating utensils.
Swab testing and culture of eating utensils in eating and drinking
establishments shall be performed under the regulations of the Hanover
Board of Health three times yearly. Results of swab tests on eating utensils
shall be posted conspicuously in each establishment.
§ 137-32. Compliance with these regulations.
A. These regulations will be complied with if the following specifications
are met:
(1) Zero to 25 colonies — excellent results.
(2) Twenty-five to 100 colonies — satisfactory results.
B. Counts exceeding 100 colonies per plate or utensil are not in
compliance with these regulations.
§ 137-31 HANOVER CODE § 137-32
1:128
ARTICLE IV
Licensing, Inspection and Other Fees
[Adopted 11-15-1967 by Ord. No. 1371]
§ 137-33. Fees. [Amended 1-15-1990 by Ord. No. 1871; 12-19-1990
by Ord. No. 1889; 9-4-1996 by Ord. No. 1989; 9-28-2011 by Ord. No.
2175]
Beginning November 1, 2011, the proprietors and operators of public eating
and drinking places, retail food establishments and food vending machines
in the Borough of Hanover shall pay to the Borough, for the purpose
of defraying the cost to the Borough of inspections and bacteriological
tests made by the Board of Health for such places, establishments and
machines, such licensing, inspection and other fees covering the period
from November 1 to October 31 each year as the Borough Council shall
establish by resolution passed from time to time by the Council.51
51.Editor's Note: The schedule of fees is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 137-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-33
1:129
Chapter 142
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I. Shade trees — See Ch. 294.
§ 142-1. Height restriction; violation constitutes nuisance.
No person, firm or corporation owning or occupying any property within
the Borough of Hanover shall permit any grass or weeds or any vegetation
whatsoever, not edible or planted for some useful or ornamental purpose,
to grow or remain upon such premises so as to exceed a height of six
inches or to throw off any unpleasant or noxious odor or to conceal any
filthy deposit or to create or produce pollen. Any grass, weeds or other
vegetation growing upon any premises in the Borough in violation of any
of the provisions of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance and
detrimental to the health, safety, cleanliness and comfort of the inhabitants
of the Borough.
§ 142-2. Removal or trimming required.
The owner of any premises, as to vacant premises or premises occupied
by the owner, and occupant thereof, in case of premises occupied by other
than the owner thereof, shall remove, trim or cut all grass, weeds or other
vegetation growing or remaining upon such premises in violation of the
provisions of § 142-1 of this chapter.
§ 142-3. Notice of violation; noncompliance procedure.
The Borough Manager, or any officer or employee of the Borough
designated thereby for the purpose, is hereby authorized to give notice, by
personal service or by United States mail, to the owner or occupant, as the
case may be, of any premises whereon grass, weeds or other vegetation is
growing or remaining in violation of the provisions of § 142-1 of this chapter,
directing and requiring such occupant to remove, trim or cut such grass,
weeds or vegetation so as to conform to the requirements of this chapter,
within five days after issuance of such notice. In case any person, firm or
corporation shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply with such notice within
the period of time stated therein, the Borough authorities may remove,
trim or cut such grass, weeds or vegetation, and the cost thereof, together
with any additional penalty authorized by the law, may be collected by the
Borough from such person, firm or corporation in the manner provided by
law.
§ 137-33 HANOVER CODE § 142-4
1:130
§ 142-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall fail, neglect or refuse
to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter within five days after
receiving the notice as provided for in § 142-3 of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to the penalties as provided for in Chapter
1, Article I, General Penalty, enacted December 29, 1954.
§ 142-5. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 827, enacted March 17, 1954, is hereby repealed.
Chapter 147
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building regulations — See Ch. 150.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 170.
Housing standards — See Ch. 230.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 316.
§ 147-1. Adoption of survey, plan and system; boundaries
designated.
The survey, plan and system for the numbering of houses and buildings on
that portion of Broadway beginning at McKinley Avenue and extending to
the Borough limit on said Broadway, and on that portion of Carlisle Street
beginning at Fourth Street and extending to the Borough limit on said
Carlisle Street, and on that portion of Spring Avenue beginning at York
Street and extending to Locust Street, which plan has been prepared by the
Borough Manager, and a copy of which is hereto attached and made a part
hereof, is hereby approved and adopted.
§ 147-2. Conformance required.
On and after the passage and approval of this chapter, it shall be the duty of
each and every owner, trustee, lessee, agent and occupant of each and every
house, building or other structure situate on any portion of the respective
highways and streets, as designated in § 147-1 hereof, to cause the same
to be numbered in accordance with this chapter and the system and plan
hereby attached and approved.
§ 147-3. Authority of Borough Manager and Mayor.
The Borough Manager and the Mayor, or either of them, are hereby
authorized to require the numbering and renumbering of any house,
building or other structure in accordance with this chapter.
Chapter 150
§ 142-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-3
1:131
BUILDING REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 147.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 170.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 212.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 215.
Housing standards — See Ch. 230.
Plumbing — See Ch. 263.
Signs; street encroachments — See Ch. 298.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
320.
Trailers; temporary structures — See Ch. 330.
Zoning — See Ch. 370.
§ 150-1. Building construction permit requirements; signs;
floodplain management. [Amended 12-29-1975 by Ord. No. 1655;
12-16-1981 by Ord. No. 1734; 8-26-2009 by Ord. No. 2151]
A. From and after the passage of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any
person or persons, firms or corporations to construct any building
within the limits of the Borough of Hanover, to materially change,
renew or enlarge any existing building or to wreck, raze or move any
existing building unless the owner of such building or proposed
building shall have first obtained therefor a permit from the Borough
Secretary.
B. If all legal provisions to Borough regulations have been complied with
by the applicant, the Borough Secretary shall issue a permit for the
doing of the work, as well as a sign or poster which shall state that said
permit has been issued; provided, however, that in the event that any
law requires that the plans for any work shall be approved by the
Department of Labor and Industry of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or a building code inspector required by commonwealth
law, such approval must be obtained prior to the issuance of any permit.
The said sign or poster shall thereafter and at all times during the
course of such construction, changes, alterations, wrecking, razing,
shoring or removing be and remain prominently and conspicuously
posted upon the premises.
C. Permit fees. [Amended 8-26-2015 by Ord. No. 2229]
(1) The fee for issuing such permit shall be $25 for the first $5,000 or
fraction thereof, plus $1 per $1,000 for all over $5,000 of the
estimated cost of such construction, material change, renewal or
enlargement. The Borough Secretary shall require a verification
and/or correction of the cost as estimated at the time of the
application for the permit, and the applicant shall file with the
Borough Secretary a certificate showing the actual cost of such
construction, material change, renewal or enlargement within 30
days from and after the date of completion thereof, provided that
§ 147-3 HANOVER CODE § 150-1
1:132
the actual cost thereof shall exceed the sum of $2,500, and the
applicant shall pay to the Borough Secretary, at the time of such
filing, any additional fees which may be due and owing to the
Borough of Hanover as a result of such actual cost exceeding the
estimated cost.
(2) The fee for issuing a permit to wreck, raze or remove an existing
building shall be set at a rate of $1 per 100 square feet for the first
1,000 square feet of building area wrecked, razed, removed, or
otherwise demolished, and $2 per 100 square feet for each square
foot, or fraction thereof, in excess of 1,000 square feet. Said fee
imposed for the issuance of a permit to wreck, raze, remove, or
otherwise demolish an existing building shall be no less than $25.
(3) Said permit fees described in this Subsection C may be adjusted
from time to time by resolution passed by the Borough Council of
the Borough of Hanover.
D. It shall be unlawful to erect any building on the building line of any
highway without first securing from the Borough Manager the proper
grade and line, which shall be promptly given, free of charge, by said
Borough Manager.
E. During the erection of any building, a passageway at least four feet
wide shall be kept open along the sidewalks, which said passageway
shall be provided with a board roof if deemed necessary by the Borough
Manager.
F. It shall be unlawful for any applicant to refuse or neglect to file with the
Borough Secretary a certificate showing the actual cost of such
construction, material change, renewal or enlargement within the time
and in the manner as provided in § 150-1C hereof, and it shall be
unlawful for any applicant to willfully falsify the amount of such actual
cost on such certificate.
G. Construction within the floodway, flood fringe or general floodplain
district shall elevate or floodproof the lowest floor, including basement,
at least 1 1/2 feet above the one-hundred-year-flood elevation, as
outlined on the Hanover Borough Flood Boundary and Floodway Map
and delineated in the Flood Insurance Study. No encroachment,
alteration or improvement of any kind shall be made to any watercourse
until all adjacent municipalities which may be affected by such action
have been notified by the Borough and until all required permits or
approvals have been first obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection Regional Office. In addition, the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and Pennsylvania Department of
Community and Economic Development shall be notified by the
Borough prior to any alteration or relocation of any watercourse.
(1) Nonresidential structures can be constructed so that the space
enclosed by such structures remains either completely or
essentially dry during any flood up to that height. Such
§ 150-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-1
1:133
construction must be in accordance with the standards contained
in the publication entitled "Floodproofing Regulations" (United
States Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972) or some other
equivalent standard for that type of construction accepted by the
Borough Engineer.
(2) Design and construction standards for drainage facilities. Storm
drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of
stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system shall
ensure drainage at all points along streets and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
(3) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters. All new or
replacement sanitary sewer facilities and private package sewage
treatment plants (including all pumping stations and collector
systems) shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into
the floodwaters. In addition, they should be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage and
impairment.
(4) Water facilities. All new or replacement water facilities shall be
located, designed and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damages.
(5) Streets. The finished elevation of proposed new streets shall be no
more than one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
(6) Utilities. All utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and telephone
systems, being placed in flood-prone areas should be located,
elevated (where possible) and constructed to minimize the chance
of impairment during a flood.
(7) Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
(a) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from
all points.
(b) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills
shall not be permitted.
(c) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
resistance to erosion, scouring or settling.
(d) Be no steeper than one-foot vertical to two feet horizontal,
unless substantiated data justifying steeper slopes is submitted
to and approved by the Building Official.
(e) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties. The provisions contained in the 2003 IBC
(Sections 1801.1 and 1830.4) shall be utilized.
§ 150-1 HANOVER CODE § 150-1
1:134
(8) Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be constructed and placed on the lot so as to offer the
minimum obstruction to the flow of water. In so doing,
consideration shall be given to their effect upon the flow and height
of floodwaters.
(9) Anchoring.
(a) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in
accordance with accepted engineering practices to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
(b) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks and other similar
objects or components located below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to prevent
flotation.
(c) The design and construction requirements of the UCC
pertaining to this subsection, as referred to in 34 Pa. Code
(Chapters 401 to 405, as amended) and contained in the 2003
IBC (Sections 1605.2.2, 1605.3.1.4, 1612.4 and Appendix
G501.3), the IRC (Sections R301.1 and R323.1.1) and ASCE
24-98 (Sections 5 and 6), shall be utilized.
(10) Floor, walls and ceilings.
(a) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the
flooring perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing
structural damage to the building.
(b) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(c) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be designed and constructed of materials that are waterresistant
and will withstand inundation.
(d) Windows, doors and other components at or below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be made of metal or other
water-resistant material.
(11) Electrical components or apparatus shall not be located below the
regulatory flood elevation.
(a) No electrical distribution panels shall be allowed at an
elevation less than three feet above the level of the onehundred-
year-flood elevation.
(b) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
§ 150-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-1
1:135
(c) The provisions pertaining to the above provisions and
referenced in the Uniform Construction Code and 34 Pa. Code
(Chapters 401 to 405, as amended) and contained in the 2003
IBC (Section 1612.4), the IRC (Section R323.1.5) and the 2000
IFGC (Sections R301.5 and R1601.3.8) and ASCE 24 (Chapter
8) shall be used.
(12) Equipment.
(a) Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioners and ventilating units
and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall be permitted only at elevations above the
regulatory flood.
(b) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with
all state and local regulations for such systems. If any such
system is permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid
impairment to it, or contamination from it, during a flood.
(c) Water supply systems and sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to preclude infiltration of floodwaters into the
systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
(d) Fuel supply systems shall not be located below the regulatory
flood elevation.
(e) Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical
and telephone systems, shall be located, elevated (where
possible) and constructed to minimize the chance of
impairment during a flood.
(13) Paints and adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(a) The design and construction provisions of the Uniform
Construction Code and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 to 405, as
amended), and contained in the 2003 IBC (Appendix G;
Sections 401.3 and 401.4) the 2003 IRC (Section 323.1.6), the
ASCE 24-98 (Section 8.3), FEMA No. 348, Protecting Building
Utilities from Flood Damages, and the International Private
Sewage Disposal Code (Chapter 3), shall be utilized.
(b) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be
finished with a marine or water-resistant paint or other
finishing material.
(c) Paint and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(d) The standards and specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code
(Chapters 401 to 405, as amended), the 2003 IBC (Sections
§ 150-1 HANOVER CODE § 150-1
1:136
801.1.3, 1403.7 and Appendix G) and the 2003 IRC (Section
R323.1.7) shall be utilized.
(e) The provisions of the Uniform Construction Code pertaining to
this subsection and referenced in the 34 Pa. Code (Chapters
401 to 405, as amended), and contained in the 2003 IBC
(Sections 801.1.3, 1403.2, 1403.4, 1403.6 and 1404.2), the
2003 IRC (Sections R323.1.7 and R501.3) and ASCE 24-98
(Chapter 6) shall be utilized.
(14) Storage. No materials that are buoyant, flammable or explosive or
that, in the time of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal or
plant life and not listed in Subsection I, Development which may
endanger human life, shall be stored at or below the regulatory
flood elevation and/or floodproofed to the maximum extent
possible.
(15) Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be
designed to prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system
and discharges from the system into floodwaters. Additional
provisions shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the
event that floodwater infiltration occurs.
H. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 to 405), as
amended, and not limited to the following provisions, shall apply to the
above and other sections and subsections of this chapter to the extent
that they are more restrictive and/or supplement the requirements of
this chapter.
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2003 or the latest edition
thereof: Sections 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and
Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2003 or the latest
edition thereof: Sections R014, R105, R109, R323, Appendix
AE101, Appendix E and Appendix J.
I. Development which may endanger human life.
(1) In accordance with the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management Act52
and the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or
substantially improved structure which will be used for the
production or storage of any of the following dangerous materials
or substances; will be used for any activity requiring the
maintenance of a supply of more than 550 gallons, or other
comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous materials or
substances on the premises; or will involve the production, storage,
or use of any amount of radioactive substances shall be subject to
52.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 150-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-1
1:137
the provisions of this section, in addition to all other applicable
provisions. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
(a) Acetone.
(b) Ammonia.
(c) Benzene.
(d) Calcium carbide.
(e) Carbon disulfide.
(f) Celluloid.
(g) Chlorine.
(h) Hydrochloric acid.
(i) Hydrocyanic acid.
(j) Magnesium.
(k) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(l) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(m) Phosphorus.
(n) Potassium.
(o) Sodium.
(p) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(q) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and
rodenticides).
(r) Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
(2) Within any FW (floodway area), any structure of the kind described
in Subsection I(1) above shall be prohibited. Where permitted in
any floodplain area, any new or substantially improved structure of
the kind described in Subsection I(1) above shall be elevated or
designed and constructed to remain completely dry up to at least
1 1/2 feet above the one-hundred-year flood; and designed to
prevent pollution from the structure or activity during the course of
a one-hundred-year flood. Any such structure, or part thereof, that
will be built below the regulatory flood elevation shall be designed
and constructed in accordance with the Standards for Completely
Dry Floodproofing (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as
amended March 1992), or with some other equivalent watertight
standards.
§ 150-1 HANOVER CODE § 150-1
1:138
(3) Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2003 IBC (Appendix G, Section 501.1-3) and the 2003 IRC (Sections
R323.2, R323.3, R102.7.1, and Appendix AE101, 604 and 605), or
the most recent revisions thereto, and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters, 401
to 405), as amended, where appropriate and/or applicable to units
where the manufacturer's standards for anchoring cannot be
provided or were not established for the unit's proposed
installation.
J. Existing structures and improvements.
(1) Structures existing in any designated floodplain district prior to the
enactment of this section but which are not in compliance with
these provisions, may continue to remain, subject to the following:
(a) Existing structures located in a designated floodway district or
area shall not be expanded or enlarged unless the effect of the
proposed expansion or enlargement of flood heights is fully
offset by accompanying improvements.
(2) The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is
made to an existing structure located within any identified
floodplain area:
(a) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
allowed within any floodway area that would cause any
increase in the elevation of the one-hundred-year flood.
(b) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
allowed within any FE area that would, together with all other
existing and anticipated development, increase the onehundred-
year-flood elevation more than one foot at any point.
(c) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement
of any kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of
50% or more of its market value shall constitute a substantial
improvement and shall be undertaken only in full compliance
with the provisions of this section.
(d) The requirements of 34 Pa. Code Chapters 401 to 405, as
amended, and the 2003 IRC (Sections R102.7.1, R105.3.1 and
Appendixes E and J), or the latest revision thereof, and the
2003 IBC (Sections 101.3, 3403.1 and Appendix G), or the
latest revision thereof, shall also be utilized in conjunction with
the provisions of this section.
§ 150-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-1
1:139
Chapter 155
BURIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
§ 155-1. Prohibited acts.
From and after the passage of this chapter, it shall not be lawful to bury any
deceased person within the corporate limits of the Borough of Hanover.
Chapter 159
BURNING, OPEN
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Fire Commissioner; Fire Department — See
Ch. 43.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 212.
§ 159-1. Permit required.
Hereafter, it shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm or corporation
to build or cause to be built any open fire within the Borough of Hanover,
unless and until such person or persons, firm or corporation shall first have
secured from the Secretary of the Borough of Hanover a permit for the
building of such open fire.
§ 159-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OPEN FIRE — Any fire that is not confined within a building.
§ 159-3. Applications; form.
Application for such permit shall be made upon a form supplied by the
Secretary of the Borough of Hanover, which application form may require
the disclosure of all facts deemed necessary by the Borough Manager for
the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 159-4. Classes of permits.
The permit herein required shall be one of the following classes:
§ 150-1 HANOVER CODE § 159-4
1:140
§ 159-5. Attendant required.
A competent attendant shall be in continuous charge of and present at every
fire.
§ 159-6. Fee for permit. [Amended 7-22-2015 by Ord. No. 2224]
The permit fees for the issuance of each type of permit shall be set at $30.
Said fee may be adjusted from time to time by resolution passed by the
Borough Council of the Borough of Hanover.
§ 159-7. Meal preparation excluded.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the building of a fire in
a fireplace, barbecue pit or similar containers for the purpose of preparing
a meal or for the purpose of cooking.
§ 159-8. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 358, enacted August 2, 1923, is hereby repealed.
Chapter 164
A. Temporary permit. A temporary permit shall be limited to the building
of bonfires or open fires for the purpose of consuming large piles of
brush, building materials and similar materials, under the direct
supervision of the Borough of Hanover.
(1) Such temporary permit will be issued for each individual and
specific case as the need arises, if approved by the Fire Chief of the
Borough of Hanover.
(2) No fire shall be built within 15 feet of any combustible building,
fence or other material of a combustible nature.
(3) Such fire will be permitted only during such times as approved by
the Fire Chief of the Borough of Hanover.
(4) Such fire shall not be built, under any circumstances, during windy
weather.
B. Permanent permit. A permanent permit shall be issued under
circumstances indicating a clear need for the destruction of classified
materials and shall be issued for a calendar year, which allows the
building of fires at various times under the following conditions:
(1) Such fire shall be built within an approved type commercial and
industrial incinerator conforming to the requirements of and
approved by the National Board of Fire Underwriters' rules and
regulations governing the manufacture of commercial and
industrial type incinerators.
§ 159-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-8
1:141
CABLE TELEVISION
§ 164-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Hanover Borough
CATV Franchise Ordinance."
§ 164-2. Definitions; word usage.
§ 164-3. Grant of authority.
There is hereby granted by the Borough to the companies the right and
privilege to construct, erect, operate and maintain in, upon, along, across,
above, over and under the streets, alleys, public ways and public places
now laid out or dedicated, and all extensions thereof and additions thereto,
in the Borough, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other
television conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and
operation in the Borough of a CATV system for the interception, sale and
distribution of video and/or audio signals, subject to the conditions
hereinafter set forth.53
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Hanover.
CATV — An abbreviation for Community Antenna Television.
COMPANIES — Cable TV of York and such other companies as Hanover
Borough Council may designate from time to time.[Amended
10-16-1974 by Ord. No. 1620; 12-17-1986 by Ord. No. 1822;
10-28-1998 by Ord. No. 2016]
COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of Hanover.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
B. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words in the plural number include the singular
number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
A. Erection of poles. No poles shall be erected within the Borough by the
companies without the express authorization of Council. The companies
shall arrange to use the poles of the public utilities companies for the
distribution of said video and/or audio signals, and in areas within the
Borough where underground utility lines are installed, the companies
shall likewise make underground installations.
53.Editor's Note: Original Subsection A, Exclusive grant, was repealed 12-17-1986 by Ord.
No. 1822.
§ 159-8 HANOVER CODE § 164-3
1:142
§ 164-4. Compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
The companies shall, at all times during the term of this franchise, be
subject to all of the laws, ordinances, rules and regulations now in force
or hereafter adopted by any federal and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
agency having jurisdiction, and the Borough and all the provisions hereof
shall be subject to the laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of said
regulatory agencies.
§ 164-5. Companies' liability; indemnification.
It is expressly understood and agreed by and between the companies and
the Borough that the companies shall save the Borough harmless from all
loss sustained by the Borough on account of any suit, judgment, execution,
claim or demand whatsoever arising out of the construction, operation
and maintenance by the companies of the community television system
permitted by this chapter to be erected, operated and maintained. The
companies each agree to maintain and keep in full force and effect, at
all times during the term of this franchise, sufficient liability insurance
coverage to protect the Borough against any such claims, suits, judgments,
executions or demands, in a sum not less than $100,000 per person in any
one claim, $300,000 as to any one accident or occurrence, and not less than
$100,000 for property damage as to any one accident or occurrence.
§ 164-6. Performance bond. [Amended 8-21-1974 by Ord. No. 1619]
The companies shall each furnish a bond to the Borough in the sum of
$10,000 to assure the compliance with the conditions herein set forth,
which bond shall remain in full force and effect throughout the term of this
franchise.
§ 164-7. Service standards.
B. Service date. It is expressly understood and agreed by and between the
companies and the Borough that the companies shall have completed
installation of the necessary wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes and other television conductors and fixtures for the rendering
of community television services to not less than 90% of the residential
buildings within the Borough within 18 months from the granting of this
franchise. Time shall be of the essence as to this agreement. However,
the companies will be granted additional time for the following delays:
(1) Delay in the granting of suitable pole attachment agreements by
the respective utilities.
(2) Delay in the completion of the "makeready" by the respective
utilities.
(3) Delay resulting from regulations of federal or state agencies.
(4) Delay resulting from legal actions.
§ 164-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-7
1:143
§ 164-8. Condition on street occupancy.
All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected
by the companies within the Borough shall be so located as to cause no
interference with the proper use of streets, alleys and other public ways
and places, and to cause no interference with the rights of reasonable
convenience of property owners who adjoin any of said streets, alleys or
other public ways and places.
§ 164-9. Approval of transfer.
The companies shall not sell or transfer their plants or systems to another,
nor transfer any rights under this franchise to another without Council
approval.
§ 164-10. Borough's rights in franchise.
A. The companies shall maintain and operate their system and render
efficient service in accordance with the rules and regulations as are or
may be set forth by the Council as provided for in § 164-10 of this
chapter, or by any federal and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania agency
having jurisdiction.
B. Notice of interruption for repairs. Whenever it is necessary to shut off
or interrupt service for the purpose of making repairs, adjustments or
installations, the companies shall do so at such time as will cause the
least amount of inconvenience to their customers, and unless such
interruption is unforeseen and immediately necessary, companies shall
give reasonable notice thereof to their customers.
A. Borough rules. The right is hereby reserved to the Borough to adopt, in
addition to the provisions herein contained and existing applicable
ordinances, such additional regulations as the Borough shall find
necessary in the exercise of the police power, provided that such
regulations, by ordinance or otherwise, shall be reasonable and not in
conflict with the rights herein granted and shall not be in conflict with
the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the United States
government.
B. Use of system by school district. The companies shall provide a singleservice
drop to each elementary and secondary school building within
the Borough of Hanover on a no-charge basis for the services or the
installation thereof; and companies shall each assign one channel to the
School District of Hanover Borough as an educational channel for use
by the School District of Hanover Borough. The educational channel
assigned to the School District of Hanover Borough shall originate in
the studios at the Hanover High School and be connected to the CATV
system on a no-charge basis.
C. Supervision and inspection. The Borough shall have the right to
supervise all construction or installation work performed subject to the
§ 164-7 HANOVER CODE § 164-10
1:144
§ 164-11. Term of franchise; public hearing. [Amended 12-17-1986
by Ord. No. 1822]
§ 164-12. Publication costs. [Amended 12-17-1986 by Ord. No.
1822]
The companies shall assume the costs of publication of this franchise as
well as any franchise renewals, amendments or proceeding notices as the
same may be enacted from time to time as such publication is required by
law. A bill for publication costs shall be presented to the companies by the
Borough Secretary.
§ 164-13. Removal.
Should the companies, for any reason, cease to provide a community
television service as herein provided for, whether the same occurs during
the term of this franchise or by virtue of the expiration thereof, the
companies shall remove all their wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes and other television conductors and fixtures within a period of 90
days therefrom.
§ 164-14. Insurance and bonds.
All insurance policies and bonds required by this chapter shall be written
by a company or companies authorized and qualified to do business in the
provisions of this chapter and to make such inspections as it shall find
necessary to ensure compliance with governing ordinances.
D. Franchise fee. The Borough of Hanover retains the right to assess a
franchise fee or tax on services rendered within the Borough of
Hanover by the companies up to the maximum extent allowed by state
and federal law as the same may be amended from time to time. Said
fee can be enacted during any year during the term of a franchise and
increased or reduced as the Hanover Borough Council believes to be in
the best interest of the Borough of Hanover. [Added 12-17-1986 by
Ord. No. 1822]
A. The franchise and rights herein granted shall take effect and be in force
from and after the enactment hereof, as required by law, provided that
companies shall make application for this franchise and file an
acceptance of the terms herein specified within 10 days from the
enactment hereof, and shall continue in force and effect for a term of 20
years after the effective date of this franchise.
B. As a condition of this franchise right, the following public hearings may
be required annually by the Borough Council of Hanover.
(1) A public hearing to obtain citizen comments regarding service
rendered Hanover Borough residents and the companies' plans to
change service in the upcoming year.
§ 164-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-14
1:145
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Certificates of all coverage required by this
chapter shall be promptly filed with the Borough Secretary.
§ 164-15. Forfeiture.
Should any of the companies violate any of the provisions of this chapter or
fail to promptly perform any of the requirements hereof, then upon failure
by such company to remedy the same within 30 days after written notice
has been given to it by the Borough, such company shall forfeit all of its
rights hereunder.
§ 164-16. Extension of conditions. [Added 12-17-1986 by Ord. No.
1822]
All conditions and requirements of the originally ordained franchise, as
amended, not herein amended are extended into the new franchise period
and remain conditions of the new franchise and remain in full force and
effect subject to the new franchise.
Chapter 170
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 147.
Building regulations — See Ch. 150.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 212.
Housing standards — See Ch. 230.
Plumbing — See Ch. 263.
Zoning — See Ch. 370.
§ 170-1. Election to administer and enforce.
This municipality hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions of
the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101
to 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its regulations.
§ 170-2. Adoption of building code.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code Chapters 401 to
405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference as the municipal building code of this municipality.
§ 170-3. Methods of administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the Code within this municipality shall
be undertaken in any of the following ways, as determined by the governing
body of this municipality from time to time by resolution:
§ 164-14 HANOVER CODE § 170-3
1:146
§ 170-4. Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the governing body
of this municipality in conformity with the requirements of the relevant
provisions of the code, as amended from time to time, and for the purposes
set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration is
undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, said Board of
Appeals shall be established by joint action of the participating
municipalities.
§ 170-5. Effect on existing ordinances.
A. By the designation of an employee of the municipality to serve as the
municipal code official to act on behalf of the municipality;
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the municipality;
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an intermunicipal
agreement;
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of this
municipality;
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by this municipality on or before July 1, 1999, and which equal
or exceed the requirements of the code shall continue in full force and
effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the
minimum requirements of the code, as amended from time to time.54
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this chapter and whose requirements
are less than the minimum requirements of the code are hereby
amended to conform with the comparable provisions of the code.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of this municipality not
governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
54.Editor's Note: The Borough resolved on 12-22-2004 by Res. No. 839 that it currently "has
in effect standards and regulations related to the construction of water and sewer service
laterals which equal or exceed the standards defined by the International Plumbing Code
(IPC) or the International Residential Code (IRC)."
§ 170-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-6
1:147
§ 170-6. Fees.
Fees assessable by the municipality for the administration and enforcement
undertaken pursuant to this chapter and the code shall be established by
the governing body by resolution from time to time.
Chapter 175
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 75. Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 186.
§ 175-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the "Curfew
Ordinance."
§ 175-2. Purposes and findings.
A. Purposes. This chapter is an updating of the Borough Curfew Ordinance
of 1943 prescribing, in accordance with prevailing community
standards, regulations for the conduct of minors on streets at night,
effectively enforced, taught in the homes, internalized and adhered to
for generations, all for the good of minors, for the furtherance of family
responsibility and for the public good, safety and welfare.
B. Findings.
(1) The Council finds that the curfew meets a very real local need, has
been over the years a significant factor in minimizing juvenile
delinquency and should be updated and amplified in light of
Hanover's local situation and facts, including but not limited to the
following:
(a) Hanover is one of the oldest communities in (and antedating)
York County, with clearly defined boundaries along the
intersection of State Routes 94, 194 and 116 in the Hanover-
York Valley in southwest York County. Hanover has a compact
built-up area largely within an area of 4.5 square miles, with its
Police Department office in the center of the municipal area at
44 Frederick Street. The Police Department office is located
within the central business district which includes retail,
professional office, utility office, governmental, service,
financial and manufacturing land uses. Still Hanover remains
primarily a residential community; a good place to raise
children, it is said; an area traditionally Pennsylvania Dutch in
background, where after 9:00 p.m., as people say, the
§ 170-6 HANOVER CODE § 175-2
1:148
§ 175-3. Definitions; word usage.
sidewalks are rolled up. This community's sense of the proper
time for cessation of outdoor activities by minors on the streets
is reflected in the curfew hours declared by this chapter, which
takes into consideration, also, the danger hours for nocturnal
crime and for accumulations of minors with potential risks
incident to immaturity.
(2) The Council finds that compact Hanover is not overcrowded.
Population density, as reflected in the Borough Comprehensive Plan
of 1980, is 3,891 per square mile. The total area is 2,370 acres, of
which streets occupy 453 acres [19%]; 164 acres are devoted to
public/semipublic uses [6.9%]; 715 acres are in residential use
[30.1%], where single-family dwellings occupy the largest portion
of the residential area. Adequate indoor living space permits
minors in Hanover to healthfully occupy their time. Commercial
recreation facilities are limited, and there is little or nothing for
minors to do outdoors after the curfew hours herein declared but to
roam the streets.
(3) The Council finds that there are 3,336 minors, the 1990 Census
figure for persons under 18 years of age, residing in Hanover.
There are fewer than 3,078 minors for each school grade. Hanover
has three elementary schools, one middle school for grades five
through eight and one high school.
(4) The Council further finds that the Hanover population (1990
Census) is 14,399. There are 6,316 households (averaging 2.22
persons per household) and 3,930 heads of family households. In
3,197 (81%) households, there are husbands and wives. Of the
2,831 minors, 2,831 are classified in the 1990 Census as "own
child" of the head of household in which they reside. Hanover is a
stable family community. Parental responsibility for the
whereabouts of children is the norm. Legal sanctions to enforce
such responsibility have had a demonstrated effectiveness over the
years. As parental control increases, the likelihood of juvenile
delinquency decreases, and there is, therefore, continuing need for
the nocturnal curfew for minors which has achieved and will
continue to achieve under local conditions the purposes
hereinbefore stated.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and
words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein.
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words in the plural number include the singular, and
words in the singular number include the plural. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
§ 175-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-3
1:149
§ 175-4. Minors.
It shall be unlawful for any person 17 or less years of age (under 18) to be or
remain in or upon the streets within the Borough of Hanover at night during
the period ending at 6:00 a.m. and beginning:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Hanover, York County, Pennsylvania, with
administrative offices at 44 Frederick Street, Hanover, Pennsylvania
17331.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 or, in equivalent phrasing
herein employed, any person 17 or less years of age.
PARENT — Any person having legal custody of a minor as a natural or
adoptive parent, as a legal guardian, as a person who stands in loco
parent is or as a person to whom legal custody has been given by order
of court.
REMAIN — To stay behind, to tarry and to stay unnecessarily upon the
streets, including the congregating of groups (or of interacting minors)
totaling four or more persons in which any minor involved would not
be using the streets for ordinary or serious purposes such as mere
passage or going home. To implement that thought with additional
precision and precaution, numerous exceptions are expressly defined
in § 175-3. More and more exceptions become available with increasing
years and as appropriate in the interest of reasonable regulation which
is intended by use of the meaningful phrase "be or remain" found
constitutional in Baker vs. Borough of Steelton, 17 Dauphin 17 (1912).
STREET — A way or place, of whatsoever nature, open to the use of
the public as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular travel or, in
the case of a sidewalk thereof, for pedestrian travel. The term "street"
includes the legal right-of-way, including but not limited to the cartway
of traffic lanes, the curb, the sidewalks, whether paved or unpaved, and
any grass plots or the grounds found within the legal right-of-way of a
"street." The term "street" applies irrespective of what it is called or
formally named, whether alley, avenue, court, road or otherwise.
B. "Time of night" referred to herein is based upon the prevailing standard
of time, whether Eastern standard time or Eastern daylight saving time,
generally observed at that hour by the public in the Borough, prima
facie the time then observed in the Borough Administrative Offices and
the Police Department.
C. Year of age continues from one birthday, such as the 17th, to (but not
including the day of) the next, such as the 18th birthday, making it clear
that 17 or less years of age is herein treated as equivalent to the phrase
"under 18 years of age," the latter phrase in practice, unfortunately,
having confused a number of persons into the mistaken thought that
eighteen-year-olds might be involved. Similarly, for example, "11 or less
years of age" means under 12 years of age.
A. At 10:00 p.m. for minors 11 or less years of age.
§ 175-3 HANOVER CODE § 175-4
1:150
§ 175-5. Exceptions.
B. At 10:30 p.m. for minors 12 or 13 years of age.
C. At 11:00 p.m. for minors 14 or more years of age.
A. In the following exceptional cases, a minor on a Borough street during
the nocturnal hours for which § 175-4 is intended to provide the
maximum limits of regulation (and a clear general guide for minors,
their parents and their fellow citizens) shall not, however, be
considered in violation of this chapter:
(1) When accompanied by a parent of such minor.
(2) When accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such
minor to take said parent's place in accompanying said minor for a
designated period of time and purpose within specified areas.
(3) When exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United
States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom
of speech and the right of assembly. Such minor shall evidence the
bona fides of such exercise by first delivering, to Municipal
Building (Police Department) personnel at the Borough Municipal
Building at 44 Frederick Street, where and to whom high priority
messages to the Mayor are regularly received, written
communications signed by such minor and countersigned as
practicable by a parent of such minor with their home address and
telephone number, addressed to the Mayor of the Borough,
specifying where and in what manner said minor will be on the
streets at night (during hours when this chapter is otherwise
applicable to said minor) in the exercise of a First Amendment right
specified in such communications.
(4) In the case of reasonable necessity but only after such minor's
parent has communicated to the Borough Police Department
personnel the facts establishing such reasonable necessity, relating
specified streets at a designated time for a described purpose,
including points of origin and destination. A copy of such
communication or of the police record thereof, duly certified by the
Chief of Police to be correct, with an appropriate notation of the
time it was received and of the names and address of such parent
and minor, shall be admissible evidence.
(5) When the minor is on the sidewalk of the place where such minor
resides or on the sidewalk of either next-door neighbor not
communicating an objection to the police officer.
(6) When returning home by a direct route from (and within 30
minutes of the termination of) a school activity or an activity of
religious or other voluntary association, of which prior notice
indicating the place and probable time of termination has been
given, in writing, to and duly filed for immediate reference by the
§ 175-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-5
1:151
Chief of Police or the officer assigned by him on duty for the
police Department, thus encouraging (here as in other exceptional
situations) conduct on the part of minors involved in such activities
and striking a fair balance for any somewhat conflicting interests.
(7) When authorized by special permit from the Mayor carried on the
person of the minor thus authorized, as follows: when necessary
nighttime activities of a minor may be inadequately provided for by
other provisions of this chapter, then recourse may be had to the
Mayor of the Borough, either for a regulation as provided in
Subsection A(8) or for a special permit as the circumstances
warrant.
(8) When authorized by regulation issued by the Mayor in other similar
cases of reasonable necessity, similarly handled but adapted to
necessary nighttime activities of more minors than can readily be
dealt with on an individual special permit basis. Normally such
regulation by the Mayor permitting use of the streets should be
issued sufficiently in advance to permit appropriate publicity
through news media and through other agencies such as the
schools and shall define the activity, the scope of the use of the
streets permitted, the period of time involved, not to extend more
than 30 minutes beyond the time for termination of such activity,
and the reason for finding that such regulation is reasonably
necessary and is consistent with the purposes of this chapter.
(9) When the minor carries a certified card of employment, renewable
each calendar month when the current facts so warrant, dated or
reissued not more than 45 days previously, signed by the Chief of
Police and briefly identifying the minor, the address of his home
and of his place of employment and his hours of employment.
(10) When the minor is, with parental consent, in a motor vehicle. This
contemplates normal travel. From excess of caution, this clearly
exempts bona fide interstate movement through Hanover,
particularly on normal routes such as State Routes 116, 194 and
94, this beginning or ending in Hanover.
(11) When the minor is 17 years of age, if and when the Mayor shall
have determined, by formal rule first reported to Borough Council,
spread upon the minutes and so reported in the press, finding facts
as to the extent (minimal) of juvenile delinquency in such age group
permitting such rule, currently, in the best interest of said minors
and of the Borough, then the Mayor by such formal rule, covering a
period of time designated therein or until recision thereof not
exceeding one year from the date thereof, may take appropriate
action excepting designated minors, minors in a defined group or
area or all minors (as the current facts may warrant) 17 years of
age at the date or attaining 17 years of age during the period that
such formal rule is and remains in effect.
§ 175-5 HANOVER CODE § 175-5
1:152
§ 175-6. Parental responsibility.
It shall be unlawful for a parent having legal custody of a minor knowingly
to permit or by inefficient control to allow such minor to be or remain
upon any Borough street under circumstances not constituting an exception
to or otherwise beyond the scope of this chapter. The term "knowingly"
includes knowledge which a parent should reasonably be expected to have
concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that parent's legal custody;
it is intended to continue to keep neglectful or careless parents up to
a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility through an
objective test. It shall, a priori, be a defense that a parent was completely
indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such minor.
§ 175-7. Police procedures.
B. Each of the foregoing exceptions, and their several limitations such as
provisions for notification, are severable, as hereinafter provided but
here reemphasized; and additional, also severable, exceptions,
broadening with the progress toward maturity of minors enrolled
respectively in elementary, middle school and high schools, will be
considered by the Council as warranted by future experience
illuminated by the views of student associations, school personnel,
citizens, associations, ward, precinct and neighborhood spokesmen,
parents, offices and persons in authority concerned positively with
minors as well as with juvenile delinquency.
A. A policeman of the Borough, upon finding or having attention called to
any minor on the streets in prima facie violation of this chapter,
normally shall take the minor to the Borough Police Department Office,
where a parent shall immediately be notified to come for such minor,
whereupon they shall be interrogated. This is intended to permit
ascertainment, under constitutional safeguards, of relevant facts and to
centralize responsibility in the Sergeant there and then on duty for
accurate, effective, fair, impartial and uniform enforcement and
recording, thus making available experienced supervisory personnel,
the best of facilities and access to information and records. In the
absence of convincing evidence, such as a birth certificate, a policeman
on the street shall in the first instance use his best judgment in
determining age.
B. Police procedures shall constantly be refined in the light of experience
and may provide, inter alia, that the policemen may deliver to a parent
thereof a minor under appropriate circumstances, for example a minor
of tender age near home, whose identity and address may readily be
ascertained or are known.
C. In any event, such policeman shall within 24 hours file a written report
with the Chief of Police or shall participate to the extent of the
information for which he is responsible in the filing of such report
within 24 hours.
§ 175-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-7
1:153
§ 175-8. Violations and penalties.
Prevailing community standards and the real internalization thereof or
interpersonal sanctions therefor, that in practice count for much as to
when minors should be off the streets, reflected in this chapter are hereby
undergirded with the following legal sanction:
D. When a parent, immediately called, has come to take charge of the
minor and the appropriate information has been recorded, the minor
shall be released to the custody of such parent. If the parent cannot be
located or fails to take charge of the minor, then the minor shall be
released to the juvenile authorities, except to the extent that in
accordance with police regulations approved in advance by juvenile
authorities, the minor may temporarily be entrusted to a relative,
neighbor or other person who will on behalf of a parent assume the
responsibility of caring for the minor pending the availability or arrival
of a parent.
E. In the case of a first violation by a minor, the Chief of Police shall, by
certified mail, send to a parent written notice of said violation with a
warning that any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of
this chapter, including enforcement of parental responsibility and of
applicable penalties.
A. If, after the warning notice pursuant to § 175-7 of a first violation by a
minor, a parent violates § 175-6 (in connection with a second violation
by said minor), this shall be treated as a first offense by the parent. For
such first parental offense, the parent shall be fined $25; and for each
subsequent offense by a parent, the fine shall be increased by an
additional $25, e.g., $50 for the second and $75 for the third offense.
The Magisterial District Judge, upon finding a parent guilty, shall
sentence the parent to pay such fine and the costs of prosecution and,
upon refusal to pay such fines and costs, to be imprisoned in the jail of
York County for a period not exceeding 10 days.
B. Any minor who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter more
than three times shall be reported by the Mayor to a society or
organization whose purpose it is to take charge of incorrigibles and
delinquents, and proceedings shall then be taken under the Juvenile
Act, 11 P.S. § 50-101 et seq.,55 before the Juvenile Court for treatment,
supervision and rehabilitation of such minor.
C. A like procedure before the juvenile authorities shall be followed in any
case where the imposing of a fine or fines upon a parent shall not be
effective or where for any other reason the provisions of this chapter
cannot be made effective by the imposing of penalties under this
§ 175-8.
55.Editor's Note: See now 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 6301 et seq.
§ 175-7 HANOVER CODE § 175-9
1:154
§ 175-9. Severability.
Severability is intended throughout and within the provisions of this
chapter. If any provision, including inter alia any exception, part, phrase or
term, or application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid,
the application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected
thereby and the validity of this chapter in any and all other respects shall
not be affected thereby. From excess of caution, the Mayor is authorized
to give advisory opinions, in writing or immediately reduced to writing,
which shall be binding and shall be adhered to by the police, until the
chapter is amended in such respect, interpreting terms, phrases, parts or
any provisions. Normally, such advisory opinion shall be in response to
good faith, signed letters addressed to him at the Borough administration
building, questioning as ambiguous, as having a potentially chilling effect
on constitutional rights specifically invoked or as otherwise invalid, in all
three categories with respect to proposed conduct definitely described. This
administrative remedy must be exhausted prior to presenting to any court
a question in any of said three categories; the Borough Council does not
intend a result that is absurd, impossible of execution or unreasonable. It is
intended that this chapter be held inapplicable in such cases, if any, where
its application would be unconstitutional. A constitutional construction is
intended and shall be given. The Council does not intend to violate the
Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the Constitution of
the United States of America.
§ 175-10. Continuing evaluation.
A. The Borough Council will continue its evaluation and updating of this
chapter.
B. Accordingly, there shall be compiled and informally reported to the
Borough Council through effective channels (such as the normal
monthly distribution by the Borough Manager and Borough Secretary,
each Councilman, the Mayor and the Borough Solicitor or noteworthy
material) all exceptional cases hereunder of reasonable necessity, the
notices of school and other activities, the Mayor's special form and the
Mayor's regulations hereinbefore authorized and the Mayor's advisory
opinions for consideration by the appropriate committee and by the
Borough Council in further updating and continuing evaluation of this
chapter.
C. For the same reasons, as well as for the implementation beyond these
legal aspects of the basic purposes hereof, the Mayor and relevant
committees of the Borough Council through their respective chairmen
in coordinated efforts shall work with existing, and may organize,
voluntary groups and shall stimulate volunteer leadership in programs
of research and of action, dealing constructively on neighborhood and
local bases with juvenile delinquency and the prevention, control or
containment thereof in all its ramifications and with practicable steps
toward the good life and a better life for minors 17 or less years of age
and with the working of this chapter, community-wise and in individual
§ 175-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-10
1:155
§ 175-11. Repealer.
All ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are repealed.
This chapter specifically repeals the Curfew Ordinance of 1943, as
amended.
Chapter 179
DANCE HALLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
§ 179-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC DANCE HALL — Includes any room, place or space in which there
shall be held any dance or ball conducted in connection with instruction in
dancing for hire, and any dance or ball to which admission may be had by
the payment of a fee or by the purchase, possession or presentation of a
ticket or token, or in connection with which a charge is made for caring
for clothing or other property, and any dance or ball to which the public
generally may gain admission with or without the payment of a fee.
§ 179-2. License required; fees.
No public dance hall shall be opened, operated or conducted or be made
available to use of patrons until the owner or operator thereof shall have
obtained from the Borough Secretary a license therefor. The license fee for
the remainder of the year 1932 shall be $5, and annually thereafter shall be
$15, which fee for the remainder of the year 1932 shall be paid on October
15, and for each calendar year after 1932 shall be paid January 1, in each
year.
§ 179-3. Closing time.
It shall be unlawful for any public dance hall to remain open after 11:50
p.m.
§ 179-4. Inspection.
cases, as one much needed legal tool toward that end as well as for
continuing present protection of minors and of other persons and of
property and of other interests important to the welfare of the people
of the Borough of Hanover.
§ 175-10 HANOVER CODE § 179-4
1:156
§ 179-5. Revocation of license.
The license of any public dance hall may be forfeited or revoked by the
Mayor for disorderly or immoral conduct on the premises, or upon proof
that the dance hall was frequented by disorderly persons, or for the
violation of any of the rules, regulations, ordinances and laws, governing or
applying to public dance halls.
Chapter 182
DEAD ANIMALS, TRANSPORT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I. Animals — See Ch. 126.
§ 182-1. Concealment from view required. [Amended 12-29-1954 by
Ord. No. 845]
No person shall haul or carry into or through the Borough in any vehicle or
other conveyance any dead animal, unless the vehicle or other conveyance
is entirely enclosed so that no part of such animal is exposed to view.
Chapter 186
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Police Department — See Ch. 75.
Curfew — See Ch. 175.
§ 186-1. Definition; offenses declared unlawful. [Amended
12-29-1954 by Ord. No. 850]
"Disorderly conduct" within the limits of the Borough of Hanover shall be
and is hereby defined as any act, word or conduct causing or tending to
A. All public dance halls shall be subject to inspection by the Police
Department of the Borough at all reasonable times and whenever they
are open for dancing, instruction in dancing or for any other purpose.
B. Any police officer shall have the power to cause the place, hall or room
where any public dance is given to be vacated whenever any provision
of any law or ordinance with regard to public dances is being violated,
or whenever any indecent act shall be committed, or when any disorder
of a gross, violent or vulgar character shall take place therein.
§ 179-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 186-1
1:157
cause a disturbance of the peace and good order of the Borough, or causing
or tending to cause any danger, discomfort or annoyance to the inhabitants
of the Borough or users of the Borough thoroughfares, and shall include,
but shall not be limited to, loafing, fighting, the making of unnecessary
noise, profanity or indecent language. All the foregoing offenses, as coming
within the definition of said "disorderly conduct," are hereby declared to be
unlawful.
Chapter 200
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
§ 200-1. Discharge restricted. [Amended 12-29-1954 by Ord. No.
841; 10-31-1968 by Ord. No. 1411; 2-18-1987 by Ord. No. 1825]
No person or persons shall, except in necessary defense of persons or
property, discharge any gun, firearm, bow and arrow weapon or other
firearm or archery-related weapon within the Borough of Hanover.
Chapter 204
FIRE LANES
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Fire Commissioner; Fire Department — See
Ch. 43.
Fire limits — See Ch. 207.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 212.
§ 204-1. Purpose.
The Borough of Hanover hereby adopts this chapter for the purpose of
establishing fire lanes on private property open to and used by the general
public.
§ 204-2. General requirements.
The Hanover Borough Council may require one or more fire lanes, at
least 20 feet in width, which shall be maintained and provided on private
property held open or devoted for public use to provide unimpeded ingress
and egress for Fire Department and Police Department vehicles, equipment
and personnel. The lanes shall be laid out and properly signed by the
property owner to provide reasonable notice to the public of the existence
§ 186-1 HANOVER CODE § 204-2
1:158
of said lanes and the policing of said lanes. The Fire Commissioner56 and
the Police Chief of the Borough of Hanover shall both approve the layout
and signing of said fire lanes by the private property owner.
§ 204-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons who obstruct or cause the obstruction of a fire lane
or fire hydrant shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to fines
as provided for in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, of the Hanover
Borough Code, as amended from time to time. The minimum fine shall not
be less than $15.
§ 204-4. Stricter provisions to prevail.
Whenever any provision or requirement of the regulations of any
department of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania is more stringent or
stricter than a provision or requirement of this chapter, the applicable
provision or requirement shall supersede any provision or requirement of
this chapter.
Chapter 207
FIRE LIMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Fire Commissioner; Fire Department — See
Ch. 43.
Fire lanes — See Ch. 204.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 212.
§ 207-1. Boundaries delineated. [Amended 10-31-1968 by Ord. No.
1411]
Within the following defined limits, none but buildings of noncombustible
material and fireproof roofs shall be erected or reconstructed or removed
thereinto: all that central portion of the Borough of Hanover bounded by
the portions of the following streets and alleys, or within 50 feet of the
boundary line of said portions of said streets and alleys farthest from the
Center Square of the said Borough, to wit:
56.Editor's Note: Section 1 of Ord. No. 2216, adopted 4-22-2015, states that all references to
the title "Fire Commissioner" in Ch. 43 and other chapters and sections of the Code shall
include the title of "Fire Chief" or other position designated by the Borough Council as
the senior executive officer of the Borough Fire Department.
§ 204-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-1
1:159
Beginning at the intersection of Baltimore Street and Walnut Street and
running thence along said East Walnut Street to Locust Street, thence
along Locust Street to Broadway, thence along Allewelt Alley to Chestnut
Street, thence along Chestnut Street to Railroad Street, thence along
Railroad Street to Park Avenue, thence along Park Avenue to High Street,
thence along High Street to Frederick Street, thence along Centennial
Avenue (a continuation of High Street) to West Walnut Street, thence along
West Walnut Street to Baltimore Street, the place of beginning.
§ 207-2. Types of materials used; exceptions. [Amended 10-31-1968
by Ord. No. 1411]
In the fire zone as herein established by this chapter, no building shall be
constructed or rebuilt or enlarged or materially changed with materials
other than brick or stone, cement block, poured concrete, or stucco over
tile unless by special vote of Council, in which case a complete plan and
description shall be exhibited to the Council prior to the voting thereon;
provided that buildings occupied exclusively as dwellings or private garages
may be constructed with brick-veneer, cement block, concrete or hardburned
brick, terra-cotta or tile; provided further, that small buildings not
directly connected to larger buildings and not more than 15 feet high at
its highest point, 16 feet wide and 20 feet long, may be constructed of
corrugated iron, but in such small buildings no inflammable or volatile
liquids shall be kept, except gasoline which may be in the tank of an
automobile.
§ 207-3. Violation declared nuisance.
Any building or roof constructed contrary to the provisions of this chapter
is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
§ 207-4. Temporary buildings; permits.
The Borough Council may issue temporary permits, revocable at any time
by motion of Council, for the building of temporary wooden structures
for outhouses, provided plans are first submitted to and approved by the
Borough Council.
Chapter 212
FIRE PREVENTION
§ 212-1. Adoption of International Fire Code.
Except to the extent otherwise adopted by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as part of the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code, that
a certain document, being marked and designated as the International
Fire Code, 2015 edition, including Appendices A through M, inclusive, as
published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as
the Fire Code of the Borough of Hanover regulating and governing the
§ 207-1 HANOVER CODE § 212-1
1:160
safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising
from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, material and
devices, and from conditions hazardous to the life or property in the
building or premises as herein provided; providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Fire Code on file in the
office of the Borough of Hanover which are hereby referred to, adopted,
and made part hereof, as if fully set out in the chapter, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 212-2 of this
chapter.
§ 212-2. Revisions and modifications. [Amended 11-26-2019 by Ord.
No. 2291]
The following sections are hereby revised:
A. Section 101. Scope and general requirements.
(1) Section 101.1, Title, shall be amended to read:
"These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the Borough
of Hanover, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
(2) Section 101.2.1, Appendices, shall be amended to read:
"The provisions of Appendices A through M contained herein are
hereby adopted."
B. Section 105. Permits.
(1) Section 105.1.1, Permits required, shall be amended to add the
following paragraph:
"Permits required by this code shall be obtained from the Fire
Code Official. Permit fees shall be set by resolution, from time
to time, by the Borough Council and shall be paid prior to the
issuance of the permit. Issued permits shall be kept on the
premises designated therein at all time and shall be readily
available for inspection by the Fire Code Official."
(2) Section 105.6, Required operational permits, shall be amended to
read:
"The fire code official is authorized to issue operational permits for
the operations set forth in sections:"
105.6.15 Explosives
105.6.16 Fire Hydrants & Valves
105.6.32 Open Burning
(3) Section 105.7, Required construction permits, shall be amended to
read:
§ 212-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-2
1:161
"The fire code official is authorized to issue construction permits
for work as set forth in sections:"
105.7.1 Automatic Fire Extinguishing Systems
105.7.6 Fire Alarm & Detection Systems and
Related Equipment
105.7.13 Private Fire Hydrants
105.7.17 Standpipe Systems
C. Section 109. Violations.
(1) Section 109.4, Violations and penalties, shall be amended to read:
"Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or fail to comply
with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install,
alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the Fire Code Official, or of a permit
or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall, upon
conviction thereof before any Magisterial District Judge in a
summary proceeding, be sentenced for each such violation to
pay a fine not exceeding $1,000, and costs of such proceedings,
and in default thereof to undergo imprisonment for a period not
exceeding 30 days. Each day that a violation continues after due
notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
In addition to the penalties provided herein, the Borough of
Hanover may institute appropriate actions and proceedings of law
or in equity to prevent or restrain violations of this ordinance."
D. Section 111. Stop work order.
(1) Section 111.4, Failure to comply, shall be amended to read:
"Any person who shall continue any work after having been served
with a stop-work order, except such work as the person is directed
to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be
guilty of a Public Safety Ordinance Violation and punishable under
Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty of the Code of the Borough of
Hanover."
E. Section 307. Open burning, recreational fires and portable outdoor
fireplaces.
(1) Section 307.1.1, Prohibited open burning, shall be amended to
read:
"There shall be no opening burning of trash, leaves, yard waste,
and construction debris or for any other waste disposal purposes
in the Borough of Hanover. The Fire Code Official or the Fire Chief
is authorized to order the extinguishment of any open fire by the
property owner, tenant or the Fire Department."
§ 212-2 HANOVER CODE § 212-2
1:162
§ 212-3. Geographic limits.
The geographical limits referred to in certain sections of the 2015
International Fire Code as hereby established as follows:
(2) Section 307.2, Permit required, shall be amended to read:
"A permit shall be required for a bon fire or other open fires for
ceremonious reasons."
(3) Section 307.4.2, Recreational fires, shall be amended to read:
"Recreational fires are prohibited within the Borough of Hanover"
1. Exception: Recreational fires are permitted through the use
of an appliance which carries the "UL Listed" mark, is ULapproved
for the use, and is fueled by propane or natural gas.
The appliance and fuel source may not be within 15 feet of any
structure or combustibles.
(4) Section 307.4.3, Portable outdoor fireplaces, shall be amended to
read and exception deleted:
"The use of portable outdoor fireplaces, fire pits or rings,
chimineas or similar devices are prohibited within the Borough of
Hanover"
1. Exception: The use of any portable outdoor fireplaces or
similar appliances are permitted if the appliance carries the
"UL Listed" mark, is UL-approved for the use, and is fueled by
propane or natural gas. The appliance and fuel source may not
be within 15 feet of any structure or combustibles.
F. Section 505. Premises identification.
(1) Section 505.1, Address identification, shall be amended to read:
"Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a
position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road
fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their
background. Numbers shall be a minimum of three inches for
residential uses and 5 1/2 inches high for nonresidential uses."
A. Section 5704.2.9.6.1. Locations where aboveground tanks are
prohibited.
The storage of Class I and II liquids in aboveground tanks outside of
buildings is prohibited within the limits of the Borough of Hanover
Zoning Districts O-A, R3, R5, R6 and SC.
B. Section 5706.2.4.4. Locations where aboveground tanks are prohibited.
§ 212-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-3
1:163
Chapter 215
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building regulations — See Ch. 150.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 170.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 310.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
320.
Zoning — See Ch. 370.
The storage of Class I and II liquids in aboveground tanks outside of
buildings is prohibited within the limits of the Borough of Hanover
Zoning Districts O-A, R3, R5, R6 and SC.
C. Section 5806.2. Limitations.
Storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers outside
of buildings is prohibited within the limits of Borough of Hanover
Zoning Districts O-A, R3, R5, R6 and SC.
D. Section 6104.2. Maximum capacity within established limits.
Within the limits of those Borough of Hanover Zoning Districts in
which the storage of liquefied petroleum gas is not prohibited (i.e., in
districts other than O-A, R3, R5, R6 and SC), the aggregate capacity of
any one installation shall not exceed a water capacity of 2,000 gallons
(7570L).
§ 212-3 HANOVER CODE § 212-3
1:164
ARTICLE I
Authority
§ 215-1. Statutory authority.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,57 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Borough Council of the Borough of Hanover does
hereby order as follows.
57.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 215-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-1
1:165

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 215-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 215-3. Applicability.
§ 215-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 215-5. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the Borough of Hanover unless a permit
has been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
B. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not
imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas or that land uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
Hanover or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
§ 215-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-5
1:167
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
§ 215-5 HANOVER CODE § 215-5
1:168
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 215-6. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
§ 215-7. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the Borough of Hanover.
§ 215-8. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
A. The Borough Manager is hereby appointed to administer and enforce
this chapter and is referred to herein as the "Floodplain Administrator."
The Floodplain Administrator may; 1) fulfill the duties and
responsibilities set forth in these regulations, 2) delegate duties and
responsibilities set forth in these regulations to qualified technical
personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other employees, or 3) enter
into a written agreement or written contract with another agency or
private sector entity to administer specific provisions of these
regulations. Administration of any part of these regulations by another
entity shall not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to
the participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Program as set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 CFR
59.22.
B. In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain
Administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Borough Engineer.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this chapter and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities.
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended);58 the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended);59 the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);60 and the U.S. Clean
Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued
until this determination has been made.
C. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
58.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
59.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
60.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 215-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-8
1:169
§ 215-9. Application procedures and requirements.
history of repairs to the subject building so that any repetitive loss
concerns can be addressed before the permit is issued.
D. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
E. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
F. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Borough Council for
whatever action it considers necessary.
G. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all records
associated with the requirements of this chapter, including, but not
limited to, finished construction elevation data, permitting, inspection
and enforcement.
H. The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a
biennial report to FEMA concerning community participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
I. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments
of the Floodplain Administrator can be delegated from the person
identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies with the person
identified in the Floodplain Ordinance as the Floodplain Administrator/
Manager.
J. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34
Pa. Code and the 2009 International Building Code and the 2009
International Residential Code or latest revisions thereof.
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the Borough of Hanover.
Such application shall contain the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the owner of the land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
§ 215-8 HANOVER CODE § 215-9
1:170
(3) The name and address of the contractor.
(4) The site location, including address.
(5) A listing of other permits required.
(6) A brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including
a breakout of the flood-related cost and the market value of the
building before the flood damage occurred, where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement;
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant;
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
§ 215-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-9
1:171
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale, showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988.
(b) The elevation of the base flood.
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2009 International Building Code or the 2009
International Residential Code.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(b) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within any identified floodplain area (see
§ 215-17), when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not cause any increase in the
base flood elevation.
(c) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
(d) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 215-24F, Storage, and § 215-25, Development that may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 215-24F and 215-25 which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
§ 215-9 HANOVER CODE § 215-9
1:172
§ 215-10. Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
shall be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to the County
Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of
a permit. The recommendations of the Conservation District shall be
considered by the Floodplain Administrator for possible incorporation into
the proposed plan.
§ 215-11. Review of application by other agencies and individuals.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal
Engineer, etc.) for review and comment.
§ 215-12. Changes to application, permit or plans.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests
for any such change shall be in writing and shall be submitted by the
applicant to Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
§ 215-13. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard
which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit and the date of
its issuance and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 215-25
during a base flood.
(e) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(f) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan to
implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control
meeting the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection.
D. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
municipality, based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 215-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-14
1:173
§ 215-14. Start of construction; time limits.
§ 215-15. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance of the development permit. Work
shall also be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of
the permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The issuance of
development permit does not refer to the zoning approval. The "actual
start of construction" means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any
work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration
of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
B. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, who sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the
Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request, and the original
permit is compliant with the ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect at the
time the extension is granted.
A. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance.
(3) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the
performance of any act it requires.
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state.
§ 215-14 HANOVER CODE § 215-15
1:174
§ 215-16. Appeals.
(5) Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order or direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction, shall pay a
fine to Borough of Hanover of not less than $100 nor more than $600,
plus costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties, all other
actions are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any
violation of or noncompliance with this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. All such persons
shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
or relocated in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by the
Borough Council to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be
filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or
action of the Floodplain Administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider
the appeal in accordance with the Municipal Planning Code and any
other local ordinance.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this
state, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.
§ 215-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-16
1:175

ARTICLE IV
Floodplain Areas
§ 215-17. Identification.
§ 215-18. Description.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. The identified floodplain area shall be:
(1) Any areas of the Borough of Hanover classified as special flood
hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated
December 16, 2015, and issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof,
including all digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance
Study; and
(2) Any community-identified flood hazard areas.
B. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs and any subsequent revisions and
amendments are hereby adopted by the Borough of Hanover and
declared to be a part of this chapter.
A. The Floodway Area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and the
FIRM as floodway and which represent the channel of a watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation by more
than one foot at any point. This term shall also include floodway areas
which have been identified in other available studies or sources of
information for those special flood hazard areas where no floodway has
been identified in the FIS and FIRM.
(1) Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development,
shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) Within any floodway area, no new construction or development
shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
B. The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood
elevations have been provided.
(1) The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared
§ 215-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-18
1:177
§ 215-19. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Borough
Council where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or
person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such
change to the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained from
FEMA. Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six months
after the date such information becomes available, a community shall notify
FEMA of the changes to the special flood hazard area by submitting
technical or scientific data. See § 215-22B for situations where FEMA
notification is required.
§ 215-20. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Borough of Hanover and any
party aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to the
Borough Council. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 215-21. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other
corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the community
shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary
by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided and a
floodway has been delineated.
C. The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the
FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no base
flood elevations have been provided. For these areas, elevation and
floodway information from other federal, state, or other acceptable
sources shall be used when available. Where other acceptable
information is not available, the base flood elevation shall be
determined by using the elevation of a point on the boundary of the
identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site. In lieu
of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to determine
the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques.
Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the municipality.
D. Community-identified flood hazard areas shall be those areas where
Borough of Hanover has identified local flood hazard or ponding areas,
as delineated and adopted on a Local Flood Hazard Map using best
available topographic data and locally derived information such as flood
of record, historic high water marks, soils or approximate study
methodologies.
§ 215-18 HANOVER CODE § 215-21
1:178
changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in
areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or
exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
§ 215-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-21
1:179

ARTICLE V
Technical Provisions
§ 215-22. General requirements.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality and until all required permits or approvals have first
been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. When a community proposes to permit the following encroachments:
any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations within
the floodway; or any development occurring in Zones A1-30 and Zone
AE without a designated floodway which will cause a rise of more than
one foot in the base flood elevation; or alteration or relocation of a
stream (including but not limited to installing culverts and bridges), the
applicant shall (as per 44 CFR Part 65.12):
(1) Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to
permitting the encroachments to occur.
(2) Upon receipt of the Administrator's conditional approval of map
change and prior to approving the proposed encroachments, a
community shall provide evidence to FEMA of the adoption of
floodplain management ordinances incorporating the increased
base flood elevations and/or revised floodway reflecting the postproject
condition.
(3) Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a community
shall provide as-built certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map
revision upon receipt of such certifications in accordance with 44
CFR Part 67.
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
§ 215-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-22
1:181
§ 215-23. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
Within any identified floodplain area, any new construction or substantial
improvements shall be prohibited. If a variance is obtained for new
construction or substantial improvements in the identified floodplain area
in accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then the following provisions
apply:
D. Within any identified floodplain area, no new construction or
development shall be located within the area measured 50 feet
landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
A. Residential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to or above the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to or above
the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 215-18C of this chapter.
(3) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401
through 405, as amended) shall be utilized, where they are more
restrictive.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to or above the regulatory
flood elevation or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
floodproofed up to or above the regulatory flood elevation
determined in accordance with § 215-18C of this chapter.
(3) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
§ 215-22 HANOVER CODE § 215-23
1:182
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as
amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent standard.
All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be
accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect which states that the proposed design and
methods of construction are in conformance with the abovereferenced
standards.
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401
through 405, as amended) shall be utilized, where they are more
restrictive.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basemen shall
be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces
on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also includes
crawl spaces.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement, as
defined in this chapter, must comply with all ordinance requirements
that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance
requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National
Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places
must be obtained from the Secretary of the Interior or the State
Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from ordinance
requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
§ 215-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-23
1:183
§ 215-24. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
E. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances, such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement and shall be designed to
automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Fill. Within any identified floodplain area the use of fill shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply. If fill is used, it shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points;
§ 215-23 HANOVER CODE § 215-24
1:184
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted;
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring, or settling;
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to and
approved by the Floodplain Administrator; and
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall ensure proper drainage along streets and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No.
348, "Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages," and the
International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems, shall be located, elevated (where possible), and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in
times of flooding could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 215-25, Development that may endanger human life, shall
be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or floodproofed to
the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
§ 215-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-24
1:185
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain, without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine
or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
§ 215-24 HANOVER CODE § 215-24
1:186
§ 215-25. Development that may endanger human life.
Within any identified floodplain area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A below, shall be prohibited.
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405), as
amended, and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to the
above and other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent
that they are more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this
chapter:
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition
thereof: Sections 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612 and 3402 and
Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest
edition thereof: Sections R104, R105, R109 and R322, Appendix E,
and Appendix J.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,61
and the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which will be used for the production or storage of
any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or will be used
for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550
gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances on the premises; or will involve the production,
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances shall be subject
to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other applicable
provisions. The following is a list of materials and substances that are
considered dangerous to human life:
Acetone
Ammonia
Benzene
Calcium carbide
Carbon disulfide
Celluloid
Chlorine
Hydrochloric acid
Hydrocyanic acid
Magnesium
61.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 215-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-25
1:187
§ 215-26. Special requirements for subdivisions and development.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 10
lots or at least two acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
Conditional Letter of Map Revision and Letter of Map Revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 215-27. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen
Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides)
Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.)
Phosphorus
Potassium
Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise
regulated
Sodium
Sulphur and sulphur products
A. Within any identified floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply.
B. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all manufactured
homes and any improvements thereto shall be:
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation;
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation;
(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement; and
(4) Have all ductwork and utilities, including HVAC/heat pump,
elevated to the regulatory flood elevation.
C. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturer's installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 International
Residential Building Code or the "U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing," 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto, and 34 Pa.
Code, Chapters 401 through 405, shall apply.
§ 215-25 HANOVER CODE § 215-27
1:188
§ 215-28. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Within any identified floodplain area, recreational vehicles shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply:
D. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or the most recent revisions thereto and 34
Pa. Code, as amended, where appropriate and/or applicable to units
where the manufacturer's standards for anchoring cannot be provided
or were not established for the proposed units' installation.
A. Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must:
(1) Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in § 215-27.
§ 215-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-28
1:189

ARTICLE VI
Prohibited Uses
§ 215-29. Prohibited activities.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, the following activities shall be
prohibited within any identified floodplain area:
A. The commencement of any of the following activities, or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision. Within any Floodway Area (FW), manufactured
homes shall be prohibited.
C. Within any Floodway Area (FW), any development which may endanger
human life is prohibited.
§ 215-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-29
1:191

ARTICLE VII
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 215-30. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 215-31 shall apply.
§ 215-31. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any identified floodplain area that would cause any increase in
base flood elevation. In A Area(s)/District(s), base flood elevations are
determined using the methodology in § 215-18C.
B. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its market value shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
C. The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
D. Within any Floodway Area/District (see § 215-18A), no new construction
or development shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is
obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional
Office.
E. Within any AE Area/District without floodway (see § 215-18B), no new
construction or development shall be located within the area measured
50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse unless the
appropriate permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
F. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of
its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible.
G. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be undertaken
only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 215-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-31
1:193

ARTICLE VIII
Variances
§ 215-32. Grant of relief authorized.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
the Borough of Hanover may, upon request, grant relief from the strict
application of the requirements.
§ 215-33. Procedures and conditions.
A. Requests for variances shall be considered by the Borough of Hanover
in accordance with the procedures contained in § 215-16 and the
following:
(1) No variance shall be granted within any identified floodplain area
that would cause any increase in base flood elevation. In an A Area/
District, base flood elevations are determined using the
methodology in § 215-18C.
(2) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(3) In granting any variance, the Borough of Hanover shall attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers
necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare
and to achieve the objectives of this chapter.
(4) Whenever a variance is granted, the Borough of Hanover shall
notify the applicant in writing that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(5) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Borough of Hanover
shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will neither result in an
unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public
expense nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the
public or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
§ 215-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-33
1:195
B. A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be
maintained by the Borough of Hanover. In addition, a report of all
variances granted during the year shall be included in the annual report
to FEMA.
C. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent-annual-chance flood.
§ 215-33 HANOVER CODE § 215-33
1:196
ARTICLE IX
Definitions
§ 215-34. Interpretation of terms.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 215-35. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood" or
one-percent-annual-chance flood).
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
§ 215-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-35
1:197
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
D.
§ 215-35 HANOVER CODE § 215-35
1:198
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — An umbrella term that includes all of
the areas within which the community has selected to enforce floodplain
regulations. It will always include the area identified as the special flood
hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Insurance Study
but may include additional areas identified by the community. See §§ 215-17
and 215-18 for the specifics on what areas the community has included in
the identified floodplain area.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed area,
used solely for the parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest
floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and built
so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term includes park trailers, travel trailers and recreational and other
similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive
days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring, mechanical or other work affecting public
health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after December 23, 2015, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. Any construction started after December
16, 1981, and before December 23, 2015, is subject to the ordinance
in effect at the time the permit was issued, provided that the start of
construction was within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
§ 215-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-35
1:199
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after
the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated 12/16/
1981, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be compliant
with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or before the
community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated 12/16/1981,
whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be compliant with
the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds
25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails, and new manufactured home parks/subdivisions and
substantial improvements to such existing parks, when such development is
located in all or a designated portion of a floodplain.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
A. Built on a single chassis.
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections.
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck.
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 215-35 HANOVER CODE § 215-35
1:200
days after the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The actual start means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
"actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above the ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs,
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, of which the cost equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred substantial damage or repetitive loss, regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities, whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
§ 215-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-35
1:201
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 215-35 HANOVER CODE § 215-35
1:202
ARTICLE X
Enactment
§ 215-36. Effective date.
This chapter shall be effective on December 23, 2015, and shall remain in
force until modified, amended or rescinded by Borough of Hanover, York,
Pennsylvania.
§ 215-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-36
1:203
Chapter 217
FOOD HANDLERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I. Eating and drinking establishments — See
Ch. 137, Part 2.
§ 217-1. Employee requirements. [Amended 10-31-1968 by Ord. No.
1411]
It shall be unlawful for any person as an employee to handle, serve, sell
or offer for sale in any establishment, including but not limited to hotels,
restaurants, bakeries, potato chip factories and meat markets, any food or
food products except that same be in a sealed package or container, unless
and until such person shall have been examined by a physician and certified
by such physician to be fit to handle such food in a manner so that disease
will not be transmitted hereby.
§ 217-2. Obligations of employer. [Amended 10-31-1968 by Ord. No.
1411]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to employ any person
and/or permit any person to handle, serve, sell or offer for sale in any
establishment, including but not limited to hotels, restaurants, bakeries,
potato chip factories and meat markets, any food or food product except
that same be in a sealed package or container, unless and until such person
to be employed and/or permitted to handle, serve, sell or offer for sale food
or food products shall have been examined and certified as stated in § 217-1
hereof.
§ 217-3. Examination procedures. [Amended 10-31-1968 by Ord.
No. 1411]
Each such examination as required by §§ 217-1 and 217-2 hereof shall be as
prescribed by the Hanover Board of Health.
§ 217-4. Certificate of fitness.
A. When each such person shall have been examined and found to be free
of communicable diseases, the physician giving such examination shall
issue a certificate, in substantially the following form: (The forms are to
be available at the office of the Secretary of the Borough of Hanover.)
§ 215-36 HANOVER CODE § 217-4
1:204
§ 217-5. Filing of certificate.
Upon receipt of a certificate of fitness, as aforesaid, from the examining
physician, the person to whom the certificate is issued shall file the same,
within five days from the date of its issue, with the Health Officer of the
Borough of Hanover.
Chapter 230
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 147.
Building regulations — See Ch. 150.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 170.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 212.
Plumbing — See Ch. 263.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 286.
Sewer use regulations — See Ch. 290.
Solid waste — See Ch. 308.
The Borough of Hanover
Board of Health
CERTIFICATE OF HEALTH
I certify that I have examined __________ of __________ Street, employed
by __________ of __________ in accordance with the regulations required
by this certificate, and believe (him/her) to be free from communicable
disease and that (he/she) is not a carrier of communicable disease
organisms: Height _____ Weight _____ Build _____ Complexion _____
Eyes _____ Hair _____ Identifying Marks ___________ Date
_______________
M. D.
B. No such certificate shall be executed by the examining physician
unless, upon such examination, the person examined is found to be free
of communicable diseases and is further found not to be a carrier of
such diseases.
§ 217-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 217-5
1:205

ARTICLE I
Minimum Standards
§ 230-1. Definitions.
A. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of this chapter:
BASEMENT — A portion of a building located partly underground, but
having less than 1/2 its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average
grade of the adjoining ground.
CELLAR — A portion of a building located partly or wholly
underground, and having 1/2 or more than 1/2 of its clear floor-toceiling
height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
DWELLING — Any building which is wholly or partly used or intended
to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants; provided, that
temporary housing, as hereinafter defined, shall not be regarded as a
dwelling.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a
dwelling and forming a single habitable unit, with facilities which are
used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents
or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing
or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by
poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping; or by any other recognized
and legal pest elimination methods approved by the Health Officer.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HABITABLE ROOM — A room or enclosed floor space used or intended
to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding
bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers or
communicating corridors, closets and storage spaces.
HEALTH OFFICER — The legally designated health authority of the
Borough of Hanover, or his authorized representative.
INFESTATION — The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any
insects, rodents or other pests.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any dwelling containing more than two
dwelling units.
OCCUPANT — Any person, over one year of age, living, sleeping,
cooking or eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling unit or
rooming unit.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a building
or part thereof in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
§ 230-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-1
1:207
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, corporation, association or
partnership.
PLUMBING — Includes all of the following supplied facilities and
equipment: gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage
disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers,
lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clotheswashing machines,
catch basins, drains, vents and any other similar supplied fixtures,
together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines.
ROOMING HOUSE — Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling,
containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the
owner or operator to three or more persons who are not husband or
wife, son or daughter, mother or father or sister or brother of the owner
or operator.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but
not for cooking or eating purposes.
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage and compost; and the term shall include the residue from the
burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible material, paper,
rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches,
yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass crockery and
dust.
SUPPLIED — Paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control of
the owner or operator.
TEMPORARY HOUSING — Any tent, trailer or other structure used for
human shelter, which is designed to be transportable and which is not
attached to the ground, to another structure or to any utilities system
on the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days.
Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or
without accompanying actual possession thereof; or
(1)
Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling
unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix,
administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of
the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner
shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this chapter, and of
rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent
as if he were the owner.
(2)
B. Meaning of certain words. Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling
units," "rooming house," "rooming unit," and "premises" are used in this
chapter, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the
words "or any part thereof."
§ 230-1 HANOVER CODE § 230-2
1:208
§ 230-2. Inspection of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and
premises.
The Health Officer is hereby authorized and directed to make inspections
to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and
premises located within this Borough of Hanover, in order that he may
perform his duty of safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants
of dwellings and of the general public. For the purpose of making such
inspections, the Health Officer is hereby authorized to enter, examine and
survey, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6.00 p.m., any day except Sunday,
all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and premises. The Health
Officer, provided public health and welfare are not in jeopardy, shall in
all cases of scheduled or routine inspection give not less than seven days'
written notice to the owner of the property, of the time such inspection is to
be made, so that the owner may be present. The owner or occupant of every
dwelling, dwelling unit and rooming unit, or the person in charge thereof,
shall give the Health Officer free access to such dwelling, dwelling unit or
rooming unit and its premises at all reasonable times, for the purpose of
such inspection, examination and survey. Every occupant of a dwelling or
dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or his agent or employee, access
to any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit or its premises at all reasonable
times, for the purpose of making inspections and such repairs or alterations
as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter
or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or any lawful order issued
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 230-3. Enforcement; service of notices and orders; hearings.
A. Wherever the Health Officer determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of
this chapter or of any rule or regulations adopted pursuant thereto, he
shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person or persons
responsible therefor, as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued.
(3) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires.
(4) Be served upon the owner or his agent, and the occupant, as the
case may require; provided, that such notice shall be deemed to be
properly served upon such owner or agent, or upon such occupant,
if a copy thereof is served upon him personally; or if a copy thereof
is sent by registered mail to his last known address; or if a copy
thereof is posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling
affected by the notice; or if he is served with such notice by any
other method authorized or required under the laws of this state.
§ 230-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-3
1:209
(5) Such notice may contain an outline of remedial action which, if
taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter and
with rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
B. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection
with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter or of any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto may request and shall be granted
a hearing on the matter before the Board of Health, provided that such
person shall file in the office of the Health Officer a written petition
requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the
grounds therefor within 10 days after the day the notice was served.
Upon receipt of such petition, the Health Officer shall set a time and
place within five days for such hearing and shall give the petitioner
written notice thereof. The time and place set by the Health Officer
shall be set far enough in advance to allow the petitioner at least five
days to prepare rebuttal. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given
an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should be
modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not later than
30 days after the day on which the petition was filed; provided, that
upon application of the petitioner, the Board of Health may postpone
the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such thirty-day
period, if in its judgment the petitioner has submitted a good and
sufficient reason for such postponement.
C. Within five days after such hearing, the Board of Health shall sustain,
modify or withdraw the notice, depending upon its finding as to
whether the provisions of this chapter and of the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with. If the Board of
Health sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be an
order. Any notice served pursuant to § 230-3A of this chapter shall
automatically become an order if a written petition for a hearing is not
filed in the office of the Health Officer within 10 days after such notice
is served. After a hearing in the case of any notice suspending any
permit required by this chapter or by any rule or regulation adopted
pursuant thereto, when such notice has been sustained by the Board of
Health, the permit shall be deemed to have been revoked. Any such
permit which has been suspended by a notice shall be deemed to be
automatically revoked if a petition for hearing is not filed in the office of
the Health Officer within 10 days after such notice is served.
D. The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and decision of
the Board of Health, shall be summarized, reduced to writing and
entered as a matter of public record in the office of the Health Officer.
Such record shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued in
connection with the matter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the
Health Officer may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent
jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of this state.
E. Whenever the Health Officer finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health, he may, without
notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an
§ 230-3 HANOVER CODE § 230-3
1:210
§ 230-4. Adoption of rules and regulations by Board of Health.
The Board of Health is hereby authorized to make and adopt such written
rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter, provided that such rules and regulations shall
not be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter. The Board of Health
shall file a certified copy of all rules and regulations which it may adopt
with the Secretary of the Borough of Hanover. Such rules and regulations
shall, when approved by Borough Council, have the same force and effect
as the provisions of this chapter, and the penalty for violation thereof shall
be the same as the penalty for violation of the provisions of this chapter, as
hereinafter provided.
§ 230-5. Minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities.
No person shall let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit,
for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein, which does not
comply with the following requirements:
emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems
necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions
of this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to
whom such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but
upon petition to the Health Officer, shall be afforded a hearing before
the Board of Health as soon as possible. After such hearing, depending
upon its finding as to whether the provisions of this chapter and of
the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied
with, the Board of Health shall continue such order in effect, or modify
it or revoke it.
F. A dwelling unit or dwelling units that make up a single structure which
the Board of Health has ruled to be unfit for human occupancy and upon
which a notice of such ruling is posted shall be made either fit for
human occupancy or razed and the ground leveled, within a period of
one year from the date of such ruling. If after the period of one year
75% of the necessary work to make the structure fit for human
occupancy has not been completed, the Health Officer shall advertise in
two issues of a local newspaper for bidders to raze the structure and
level the ground, and post a typewritten notice of such advertisement
on the premises in question. Thirty days after the date of the first
advertisement, the Health Officer shall award a contract to the lowest
bidder for razing the structure and leveling the ground. All costs shall
be paid by the owner of the property in question.
A. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good working
condition and properly connected to a water and sewer system in
accordance with Chapter 263, Part 2, Plumbing Code, within six months
after the effective date of this chapter.
B. Every dwelling unit (except as otherwise permitted under § 230-5D)
shall contain a room which affords privacy to a person within said room
§ 230-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-5
1:211
and which is equipped with a flush water closet and a lavatory basin in
good working condition and properly connected to a water and sewer
system in accordance with the Borough Plumbing Code, within one year
after the effective date of this chapter. However, the lavatory basin may
be located immediately adjacent to the room in which the commode
is located if the size of room or structural design does not permit its
location therein.
C. Every dwelling unit (except as otherwise permitted under § 230-5D)
shall contain within a room which affords privacy to a person within
said room, a bathtub or shower in good working condition and properly
connected to a water and sewer system in accordance with the Borough
Plumbing Code, within 18 months after the effective date of this
chapter.
D. The occupants of not more than two dwelling units may share a single
flush water closet, a single lavatory basin and a single bathtub or
shower, if:
(1) Neither of the two dwelling units contains more than two rooms;
provided that, for the purposes of this subsection, a kitchenette or
an efficiency kitchen with 60 square feet or less of floor area shall
not be counted as a room; and that
(2) The habitable area of each of such dwelling units shall equal not
more than 250 square feet of floor area; and that
(3) Such water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be in
good working condition and properly connected to a water and
sewer system approved by the Health Officer.
E. Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower required
under the provisions of § 230-5A, B, C and D of this chapter shall be
properly connected with both hot- and cold-water lines.
F. Garbage disposal. [Amended 12-29-1980 by Ord. No. 1723]
(1) Every owner of a rental dwelling shall be responsible for paying the
refuse service fees for each dwelling unit under his control. The
amounts of such fees are determined by ordinance.
(2) Every dwelling unit shall have adequate garbage disposal facilities
or garbage storage containers, the type and location of which are
approved by the Health Officer.
G. Every dwelling shall have supplied water-heating facilities which are
properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition,
are properly connected with the hot-water lines required under the
provisions of § 230-5E of this chapter and are capable of heating water
to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be
drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower
at a temperature of not less than 120° F. Such supplied water-heating
§ 230-5 HANOVER CODE § 230-5
1:212
§ 230-6. Minimum standards for light, ventilation and heating.
No person shall let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit,
for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following
requirements:
facilities shall be capable of meeting the requirements of this
subsection when the dwelling or dwelling unit heating facilities
required under the provisions of § 230-6E of this chapter are not in
operation.
H. Every dwelling unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress
leading to safe and open space at ground level, as required by the laws
of this state and the Borough of Hanover.
A. Where feasible, every habitable room shall have at least one window or
skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window
area, measured between stops and 36 inches above the floor level, for
every habitable room, shall be 5% of the floor area of such room.
Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a window of any
such room and such light-obstruction structures are located less than
two feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling
of the room, such a window shall not be deemed to face directly to the
outdoors and shall not be included as contributing to the required
minimum total window area. Whenever the only window in a room is a
skylight-type window in the top of such room, the total window area of
such skylight shall equal at least 5% of the total floor area of such room.
B. Where feasible, every habitable room shall have at least one window or
skylight which can easily be opened, or such other device as will
adequately ventilate the room. The total of openable window area in
every habitable room shall be equal to at least 45% of the minimum
window area size or minimum skylight-type window size, as required in
§ 230-6A of this chapter, except where there is supplied some other
device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the Health
Officer.
C. Where feasible, every bathroom and water closet compartment shall
comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms
contained in § 230-6A and B, except that no window or skylight shall be
required in adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closet
compartments equipped with a ventilation system which operates in
conjunction with the bathroom lights and is approved by the Health
Officer.
D. Every habitable room of such dwelling shall contain at least two
separate floor- or wall-type electric convenience outlets, or one such
convenience outlet and one supplied ceiling-type electric light fixture;
and every water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnace
room shall contain at least one supplied ceiling- or wall-type electric
light fixture and one convenience outlet. Every public hall shall have
§ 230-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-6
1:213
§ 230-7. Safe and sanitary maintenance of parts of dwellings and
dwelling units.
No person shall let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit,
for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following
requirements:
one ceiling- or wall-type fixture on each floor. Every such outlet and
fixture shall be properly installed, shall be maintained in good and
safe working condition and shall be connected to the source of electric
power in a safe manner.
E. Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly installed,
are maintained in safe and good working condition and are capable of
safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and
water closet compartments in every dwelling unit located therein to a
temperature of at least 70° F. at a distance five feet above floor level
when outside temperature reaches 0° F.
F. Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling containing five
or more dwelling units shall be adequately lighted at all times. Every
public hall and stairway in structures devoted solely to dwelling
occupancy and containing not more than four dwelling units may be
supplied with conveniently located light switches, controlling an
adequate lighting system which may be turned on when needed,
instead of full-time lighting.
G. During that portion of each year when the Health Officer deems it
necessary for protection against mosquitoes, flies and other insects,
any door used for ventilation opening directly from a dwelling unit to
outdoor space shall have supplied screens and a self-closing device; and
50% of the windows or other devices with openings to outdoor space,
used or intended to be used for ventilation, shall likewise be supplied
with screens. In the absence of an agreement to the contrary, it shall be
the responsibility of the owner to provide all necessary screens at the
time of renting or leasing the property to each new tenant or lessee.
Thereafter, it shall be the responsibility of the renter, tenant or lessee to
maintain said screens in a proper condition so long as the property is in
use by said renter, tenant or lessee.
H. Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for
ventilation, and every other opening to a basement which might provide
an entry for rodents, shall be supplied with a screen or such other
device as will effectively prevent their entrance.
A. Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling and roof shall be reasonably
weathertight, watertight and rodentproof; shall be capable of affording
privacy; and shall be kept in good repair.
§ 230-6 HANOVER CODE § 230-7
1:214
§ 230-8. Minimum space, use and location requirements.
No person shall let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit,
for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following
requirements:
B. Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be
reasonably weathertight, watertight and rodentproof; and shall be kept
in sound working condition and good repair.
C. Every inside and outside stair, every porch and every appurtenance
thereto shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that
normal use may cause to be placed thereon; and shall be kept in sound
condition and good repair.
D. Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly
installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from
defects, leaks and obstructions.
E. Every water closet compartment floor surface and bathroom floor
surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably
impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a
clean and sanitary condition.
F. Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is required
under this chapter shall be so installed that it will function safely and
effectively, and shall be maintained in satisfactory working condition.
G. No owner shall let to any other occupant any vacant dwelling unit
unless it is clean, sanitary and fit for human occupancy.
A. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 100 square feet of floor space
for the first occupant thereof and at least 50 additional square feet of
floor space for every additional occupant thereof, the floor space to be
calculated on the basis of total habitable room area.
B. In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet
of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more
than one occupant shall contain at least 30 square feet of floor space for
each occupant thereof.
C. No dwelling or dwelling unit shall be constructed, altered or
rehabilitated so that two or more sleeping rooms shall have such room
arrangements that access to a bathroom or water closet compartment
intended for use by occupants of more than one sleeping room can be
had only by going through another sleeping room; nor shall room
arrangements be such that access to a sleeping room can be had only
by going through another sleeping room or a bathroom or water closet
compartment. The provision of this section shall not apply if the
dwelling or dwelling unit is occupied by a single family consisting of
husband and/or wife and their immediate family. The provisions of this
§ 230-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-8
1:215
§ 230-9. Responsibilities of owners and occupants.
section shall not apply if three or more persons of the same sex share
a common bathroom or water closet compartment located on the same
floor as the dwelling unit.
D. At least 1/2 of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling
height of at least seven feet; and the floor area of that part of any room
where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be considered as
part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of the room for
the purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy
thereof.
E. No basement or cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or
dwelling unit unless:
(1) The floor and walls are free of leakage of underground and surface
runoff water and there is no evidence of dampness.
(2) The total of window area in each room is equal to at least the
minimum window area sizes as required in § 230-6A of this chapter.
(3) The total of openable window area in each room is equal to at least
the minimum as required under § 230-6B of this chapter, except
where there is supplied some other device affording adequate
ventilation and approved by the Health Officer.
A. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall
be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the
shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.
B. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and
sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit and premises
thereof which he occupies and controls.
C. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his
rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner.
D. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his
garbage and any other organic waste which might provide food for
rodents, in a clean and sanitary manner, by placing it in the garbage
disposal facilities or garbage storage containers required by § 230-5F of
this chapter. It shall be the responsibility of the occupant to furnish
such facilities or containers.
E. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for
hanging all screens whenever the same are required under the
provisions of this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto, except where the owner has agreed to supply such service.
F. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be
responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests
therein or on the premises. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of
§ 230-8 HANOVER CODE § 230-9
1:216
§ 230-10. Rooming houses.
No person shall operate a rooming house, or shall occupy or let to another
for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house, except in compliance
with the provisions of every section of this chapter, except the provisions of
§§ 230-5 and 230-9.
this subsection, whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner
to maintain a dwelling in a ratproof or reasonably insectproof condition,
extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever
infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling,
or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more
dwelling units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the
owner.
G. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures
therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for
the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof.
A. No person shall operate a rooming house unless he holds a valid
rooming house permit issued by the Health Officer, in the name of the
operator and for the specific dwelling or dwelling unit. The operator
shall apply to the Health Officer within 30 days after the effective date
of this code for such permit, which shall be issued by the Health Officer
upon compliance by the operator with the applicable provisions of this
chapter and of any rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. This
permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the rooming
house, at all times. No such permit shall be transferable. Every person
holding such a permit shall give notice in writing to the Health Officer
within 24 hours after having sold, transferred, given away or otherwise
disposed of ownership of, interest in or control of any rooming house.
Such notice shall include the name and address of the person
succeeding to the ownership or control of such rooming house. Every
rooming house permit shall expire at the end of the calendar year,
unless sooner suspended or revoked as hereinafter provided. The
provisions of this section shall not apply if three or less persons of the
same sex share a common bathroom or water closet compartment
located on the same floor as the dwelling unit.
B. Any person whose application for a permit to operate a rooming house
has been denied may request and shall be granted a hearing on the
matter before the Board of Health, under the procedure provided by
§ 230-3 of this chapter.
C. Whenever upon inspection of any rooming house the Health Officer
finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any
provision of this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto, the Health Officer shall give notice in writing to the operator of
such rooming house that unless such conditions or practices are
corrected within a reasonable period, to be determined by the Health
Officer, the operator's rooming house permit will be suspended. At the
§ 230-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-10
1:217
end of such period, the Health Officer shall reinspect such rooming
house, and if he finds that such conditions or practices have not been
corrected, he shall give notice in writing to the operator that the latter's
permit has been suspended. Upon receipt of notice of suspension, such
operator shall immediately cease operation of such rooming house, and
no person shall occupy for sleeping or living purposes any rooming unit
therein.
D. Any person whose permit to operate a rooming house has been
suspended, or who has received notice from the Health Officer that his
permit is to be suspended unless existing conditions or practices at his
rooming house are corrected, may request and shall be granted a
hearing on the matter before the Board of Health, under the procedure
provided by § 230-3 of this chapter; provided that if no petition for such
hearing is filed within 10 days following the day on which such permit
was suspended, such permit shall be deemed to have been
automatically revoked.
E. At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower,
properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the
Health Officer, and in good working condition, shall be supplied for
each eight persons or fraction thereof residing within a rooming house,
including members of the operator's family whenever they share the
use of the said facilities; provided that in a rooming house where rooms
are let only to males, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than
1/2 the required number of water closets. In case of new construction,
alteration, rehabilitation, all such facilities shall be so located within
the dwelling as to be reasonably accessible from a common hall or
passageway to all persons sharing such facilities. Every lavatory basin
and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot water at all times. No
such facilities shall be located in a basement except by written approval
of the Health Officer.
F. The operator of every rooming house shall change supplied bed linen
and towels therein at least once each week, and prior to the letting of
any room to any occupant.
G. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person shall contain
at least 50 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by more than one person shall contain at least 30
square feet of floor space for each additional occupant thereof.
H. Every rooming unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress
leading to safe and open space at ground level, as required by the laws
of this state and the Borough of Hanover.
I. The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for the
sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors and ceilings; and for
maintenance of a sanitary condition in every other part of the rooming
house; and he shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance
§ 230-10 HANOVER CODE § 230-10
1:218
§ 230-11. Designation of unfit dwellings; condemnation.
The designation of dwellings or dwelling units as unfit for human habitation
and the procedure for the condemnation and placarding of such unfit
dwellings or dwelling units shall be carried out in compliance with the
following requirements:
of the entire premises where the entire structure or building is leased
or occupied by the operator.
J. Every provision of this chapter which applies to rooming houses shall
also apply to hotels, except to the extent that any such provision may be
found in conflict with the laws of this state or with the lawful
regulations of any state board or agency.
A. Any dwelling or dwelling unit which shall be found to have any of the
following defects shall be condemned as unfit for human habitation and
shall be so designated and placarded by the Health Officer:
(1) One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, insanitary, unsafe
or vermin-infested that it creates a serious hazard to the health or
safety of the occupants or of the public.
(2) One which lacks illumination, ventilation or sanitation facilities
adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or of the
public.
(3) One which because of its general condition or location is insanitary,
or otherwise dangerous, to the health or safety of the occupants or
of the public.
B. Any dwelling or dwelling unit condemned as unfit for human habitation,
and so designated and placarded by the Health Officer, shall be vacated
within a reasonable time as ordered by the Health Officer, but in no
case shall it exceed 30 days.
C. No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned and placarded
as unfit for human habitation shall again be used for human habitation
until written approval is secured from, and such placard is removed by,
the Health Officer. The Health Officer shall remove such placard
whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and
placarding action were based have been eliminated.
D. No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling or
dwelling unit which has been condemned as unfit for human habitation
and placarded as such, except as provided in § 230-11C.
E. Any person affected by any notice or order relating to the condemning
and placarding of a dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit for human
habitation may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter
before the Board of Health, under the procedure set forth in § 230-3 of
this chapter.
§ 230-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-12
1:219
§ 230-12. Violations and penalties; repealer; when effective.
§ 230-13. Conflicting provisions.
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with
a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or code
of the Borough of Hanover existing on the effective date of this chapter,
the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and
protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. In any
case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a
provision of any other ordinance or code of the Borough of Hanover existing
on the effective date of this chapter, which establishes a lower standard
for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people,
the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to prevail, and such other
ordinances or codes are hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that
they may be found in conflict with this chapter.
§ 230-14. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective 3 November 1965.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof before the Mayor or any Magisterial District Judge of
the Borough of Hanover, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$100 plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine
and costs, to imprisonment in the York County Jail for not more than 30
days. Each day that a violation is permitted to continue without
correction shall constitute a separate offense punishable by like fine or
penalty.
B. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this chapter, and specifically Ordinance No. 741, enacted December 20,
1950, as amended, are hereby repealed.
C. This chapter shall become effective immediately upon its recording and
publication.
D. The Secretary of the Borough of Hanover shall attach to the ordinance
book of the Borough of Hanover a copy of the National Plumbing Code
as herein incorporated by reference,62 with the same force and effect as
if duly recorded therein.
62.Editor's Note: See Ch. 263, Part 2, Plumbing Code.
§ 230-12 HANOVER CODE § 230-14
1:220
ARTICLE II
Appendix
§ 230-15. Definitions.
The definitions contained in § 230-1 of this chapter, together with the
definitions contained in this section, shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of these regulations:
HOUSING ORDINANCE — The Housing Ordinance of the Borough of
Hanover, regulating supplied facilities, maintenance and occupancy of
dwellings and dwelling units.
§ 230-16. Plumbing and plumbing fixtures.
All plumbing and plumbing fixtures shall be installed in accordance with
Chapter 263, Part 2, Plumbing Code. No dwelling or dwelling unit shall be
deemed to comply with the requirements of the Housing Ordinance relating
to plumbing and plumbing fixtures, unless:
A. All plumbing is so designed and installed as to prevent contamination of
the water supply through backflow, back siphonages and any other
method of contamination (§§ 230-5A, B, C and E; 230-7D; 230-9G).
B. All plumbing is so designed and installed that no potable water supply
line or plumbing fixture is directly connected to a nonpotable water
supply (§§ 230-5A, B, C and E; 230-7D; 230-9G).
C. Every water supply line is so constructed that there is no possibility of a
cross-connection between a potable and nonpotable water supply
(§§ 230-5A, B, C and E; 230-7D; 230-9G).
D. Every water supply line is in good working condition and every valve
therein is in good working condition (§§ 230-5A, B, C and E; 230-7D;
230-9G).
E. Every water supply inlet is located above the flood level of any installed
sink, lavatory, bathtub or automatic washing machine and similar
water-using fixture, or above some unobstructible overflow thereof; and
there are no submerged inlets, except submerged inlets installed with a
vacuum breaker of a type approved by the Health Officer (§§ 230-5A, B,
C and E; 230-7D; 230-9G).
F. The waste line of every water-using fixture is trapped (§§ 230-5A, B, C
and E; 230-7D; 230-9G).
G. Every waste line drains freely without obstruction or leaks (§§ 230-5A,
B, C and E; 230-7D; 230-9G).
H. All plumbing and plumbing fixtures are maintained in good working
condition, and all plumbing fixtures are kept clean (§§ 230-5A, B, C and
E; 230-7D; 230-9G).
§ 230-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-16
1:221
§ 230-17. Rubbish storage and disposal.
No dwelling unit shall be deemed to comply with the requirements of the
Housing Ordinance relating to rubbish storage and disposal, unless rubbish
stored outdoors is stored in one or more covered rubbish storage boxes or
containers (§§ 230-5F, 230-9C).
§ 230-18. Garbage storage and disposal.
No dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed to comply with the
requirements of the Housing Ordinance relating to garbage and garbage
storage and disposal, unless:
§ 230-19. Gas facilities.
No dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed to comply with the
requirements of the Housing Ordinance relating to gas facilities, unless:
I. Water pressure is adequate to permit a proper flow of water from all
open water faucets at all times (§§ 230-5A, B, C and E; 230-7D; 230-9G).
J. Every water closet is of the trap type, with facilities for safe and clean
flushing (§ 230-5B).
K. No water closet is of the so-called flush hopper, frost-proof hopper or
similar type (§ 230-5B).
A. Garbage is disposed of in a garbage incinerator located within the
dwelling and installed and operated in a sanitary manner; or garbage is
disposed of in one or more flytight and watertight metal garbage
storage containers equipped with tightly fitting metal covers, no one of
which is smaller than five gallons in capacity or larger than 20 gallons
in capacity; or garbage is disposed of in a garbage grinder which grinds
garbage finely, and is discharged into the kitchen sink drain in a
sanitary manner (§§ 230-5F, 230-9D).
B. Every outside garbage storage container is so maintained and so
located on the premises that no odors will permeate any dwelling or
dwelling units (§§ 230-5F, 230-9D).
C. Every garbage storage container is emptied at least weekly (§§ 230-5F,
230-9D).
D. No loose garbage is placed upon or strewn about on the floor of any
basement or cellar or any other part of any dwelling, or on the ground
surrounding any dwelling (§§ 230-5F, 230-9D).
A. All gas-burning hot-water heaters and space heaters are properly
vented to a chimney or duct leading to outdoor space (§§ 230-5H,
230-6E).
B. Every gas pipe is sound and tightly put together, with no leaks
(§§ 230-5H, 230-6E).
§ 230-16 HANOVER CODE § 230-19
1:222
§ 230-20. Electric wiring and facilities.
No dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed to comply with the
requirements of the Housing Ordinance relating to electric wiring and
facilities, unless:
§ 230-21. Heating and heating facilities.
No dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed to comply with the
requirements of the Housing Ordinance relating to heating and heating
facilities, unless:
C. No gas pipe is corroded or obstructed so as to reduce gas pressure or
volume (§§ 230-5H, 230-6E).
D. Every gas appliance is connected to a gas line with solid metal piping
(§§ 230-5H, 230-6E).
E. Gas pressure is adequate to permit a proper flow of gas from all open
gas valves at all times (§§ 230-5H, 230-6E).
A. Every exposed electric wire has insulation which is in good condition
(§ 230-6D).
B. Every switch plate and outlet plate is properly fastened in position
(§ 230-6D).
C. No short circuit or break exists in any electric line (§ 230-6D).
D. Every fixture and outlet functions properly and is properly fastened in
place (§ 230-6D).
E. No obvious shock hazard exists (§ 230-6D).
F. No temporary wiring is used, except extension cords which run directly
from portable electric fixtures to convenience outlets (§ 230-6D).
G. No electric circuit is overloaded as a result of connecting appliances
which operate at high wattages to outlets supplied with wire of
inadequate size (§ 230-6D).
A. When the dwelling or dwelling unit is heated by a central heating
system:
(1) The central heating unit is in good operating condition.
(2) Every heat duct, steam pipe and hot-water pipe is free of leaks and
functions so that adequate heat is delivered where intended.
(3) Every seal between the sections of a hot air furnace is in good
repair (§ 230-6E).
B. When the dwelling or dwelling unit is heated by space heaters:
§ 230-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-21
1:223
§ 230-22. Lighting.
No dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed to comply with the
requirements of the Housing Ordinance relating to lighting, unless every
public hall, stairway and foyer has sufficient lighting through windows or
from electric lights to provide illumination of a least one footcandle on every
part of such areas at all times of the day and night, except as otherwise
provided by § 230-6F of the Housing Ordinance (§ 230-6F).
§ 230-23. Exclusion of insects and rodents.
No dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed to comply with the
requirements of the Housing Ordinance relating to exclusion of insects and
rodents, unless:
(1) Every space heater burning solid, liquid or gaseous fuels is
properly vented to a chimney or duct leading to outdoor space.
(2) Every coal-burning space heater has a fire-resistant panel beneath
it.
(3) Every space heater located close to a wall is equipped with
insulation sufficient to prevent overheating of the wall.
(4) Every space heater smoke pipe is equipped with guards made of
metal or other nonflammable material at the point where the pipe
goes through a wall, ceiling or partition (§ 230-6E).
C. There are no portable heaters burning solid, liquid or gaseous fuels
(§ 230-6E).
D. Every smoke pipe and every chimney is adequately supported,
reasonably clean and maintained in such condition that there will be no
leakage or backing up of noxious gases (§ 230-6E).
A. During the period beginning on the 15th day of May and ending on the
30th day of September in each year, every door used for ventilating
purposes opening directly from a dwelling unit to outdoor space is
supplied with a screen of not less than 16 mesh per inch and a selfclosing
device in good operating condition; and the required windows
or other devices with openings to outdoor space, used or intended to be
used for ventilation, are supplied with a screen of not less than 16 mesh
per inch (§§ 230-6G, 230-7B, 230-9E).
B. Every basement or cellar window used for ventilation shall be supplied
with wire screen not less than 16 mesh and not larger than one-fourthinch
mesh, which fits lightly and is securely fastened (§§ 230-6G,
230-7B, 230-9E).
§ 230-21 HANOVER CODE § 230-24
1:224
§ 230-24. Foundation, floors, walls, ceilings and rooms.
No dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed to comply with the
requirements of the Housing Ordinance relating to foundations, floors,
walls, ceilings and roofs, unless:
§ 230-25. Windows, exterior doors and basement hatchways.
No dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed to comply with the
requirements of the Housing Ordinance relating to windows, exterior doors
and basement hatchways, unless:
A. The foundation elements adequately support the building at all points
(§ 230-7A).
B. Every floor is free of holes and wide cracks which might admit rodents,
or which constitute a possible accident hazard (§ 230-7A).
C. Every floor is free of loose, warped, protruding and rotting floorboards
(§ 230-7A).
D. Every exterior wall is free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards and
timbers and any other conditions which might admit rodents, rain or
dampness to the interior portions of the walls or to the interior spaces
of the dwelling (§ 230-7A).
E. Every interior wall and ceiling is free of holes and large cracks
(§ 230-7A).
F. Every interior wall and ceiling is free of loose plaster and other
structural material, the collapse of which might constitute an accident
hazard (§ 230-7A).
G. Plaster, paint and all other surface materials are of such character as to
be easily cleanable, and are reasonably smooth, clean and tight
(§ 230-7A).
H. The roof is tight and has no defects which admit rain (§ 230-7A).
A. Every window is fully supplied with window panes which are without
open cracks or holes (§ 230-7B).
B. Every window sash is in good condition and fits reasonably tightly
within its frame (§ 230-7B).
C. Every window other than fixed windows is capable of being easily
opened and held in open position by window hardware (§ 230-7B).
D. Every exterior door, door hinge and door latch is in good condition
(§ 230-7B).
E. Every exterior door, when closed, fits reasonably well within its frame
(§ 230-7B).
§ 230-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-25
1:225
§ 230-26. Stairways and porches.
No dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed to comply with the
requirements of the Housing Ordinance relating to stairways and porches,
unless:
§ 230-27. Water closet compartment and bathroom floor.
No dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed to comply with the
requirements of the Housing Ordinance relating to water closet
compartment and bathroom floor, unless:
F. All windows and doors and their frames are constructed and maintained
in such relation to wall construction as completely to exclude rain and
substantially to exclude wind from entering the structure (§ 230-7B).
G. Every basement hatchway is so constructed and maintained as to
prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water into
dwelling (§ 230-7B).
A. Every flight of stairs and porch is free of holes, grooves and cracks
which are large enough to constitute possible accident hazards
(§ 230-7C).
B. Every stairwell, and every flight of stairs which is more than four risers
high, has rails not less than two feet, six inches, measured vertically
from the nose of the treads to the top of the rail, and every porch which
is more than four risers high has rails not less than two feet, six inches
above the platform (§ 230-7C).
C. Every rail and balustrade is firmly fastened and is maintained in good
condition (§ 230-7C).
D. No flight of stairs has settled more than one inch out of its intended
position or has pulled away from supporting or adjacent structures
(§ 230-7C).
E. No flight of stairs has rotting or deteriorating supports (§ 230-7C).
F. The treads of every flight of stairs are uniform in height (not exceeding
three-eighths-inch variation) (§ 230-7C).
G. Every stair tread is sound and is securely fastened in position
(§ 230-7C).
H. Every stair tread is strong enough to bear a concentrated load of at
least 400 pounds without danger of breaking through (§ 230-7C).
I. Every porch has a sound floor (§ 230-7C).
J. No porch has rotting or deteriorating supports (§ 230-7C).
A. Every water closet compartment floor and bathroom floor is made of
terrazo, tile, smooth concrete, dense hardwood with tightly fitting
§ 230-25 HANOVER CODE § 230-27
1:226
§ 230-28. General sanitation.
No dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed to comply with the
requirements of the Housing Ordinance relating to general sanitation,
unless:
joints, rubber, asphalt tile, linoleum or other similar material providing
a surface which is reasonably impervious to water and is easily
cleanable; or
B. Such floor is made of one of the denser soft woods, with tightly fitting
joints, and is covered with varnish, lacquer or other similar coating
providing a surface which is reasonably impervious to water and is
easily cleanable (§ 230-7E).
A. Every floor and floor covering is kept reasonably clean and is not
littered or covered with dirt, dust, garbage, human or animal fecal
matter or any other insanitary thing (§ 230-9A and B).
B. Every wall and ceiling is reasonably clean and is not littered or covered
with dust, dirt, cobwebs or greasy film (§ 230-9A and B).
C. No stagnant water is allowed to accumulate or stand anywhere about
the premises (§ 230-9A and B).
§ 230-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-28
1:227
Chapter 240
LICENSING FOR PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT, PEDDLING AND
SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Parks and other public areas — See Ch. 259.
Signs; street encroachments — See Ch. 298.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 316.
Yard sales; auctions — See Ch. 364.
§ 240-1. Activities requiring licenses; fees.
From and after the passage of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any
person or persons, firms or corporations, whether principal or agent, either
directly or indirectly:
A. (Reserved)63
B. (Reserved)64
C. To sell from any permanent or temporary position in any public
highway, or to use for commercial purposes, gain or advantage herein
specifically mentioned, any portion of a public highway, including the
sidewalks thereof, in any manner not herein otherwise provided for.
[Amended 12-19-1951 by Ord. No. 773]
D. To enter into, begin or desire to begin a transient retail business in the
Borough for the sale of any goods, wares or merchandise whatsoever,
and to hire, lease or occupy a room, apartment, store, building or other
structure for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares or
merchandise, except upon payment, to the proper officer of the said
Borough, of a license fee or fees as follows: $10 per day; $65 per week;
$200 per month. Said license shall be payable at the commencement of
each such licensing period and shall be renewed prior to the
commencement of any succeeding period or periods. The license fees
hereby assessed and levied are to cover the cost of inspection,
supervision and proper police control of the conduct of such transient
retail business in the Borough. Provided, however, that nothing herein
contained shall be applicable to any persons, goods or wares at any
time exempted from such requirements by the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. [Amended 3-15-1950 by Ord. No.
716]
63.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, concerning licensing for a circus or other form of
public entertainment which uses a public highway, was repealed 7-22-2015 by Ord. No.
2226. For special events, see Ch. 309.
64.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, concerning licensing for a parade, show or
demonstration which uses a public highway, was repealed 7-22-2015 by Ord. No. 2226. For
special events, see Ch. 309.
§ 230-28 HANOVER CODE § 240-1
1:228
§ 240-2. Nonauthorized uses; nontransferability; term of issuance.
§ 240-3. Repealer.
The ordinance enacted the 20th day of December 1924, entitled "An
ordinance regulating, licensing and prohibiting certain usages of highways
and commercial enterprises in the Borough of Hanover," and all other
ordinances, amendments or parts of ordinances inconsistent or conflicting
herewith, be and the same are hereby repealed.
E. To sell or offer for sale to the consuming public, on any public highway
or from house to house, within the said Borough, as a huckster, peddler,
hawker, street vendor, traveling merchant or agent, any goods, wares or
merchandise, without having first procured from the proper officer of
the said Borough a license so to do. The amount of the fee to be paid to
the proper officer of said Borough for such license shall be as follows:
(1) For the first automobile, truck, trailer, wagon or other vehicle used
by any person or persons, firm or corporation, in connection with
the business aforesaid, $50 for each calendar year or fractional
part thereof; and for each additional automobile, truck, trailer,
wagon or other vehicle used in the business aforesaid, $25 for each
calendar year or fractional part thereof. [Amended 3-26-2003 by
Ord. No. 2067]
(2) For each person engaged in the business aforesaid, other than by
use or employment of any vehicle as mentioned in § 240-1E(1)
hereof, $10 for each calendar year or fractional part thereof.
(3) Provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall apply to any
persons, goods or wares at any time exempted from such
requirements by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. This chapter does not authorize the use of highways for the purposes
mentioned in § 240-1 hereof, in any cases where such uses are
prohibited or restricted by any other ordinance of the Borough, the
intention hereof being to charge a license fee for a use which is
permitted and not restricted or prohibited. The payment of a license fee
does not permit the holder to create a nuisance, to do anything
dangerous in itself or that may attract children to a danger. Anything
done contrary to this chapter is a nuisance and shall be abated as such,
in addition to the fine imposed.
B. Nothing may be licensed under this chapter which is prohibited by state
law or other Borough ordinances. Licenses granted to individuals are
not transferable. Licenses which are personal do not permit the
employment of unlicensed agents. Every vehicle is required to have a
license tag conspicuously placed as designated by the Chief of Police.
Licenses are to be issued for a period of one year, beginning January 1.
Any fractional part of any unit of time or space or number requires the
same license fee as the whole unit.
§ 240-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-3
1:229
Chapter 248
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
§ 248-1. Amplifiers for advertising.
The operation for advertising purposes on any automobile, motor vehicle
or vehicle, howsoever driven or drawn, on any public street, avenue, alley
or other highway of the Borough of Hanover, of any radio amplifier,
loudspeaker or electrical sound-producing instrument or device is hereby
prohibited.
§ 248-2. Voice amplifiers and transmitters. [Amended 12-29-1954
by Ord. No. 852]
The operation of any amplifier or mechanical or electrical device to amplify
or carry the human voice in advertising from any place of business to any
public street, avenue or other public highway in the Borough of Hanover is
hereby prohibited.
Chapter 254
PARKING METERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Parking Authority — See Ch. 8, Art. II.
Vehicle impoundment — See Ch. 339.
Abandoned or junked vehicles — See Ch. 342.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 346.
§ 254-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OPERATOR — Includes every individual who shall operate a vehicle as the
owner thereof, or as the agent, employee or permittee of the owner, or is in
actual physical control of a vehicle.
PARKING METER — Includes any mechanical device or meter not
inconsistent with this chapter, placed or erected for the regulation of
parking by authority of this chapter. Each parking meter installed shall
§ 240-3 HANOVER CODE § 254-1
1:230
indicate by proper legend the balance of legal parking time, and at the
expiration of such period shall indicate illegal or overtime parking.
PARKING METER ZONE — Includes any restricted street upon which
parking meters are installed and in operation.
PARKING SPACE — Any space within a parking meter zone adjacent to
a parking meter and which is duly designated for the parking of a single
vehicle by lines painted or otherwise durably marked on the curb or on the
surface of the street adjacent to or adjoining the parking meters.
PARK or PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
upon a street otherwise than temporarily, for the purpose of, and while
actually engaged in, receiving or discharging passengers or in obedience to
traffic regulations, signs or signals, or an involuntary stopping of the vehicle
by reason of causes beyond the control of the operator of the vehicle.
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, copartnership, association or
corporation.
STREET — Any public street, avenue, road, alley, highway, lane, path or
other public place located in the Borough of Hanover and established for
the use of vehicles.
VEHICLE — Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported upon a highway, except a device which is operated upon
rails or tracks.
§ 254-2. Parking meter zones.65 [Amended 2-15-1961 by Ord. No.
1079; 6-6-1962 by Ord. No. 1142; 10-16-1963 by Ord. No. 1196;
10-16-1963 by Ord. No. 1199; 11-20-1963 by Ord. No. 1202;
4-15-1964 by Ord. No. 1224; 10-6-1965 by Ord. No. 1289;
11-10-1965 by Ord. No. 1291; 11-16-1966 by Ord. No. 1334;
5-15-1968 by Ord. No. 1389; 6-19-1968 by Ord. No. 1399; 7-17-1968
by Ord. No. 1401; 12-28-1968 by Ord. No. 1424; 5-7-1969 by Ord.
No. 1436; 10-15-1969 by Ord. No. 1459; 5-17-1972 by Ord. No.
1549; 10-18-1972 by Ord. No. 1557]
The following names and described areas, streets or portions of streets, and
such other areas, streets or portions of streets as may hereafter be included
in this section by amendment hereto, lying within the corporate limits of the
Borough of Hanover, shall constitute a parking meter zone, and all frontages
in said squares, streets or avenues defining said zones shall be included
therein:
A. On the streets, areas or portions thereof set forth in this subsection,
which are hereby designated as parking meter zones, it shall be
unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle or other vehicle
to park such vehicle between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on
any day except Sunday, Monday, Friday and Saturday; and on Saturday,
Monday and Friday between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. for
65.Editor’s Note: The fees for parking meters are also set forth in Ch. A401, Art. II.
§ 254-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-2
1:231
more than 2 1/2 hours at any time, except such spaces as are or shall
be designated as cabstands, bus stops, entrances to hotels, theaters,
fireplugs and other places where parking is now or may hereafter
be prohibited. The parking meters on such streets, areas or portions
thereof shall be so set as to display a signal showing legal parking
upon the deposit therein of coins of the United States as follows: 1/
2 hour for each $0.10 in an amount to be set by resolution deposited
up to 2 1/2 hours by the use of five-cent coins, ten-cent coins or a
combination thereof, or a twenty-five-cent coin, and each meter by its
device shall clearly set out and continue in operation from the time of
depositing said coin or coins until the expiration of 1/2 hour for each
$0.10 in amount deposited up to 2 1/2 hours, inclusive, and at the
expiration of such time will indicate by a proper signal that the lawful
parking period has expired. The foregoing shall apply to the following
streets, areas or portions thereof: [Amended 9-17-1975 by Ord. No.
1645; 6-15-1977 by Ord. No. 1683; 7-20-1977 by Ord. No. 1684;
9-7-1977 by Ord. No. 1686; 6-6-1979 by Ord. No. 1704; 9-17-1980
by Ord. No. 1716; 2-16-1983 by Ord. No. 1752; 4-4-1984 by Ord.
No. 1773; 8-16-1989 by Ord. No. 1859; 12-6-1989 by Ord. No.
1864; 6-26-2013 by Res. No. 1049]
(1) The east side of Carlisle Street, between Center Square and Bank
Lane.
(2) The west side of Carlisle Street 90 feet north of Bank Lane to
Chestnut Street.
(3) The north side of Frederick Street, between Center Square and
High Street.
(4) The east side of Baltimore Street, between the first alley south of
Broadway and Walnut Street.66
(5) The west side of Railroad Street between a point measured
northwardly 157.2 feet from East Chestnut Street to Gail Street.
(6) The east side of Railroad Street between a point measured
northwardly 45.3 feet from East Chestnut Street to a point
measured southwardly from Gail Street 41.3 feet.
(7) The west side of Railroad Street, between a point measured
northwardly 157.2 feet from East Chestnut Street to Park Avenue.67
(8) The east side of Railroad Street between Gail Street and Park
Avenue.
66.Editor's Note: Original Subsection A(5), which listed a portion of Baltimore Street as a
parking meter zone, was repealed 4-4-1984 by Ord. No. 1773.
67.Editor's Note: Original Subsection A(9), which listed a portion of Railroad Street as a
parking meter zone, was repealed 4-4-1984 by Ord. No. 1773.
§ 254-2 HANOVER CODE § 254-2
1:232
(9) The southeast side of West Chestnut Street from a point 58 feet
west of Carlisle Street to the first alley west of and parallel to
Carlisle Street.68, 69
(10) The northeast and southwest sides of York Street between Walnut
Street and the first alley south of and parallel to Walnut Street.
(11) The north and south sides of Broadway between Locust Street and
the first alley east of and parallel with Locust Street.
(12) The southeast side of East Chestnut Street, from a point 150 feet
east of Carlisle Street to the first alley, known as "Allewelt Alley,"
northeast of and approximately parallel with Railroad Street; and
the northwest side of East Chestnut Street between Railroad Street
and the second alley northeast of and approximately parallel with
Railroad Street.
(13) The southeast side of West Chestnut Street, between the first alley
west of Carlisle Street and a point at the western boundary line of
the property of the Park Theater.
(14) The north side of East Walnut Street between York Street and
School Avenue; on the south side of East Walnut Street from York
Street to a point 115 feet eastwardly from York Street; on the south
side of East Walnut Street from a point 173 feet from York Street
eastwardly to School Avenue. [Amended 5-16-1990 by Ord. No.
1875]
(15) The north side of West Walnut Street from a point 108 feet west of
Baltimore Street to the first alley west of and parallel to Baltimore
Street.
(16) The west side of Centennial Avenue between Frederick Street and
the first alley south of and parallel to Frederick Street.70
(17) The east and west side of North Franklin Street between West
Chestnut Street and Bank Lane.
(18) The north side of West Walnut Street between Centennial Avenue
and the second alley east of and parallel with Centennial Avenue.
(19) The east and west sides of Centennial Avenue between West Walnut
Street and Exchange Place.
68.Editor's Note: Original Subsection A(12), which listed a portion of Carlisle Street as a
parking meter zone, was repealed 4-4-1984 by Ord. No. 1773.
69.Editor's Note: Original Subsection A(13), which listed a portion of Baltimore Street as a
parking meter zone, as amended, was repealed 4-14-1984 by Ord. No. 1773.
70.Editor's Note: Original Subsection A(21), which listed East Walnut Street as a parking
meter zone, was repealed 6-15-1977 by Ord. No. 1683.
§ 254-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-2
1:233
(20) The southeast side of East Walnut Street between York Street and
the first alley west of and parallel with York Street, sometimes
known as "Five Points Alley."
(21) Center Square at all parking meter spaces.
(22) The south side of Locust Street from Broadway to the first alley
east of and parallel with Broadway.
(23) The north side of West Middle Street from a point 30 1/2 feet
between Baltimore Street and a point 134 feet west of Baltimore
Street.
(24) The east side of Railroad Street from Broadway northwardly to
Bank Lane.
(25) The east and west sides of South Franklin Street from Frederick
Street southwardly to West Walnut Street.
B. On all designated municipal parking lots, areas or portions thereof set
forth in this subsection, which are hereby designated as parking meter
zones, it shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor
vehicle or other vehicle to park such vehicle between the hours of 8:30
a.m. and 8:30 p.m. on any day, except Sunday, for more than 2 1/2 hours
at any time in parking spaces where the meter head is painted yellow
and for more than 12 hours at any time in all other parking spaces,
except such spaces as are or shall be designated as cabstands, bus
stops, entrances to hotels, theaters, fireplugs and other places where
parking is now or may hereafter be prohibited. The parking meters on
such streets, areas or portions thereof shall be so set as to display a
signal showing legal parking upon the deposit therein of coins of the
United States as follows: 1/2 hour for each $0.10 in an amount set by
resolution for deposited up two hours in spaces where the meter head is
painted yellow and up to 12 hours in all remaining spaces, by the use of
five-cent coins, ten-cent coins, twenty-five-cent coins or a combination
thereof; and each meter by its device shall clearly set out and continue
in operation from the time of depositing such coin or coins until the
expiration of 1/2 hour and/or the expiration of the period of time at the
rate of 1/2 hour for each $0.10 in amount up to two hours in spaces
where the meter head is painted yellow and up to 12 hours in all other
spaces, inclusive, and at the expiration of such times will indicate by
proper signal that the lawful parking period has expired; provided,
however, that in parking spaces where the meter head is painted red,
parking is permitted up to 10 minutes, without the necessity of
depositing any coins as hereinabove set forth, only between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on any day except Saturday and Sunday. At
all other times and days the parking in such spaces shall be governed by
the foregoing regulations applicable to the twelve-hour parking spaces.
[Amended 8-2-1978 by Ord. No. 1695; 9-17-1980 by Ord. No.
1716; 12-6-1989 by Ord. No. 1864; 6-26-2013 by Res. No. 1049]
§ 254-2 HANOVER CODE § 254-2
1:234
(1) Municipal parking lot at the northwest corner of West Chestnut
Street and North Franklin Street.
(2) Municipal parking lot at Nos. 106-110 Carlisle Street.
C. On the streets, areas or portions thereof set forth in this subsection,
which are hereby designated as parking meter zones, it shall be
unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle or other vehicle
to park such vehicle between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 8:30 p.m. on
any day except Sunday and the following legal holidays: New Year’s
Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Veterans Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day, for more than 2 1/2 hours at any
time in parking spaces where the meter head is painted yellow and for
more than 12 hours at any time in all other parking spaces, except such
spaces as are or shall be designated as cabstands, bus stops, entrances
to hotels, theaters, fireplugs and other places where parking is now or
may hereafter be prohibited. The parking meters on such streets, areas
or portions thereof shall be so set as to display a signal showing legal
parking upon the deposit therein of coins of the United States as
follows: 1/2 hour for each $0.10 in an amount set by resolution for
deposited up to 2 1/2 hours in spaces where the meter head is painted
yellow and up to 12 hours in all remaining spaces, by the use of fivecent
coins, ten-cent coins, twenty-five-cent coins or a combination
thereof; and each meter by its device shall clearly set out and continue
in operation from the time of depositing such coin or coins until the
expiration of 1/2 hour and/or the expiration of the period of time at the
rate of 1/2 hour for each $0.10 in amount up to 2 1/2 hours in spaces
where the meter head is painted yellow and up to 12 hours in all other
spaces, inclusive, and at the expiration of such times will indicate by
proper signal that the lawful parking period has expired; provided,
however, that in parking spaces where the meter head is painted red,
parking is permitted up to 10 minutes without the necessity of
depositing any coins as hereinabove set forth, only between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on any day except Saturday and Sunday. At
all other times and days the parking in such spaces shall be governed by
the foregoing regulations applicable to the twelve-hour parking spaces.
[Added 9-17-1980 by Ord. No. 1716; amended 6-26-2013 by Res.
No. 1049]
(1) Municipal parking lot at the corner of Baltimore Street and Walnut
Street and Railroad Street.
(2) Municipal parking lot at Nos. 31-33-35-37 Carlisle Street.
(3) Municipal parking lot at Nos. 38-40 Frederick Street.
(4) Municipal parking lot at the corner of East Chestnut Street and
Railroad Street and Bank Lane.
(5) Municipal parking lot at 16 York Street. [Added 12-22-2010 by
Ord. No. 2169]
§ 254-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-2
1:235
§ 254-3. Designation of parking spaces.
The Borough Manager is hereby directed and authorized to mark off
individual parking spaces in the parking meter zones designated and
described in § 254-2 of this chapter and in such other zones as may
hereafter be established, said parking spaces to be designated by lines
painted or durably marked on the curbing or surface of the street. At each
space so marked off, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in such a
way that said vehicle shall not be entirely within the limits of the space
so designated. In any parking meter zone where vehicles are now required
to be parked parallel to the curbline, parking spaces shall be designated
adjacent to the curblines, each of which spaces shall be approximately 22
feet in length. In any parking meter zone where vehicles are now or may
hereafter be required to park at right angles to the curbline, parking spaces
shall be designated adjacent to the curbline, each of which spaces shall be
approximately eight feet in width.
§ 254-4. Installation of parking meters. [Amended 2-16-1983 by
Ord. No. 1752]
In said parking meter zones, the Borough Manager shall cause parking
meters to be installed upon the curb or sidewalk immediately adjacent
to the parking spaces provided in § 254-3 of this chapter, as close to the
curbline as practical, and the Borough Manager and Chief of Police shall
be responsible for the regulation, control, operation, maintenance and use
of such parking meters. Each device shall be so set as to display a signal
showing legal parking upon the deposit of the appropriate coin or coins,
lawful money of the United States of America for the period of time
prescribed by this chapter. Each device shall be so arranged that, upon the
expiration of the lawful time limit, it will indicate by a proper visible signal
that the lawful parking period has expired, and in such cases, the right
of such vehicle to occupy such space shall cease and the operator, owner,
possessor or manager thereof shall be subject to the penalties prescribed
by law.
§ 254-5. Operation of parking meters.
Except in a period of emergency determined by an officer of the Fire or
Police Department, or in compliance with the directions of a police officer
or traffic control sign or signal, when any vehicle shall be parked in any
parking space alongside or next to which a parking meter is located, the
operator of such vehicles shall, upon entering the said parking meter space,
immediately deposit or cause to be deposited in said meter such proper
coin of the United States as is required for such parking meter and as is
designated by proper directions on the meter, and when required by the
directions on the meter, the operator of such vehicle, after the deposit of
the proper coin or coins, shall also set in operation the timing mechanism
(6) Municipal parking lot at the corner of Pennsylvania Avenue and
High Street. [Added 12-22-2010 by Ord. No. 2169]
§ 254-2 HANOVER CODE § 254-5
1:236
on such meter in accordance with directions properly appearing thereon,
and failure to deposit such proper coin and to set the timing mechanism
in operation when so required shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
Upon the deposit of such coin (and the setting of the timing mechanism in
operation when so required), the parking space may be lawfully occupied
by such vehicle during the period of time which has been prescribed for the
part of the street in which said parking space is located. If said vehicle shall
remain parked in any such parking space beyond the parking time limit set
for such parking space, or if the meter shall indicate such illegal parking,
then in either event such vehicle shall be considered as parking overtime
and beyond the period of legal parking time, and such parking shall be
deemed a violation of this chapter.
§ 254-6. Unlawful conduct; fines.
A. It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this chapter for
any person:
(1) To cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name
of or operated by such person to be parked overtime or beyond the
period of legal parking time established for any parking meter zone
as herein described or to deposit in any parking meter a coin for
the purpose of parking beyond the maximum legal parking time for
the particular parking meter zone.
(2) To permit any vehicle to remain or be placed in any parking space
adjacent to any parking meter while said meter is displaying a
signal indicating that the vehicle occupying such parking space has
already been parked beyond the period prescribed for such parking
space.
(3) To park any vehicle across any line or marking of a parking space or
in such position that the vehicle shall not be entirely within the
area designated by such lines or markings.
(4) To deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or
impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the
provisions of this chapter.
(5) To deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug,
device or metal substance or other substitute for lawful coins.
(6) To deposit or cause to be deposited in a parking meter any coin for
extending the parking time of any parking beyond the time herein
provided in a zone in which such meter is located.
B. Fines for overtime parking at meters shall be imposed by the Police
Department and the parking attendants of the Borough of Hanover at
the following rates: [Added 2-16-1983 by Ord. No. 1752; amended
12-30-1983 by Ord. No. 1770; 3-24-2010 by Ord. No. 2157]
(1) A fine of $5 for overtime parking.
§ 254-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-6
1:237
§ 254-7. Purchase, installation and maintenance of parking meters.
The proper officers of the Borough are hereby authorized and directed to
enter into contracts for the purchase and installation of parking meters,
said contracts to be made subject to the conditions and in the manner
provided by law, the payment of such meters and the installation thereof to
be provided for solely from the receipts, funds and revenues obtained by the
Borough from the operation of said parking meters, without in any manner
obligating the Borough to pay for the same from any other sources, and to
enter into a contract or contracts for such parts and maintenance of such
parking meters as may be necessary to maintain the same in good operating
condition and to pay for such parts and maintenance exclusively from the
receipts, funds and revenues received from the operation of said parking
meters.
§ 254-8. Meter cover or marker for business purposes. [Added
11-20-1957 by Ord. No. 946]
Anything to the contrary in this chapter notwithstanding, any person who is
in the business of repairing or constructing any property in a parking meter
zone, and which requires a vehicle for such work, may obtain from the
Police Department a cover or marker, in such form, at such time and for the
use of such length of time as the Police Department may determine, which
cover or marker, when placed upon or over any parking meter, will allow the
vehicle of such person to occupy the parking space at such parking meter
without such person depositing any coin therein, provided that such person
pay to the Borough of Hanover a sum of money equal to $0.05 for each hour
or fraction thereof such space is to be used.
§ 254-9. Parking meter fees. [Added 6-12-2013 by Ord. No. 2198]
Effective June 12, 2013, the rates and designated times established for
parking meter fees shall be set by resolution passed from time to time by
the Hanover Borough Council.
§ 254-10. Parking space convenience pass. [Added 6-24-2015 by
Ord. No. 2220]
(2) A fine of $15 for overtime parking not paid within 48 hours of the
violation.
A. The Borough of Hanover shall make available a parking space
convenience pass, to be used Monday through Saturday, with the
exception of holidays, but no more than 12 hours out of a twenty-fourhour
day, for any twelve-hour metered parking space in a Hanover
Borough municipal parking lot as identified on a list of municipal lots on
file with the Borough. [Amended 9-23-2015 by Ord. No. 2236]
(1) Such parking passes shall require the execution of a Parking Space
Convenience Pass Agreement between the lessee and the Borough
of Hanover. The terms of said agreement shall be determined by
§ 254-6 HANOVER CODE § 254-10
1:238
Chapter 259
PARKS AND OTHER PUBLIC AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Recreation Board — See Ch. 84.
Animals — See Ch. 126.
Curfew — See Ch. 175.
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 186.
Firearms — See Ch. 200.
the Borough Manager upon consultation with the Borough Council,
Police Chief, and Fire Chief.
(2) The Borough shall charge the lessee a rental fee of $25 per month
for issuance and use of a parking space convenience pass.
B. The fee established for monthly rental of metered parking spaces under
the Parking Space Convenience Pass Agreement may be adjusted by
resolution passed from time to time by the Hanover Borough Council.
§ 254-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-10
1:239

ARTICLE I
Rules and Regulations
[Adopted by 9-18-1940 by Ord. No. 575]
§ 259-1. Establishment of rules and regulations. [Amended
10-31-1968 by Ord. No. 1411; 4-28-2010 by Ord. No. 2160]
All public parks maintained and/or owned by the Borough shall hereafter be
used and enjoyed by the general public under and subject to such rules and
regulations as shall be prescribed for such uses in the interest of the health,
safety, morals, and convenience of the general public by Borough Council,
which body may provide for specific rule exceptions from time to time by
resolution of Council for specific public events.
§ 259-2. Posting of copies.
Copies of the rules and regulations adopted in conformity with the
provisions of § 259-1 of this article, labeled "Park Rules," shall be posted in
a prominent place in each public park, the user of which is affected thereby.
§ 259-3. Park rules enumerated. [Amended 10-31-1968 by Ord. No.
1411; 9-7-1977 by Ord. No. 1688]
The following shall be posted in each public park:
WELCOME — Enjoy your visit. Please be considerate of those who will
use this park or recreation area after you. To help ensure your safety and
pleasure, please observe the following rules and regulations:
A. All recreation and park areas are open to the public between dawn and
dusk throughout the year. Lighted courts may be used until 11:00 p.m.
where provided with lighting specifically for court use, not just security
or walkway lights. [Amended 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2144]
B. In the event of hazardous conditions endangering life or property, any
park, recreation area or facility may be closed to public use at the
discretion of the Borough Manager.
C. Alcoholic beverages are not permitted.
D. Consider other users. Boisterous, immoral or indecent conduct will not
be tolerated.
E. Trash, garbage and all other litter must be placed in containers
provided for this purpose and shall be limited to materials accumulated
during use of park or recreation areas.
F. Do not remove, molest, injure or damage anything natural or physical
within any park or recreation area.
G. Open fires and the disposal of hot coals from charcoal grills are
permitted only in the facilities provided.
§ 259-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-3
1:241
H. The soliciting for any purpose or posting of signs is not permitted. The
distribution, sales, servicing or rental of any supplies, equipment,
material or commodity is restricted to authorized concessionaires.
I. The use or discharge of any type of air gun, slingshot or explosive is
prohibited.
J. Outdoor recreational activity in park or recreation areas shall be
restricted to locations for which physical improvement or posting
designates the appropriate purpose and use.
K. Unorganized or organized instruction, exhibition, competition
demonstration or special camping events first require written
application and approval from Hanover Borough Council before such
event may be conducted.
L. No bicycles, minibikes, or motorized vehicles are to be used in or on the
recreation areas and parks. The only exception is for scheduled events
by the proper authorities and the use of bicycles on trail paths provided
for nonmotorized cycles. [Amended 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2144]
M. No dogs, horses or other animals are allowed in or on recreation areas
or parks owned by the Borough of Hanover unless a specific scheduled
event in which such animals are permitted is approved by the proper
Borough authorities. The only exceptions to this restriction are leashed
dogs and horses, which shall be allowed on the Hanover Rail Trail,
subject to the conditions set forth below. The following acts shall be
considered unlawful in or on recreation areas and parks in the Borough
of Hanover: [Amended 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2144; 12-23-2014
by Ord. No. 2213]
(1) Causing or allowing any animal which one owns or otherwise has
control over to run at large.
(2) Bringing, driving, riding or leading any horse onto Borough
recreational property, with the exception that horses may be ridden
or brought onto the Hanover Rail Trail.
(3) Bringing, driving, leading or carrying onto Borough recreation
property any dog or other animal or pet which is unleashed.
(4) Torturing, ill-treating or neglecting any animal.
(5) Causing or allowing a pet or animal which one owns or otherwise
has under one's control, including dogs and horses, to relieve
themselves without cleaning up afterwards.
(6) Feeding wild animals, including but not limited to geese, ducks,
deer, birds and squirrels.
(7) Storing or leaving food on Borough recreation property in a
manner that is reasonably likely to attract wild animals.
§ 259-3 HANOVER CODE § 259-3
1:242
§ 259-4. Lighted ball field rules. [Amended 6-2-1982 by Ord. No.
1743]
In order to safeguard public use and enjoyment of this lighted ball field,
Hanover Borough Council has established the following rules of conduct:
(8) Releasing or abandoning any animal on Borough recreation
property.
(9) Staging any animal fights for any reason.
N. Violations are punishable by a fine not exceeding $100 for each offense
or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or both, under Chapter 1,
Article I, General Penalty, of the Code of the Borough of Hanover.
O. The use of firearms and fireworks in this park is forbidden. The
restriction as to use of fireworks encompasses all types of fireworks,
including sparklers. [Added 6-20-1979 by Ord. No. 1706]
P. Smoking is prohibited in all public parks and recreation areas
maintained and/or owned by the Borough of Hanover, including in the
Borough-owned parking areas adjacent thereto and used in conjunction
therewith. For purposes of this subsection, the word “smoking” means
inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted or heated cigar,
cigarette, or pipe, or any other lighted or heated tobacco or plant
product intended for inhalation, including hookahs and marijuana,
whether natural or synthetic, in any manner or in any form. “Smoking”
also includes the use of an electronic smoking device which creates an
aerosol or vapor, in any manner or in any form, or the use of any oral
smoking device for the purpose of circumventing the prohibition of
smoking set forth above. [Added 10-26-2016 by Ord. No. 2252]
A. All Borough park rules apply to this area.
B. League presidents will be responsible for scheduling the field with the
Director of Recreation.
C. Lights will turn off promptly at 11:00 p.m. Spectators and players shall
leave the area promptly at 11:00 p.m.
D. No games may start before 12:00 noon on Sundays.
E. The home team is responsible for seeing that the area is properly
cleaned after each use.
F. Payment for use of the lights will be made monthly by the various
leagues using the field. Checks should be made at the hourly
reimbursement rate as established from time to time by Hanover
Borough Council and made payable to the Borough of Hanover.
G. Neither the Hanover Recreation Board nor the Borough of Hanover are
responsible for injuries incurred in the use of the field.
§ 259-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-4
1:243

ARTICLE II
Use of Public Areas
[Adopted 9-18-1991 by Res. No. 574]
§ 259-5. Conditions and policies.
The following is a listing of the conditions and policies used by the Borough
of Hanover in granting or denying permission to use public areas within the
Borough of Hanover:
A. Requests should be made to the Borough Manager, in writing, for
submission to the Hanover Borough Council.
B. Prior to submission for any parades or walks along public rights-of-way,
the group should obtain the advice of the Police Department as to route
safety and potential traffic control needs.
C. Any group wishing to use public facilities or rights-of-way shall provide
a certificate of insurance to cover the activity, naming the Borough of
Hanover as co-insured, said coverage to be in the amount of
$1,000,000.
D. Private groups without 501(c)(3) certification as a nonprofit public
corporation will pay reasonable costs related to police, refuse and
cleanup and utility costs incurred in the event. Council may waive said
costs for 501(c)(3) organizations or in instances where a public service
is being provided by the event.
E. Groups wishing to occupy or use state highways will be responsible to
obtain all permits.
F. No amplification is allowed on Center Square. No parade groups other
than representatives of state, county or local law enforcement services
or veterans organizations or entities involved in the national defense
may display or carry weapons.
G. Amplification used at parks or parades will be limited to hours
acceptable to the Council in the neighborhood of the park or
playground. Playground use will allow involvement of children in the
neighborhood in public use so far as practical.
H. The proposal will clarify the cleanup provisions of the group, the
amount anticipated, what cleanup will be provided by the group and
what must be done by the Borough. Will leaflets be distributed? Costs of
leaflet cleanup will be assessed all groups.
I. Supervision provisions. Who will supervise the activity? Will police be
needed to protect public safety? What coverage will be needed? Will
first aid be supplied? By whom? (Ref. EMS Act of 1985.)
J. Sales of any items will require a peddler's license and possibly a tax
number from the state. Have the same been obtained if needed?
§ 259-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-5
1:245
K. The Council will consider all ramifications to the public prior to
permitting or denying requests or placing added conditions as it deems
necessary.
§ 259-5 HANOVER CODE § 259-5
1:246
Chapter 263
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Building regulations — See Ch. 150.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 170.
Housing standards — See Ch. 230.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 286.
Sewer use regulations — See Ch. 290.
§ 259-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-5
1:247

Part 1
[Adopted 1G-1a8rb-1a9g6e1 GBriynOderdrs. No. 1066]
ARTICLE I
Regulations
§ 263-1. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms
used in this Part 1 shall be as follows:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Hanover, York County, Pennsylvania.
COUNCIL — The group of elected officials acting as the governing body of
the Borough.
GARBAGE — Every waste or refuse, animal, fruit or vegetable matter, liquid
or otherwise, that attends the preparation, use, cooking or storage of meat,
fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables.
GARBAGE GRINDING UNIT — A motorized electrical device suitable for
installation under or in direct connection with a kitchen sink, that grinds
garbage to such a size as to be readily waterborne and causes the discharge
of such ground garbage directly into the sanitary sewer system.
§ 263-2. Conditions and restrictions.
Garbage grinding units may be installed, used and connected to the sanitary
sewer system upon the following conditions:
§ 263-3. Sewer rent charges.
The charge for each garbage grinder connected to the sanitary sewer
system shall be the rate as determined by the Council and established under
Chapter 286, Article III, Sewer Rents.
A. Such unit may be installed or used in any restaurant, store, hotel,
private home, apartment house or other similar building. [Amended
6-6-1973 by Ord. No. 1585]
B. Garbage grinding units shall be of a type tested, approved and listed by
the Underwriters' Laboratory, Inc.
C. All installations shall be made only by licensed plumbers pursuant to
and in accordance with ordinances of the Borough.
D. No such unit shall be installed or connected to the sanitary sewer
system until a permit therefor has been obtained as prescribed by
ordinances of the Borough.
§ 263-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-3
1:249

Part 2
[Adopted 12-P2l8u-m19b6in1gB CyoOderd. No. 1121]
ARTICLE II
Title, Scope and Definitions
§ 263-4. Title.
This Part 2 shall be known as the "Hanover Plumbing Code," may be so
cited, and shall be so designated in this Part 2.
§ 263-5. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Manager to administer and enforce this
Part 2, and he is hereby authorized and directed to take such action as may
be reasonably necessary to enforce the Hanover Plumbing Code and carry
out its purposes. In this responsibility, the Borough Manager will be assisted
by the Borough Engineer, the Supervisor of Public Works and the Plumbing
Inspector. The above officials shall be the administrative authority charged
with the responsibility of enforcing the provisions of this code.
§ 263-6. Scope.
The provisions of this code shall apply to and govern plumbing as defined
in this code, including the practice, materials and fixtures used in the
installation, maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping, fixtures,
appliances and appurtenances in connection with any of the following:
sanitary drainage or storm drainage facilities, the venting system and the
public or private water supply systems, both within or adjacent to any
building, other structure or conveyance. The provisions of this code shall
also apply to the practice and materials used in the installation,
maintenance, extension or alteration of the sanitary sewer or storm
drainage systems of all premises, including all facilities, up to their
connection with any point of public disposal or similar terminal.
§ 263-7. Partial ownership and control.
It is recognized that there are facilities in or adjacent to public streets and
referred to in this code, of which only a portion is under the ownership or
control of the owner or occupant of the building or premises to which this
code applies.
§ 263-8. Definitions.
A. The following words, when used in this Part 2, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the
context clearly indicates otherwise:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Hanover, York County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH MANAGER — The Manager of the Borough of Hanover.
§ 263-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-8
1:251
FIXTURE — Any water closet, basin, bathtub, shower, sink, laundry
tray, urinal, slop sink, drinking fountain, lavatory, washing machine,
water softener, sump, catch basin, water heater, hot-water boiler or
items of similar nature.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, partnership, association or
corporation.
PLUMBING BOARD — The Plumbing Board of the Borough of Hanover.
PLUMBING INSPECTOR — The Plumbing Inspector of the Borough of
Hanover.
B. All other definitions as set forth in the National Standard Plumbing
Code, 1990, as published by the National Association of Plumbing-
Heating-Cooling Contractors, are incorporated herein by reference.
[Amended 10-21-1992 by Ord. No. 1912]
§ 263-8 HANOVER CODE § 263-8
1:252
ARTICLE III
Licenses
§ 263-9. Business license required.
No person shall engage in the business of plumbing in the Borough of
Hanover unless licensed as a master plumber under the provisions of this
code.
§ 263-10. Requirements to make connections.
No person other than a master plumber licensed by the Borough of Hanover
or a journeyman plumber employed by a master plumber and licensed by
the Borough of Hanover shall make or cause to be made connections to any
plumbing fixtures, drain, waste, soil or vent pipe or water supply system,
provided that nothing in this Part 2 shall be construed to prohibit the
employment or working of apprentices under the direction of a licensed
master plumber and in the immediate company of a licensed master or
licensed journeyman plumber, provided also that nothing in this section
shall be construed to prohibit minor repairs being made as allowed in
§ 263-29.
§ 263-11. Plumbers' licenses: fees, renewal, term. [Amended
8-26-2015 by Ord. No. 2231]
The fee for a master plumber's license shall be $25 a year or part thereof.
The fee for a journeyman plumber's license shall be $10 per year or part
thereof. Said license fees shall be adjusted from time to time by resolution
of the Borough Council. All licenses issued by the Borough shall expire on
December 31 of the year for which they were issued. Licenses not renewed
for a period of at least 30 days after the expiration date can be renewed
only upon payment of the respective examination fee and after the applicant
shall have successfully passed the respective examination. The period for
issuing a license shall begin December 1 prior to the year for which a
license is issued.
§ 263-12. Reciprocal licenses; fees. [Amended 8-26-2015 by Ord.
No. 2231]
Any person holding a master or journeyman plumber's license from another
political subdivision or municipality may be issued a temporary master or
journeyman plumber's license at the direction of the Plumbing Board, if
the said Board deems the license and requirements for licenses issued
by the other municipality to be comparable to that issued to a master or
journeyman plumber by the Borough of Hanover. Such temporary license
shall permit the licensee to perform the work pertaining to one plumbing
permit. The fee for a temporary license shall be $25 for each master
plumber's license and $10 for each journeyman plumber's license. Said
license fees shall be adjusted from time to time by resolution of the Borough
Council.
§ 263-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-13
1:253
§ 263-13. Issuance of licenses.
All licenses specified by this Part 2 shall be issued by the Hanover Borough
Secretary.
§ 263-14. Use of name or license by another; license records.
No person holding either a master or journeyman plumber's license shall
allow his name or license to be used by another, either for the purpose of
obtaining plumbing permits or for doing plumbing work under said license.
The Hanover Borough Secretary shall keep a record of the business name
and place of business of all licenses, and it shall be the duty of all licensees
to inform the Borough Secretary of any change in either.
§ 263-15. Revocation; hearing; relicensing.
The Borough of Hanover may revoke any license issued under this Part
2 if said license was obtained through nondisclosure, misstatement or
misrepresentation of any material fact, or if a penalty has been imposed
on the licensee under § 263-37 of this Part 2. Before a license may be
revoked, the licensee shall be notified in writing, with the charges against
him enumerated, and shall be entitled to a hearing before the Plumbing
Board. This hearing shall be set not sooner than five days after the receipt
of the notice of revocation. At the hearing, the licensee shall be given an
opportunity to present testimony, oral or written, may be represented by
counsel, and shall have the right of cross-examination. The decision of the
Board shall be based on the evidence produced at the hearing and made a
part of the record thereof. Any person whose license has been revoked shall
not be permitted to apply for a new license within one year after date of
revocation.
§ 263-13 HANOVER CODE § 263-15
1:254
ARTICLE IV
Plumbing Board
§ 263-16. Composition; terms of office.
There is hereby established a Plumbing Board (hereinafter referred to as
the Board), to consist of five members. One member of said Board shall be
recommended by and represent the Board of Health, one member shall be
a master plumber licensed by the Borough of Hanover, one member shall
be a journeyman plumber licensed by the Borough, and two shall represent
the public. The members of the Board shall be appointed by the Borough
Council. At the first appointment, one member shall be appointed to serve
for one year, one for two years, one for three years, one for four years and
one for five years: and thereafter, all members shall, in like manner, be
appointed each year to serve five years.
§ 263-17. Meetings.
The Board shall hold its first meeting not more than 30 days after its
appointment. Thereafter, the Board shall meet whenever necessary to carry
out its duties, but in any case the Board shall hold not less than four
meetings a year, with at least one meeting being held in each calendar
quarter.
§ 263-18. Licensing procedures.
The Board shall establish standards and procedures for the qualification,
examination and licensing of master and journeyman plumbers, and shall
authorize the Borough Secretary to issue the appropriate license to each
person who meets the qualifications therefor and who successfully passes
the examination given by the Board. The Board shall elect a Chairman and
a Secretary and shall keep an official record of all of its business.
§ 263-19. License prerequisites.
No applicant for licensing as a master plumber shall be examined by the
Board unless he has had at least five years of practical experience in
plumbing work. No applicant for licensing as a journeyman plumber shall
be examined by the Board unless he has had at least three years of practical
experience in plumbing work.
§ 263-20. Termination of membership on Board.
If any person, having been appointed as a member of the Plumbing Board,
shall neglect or refuse to attend two successive meetings, unless detained
by sickness, or prevented by necessary absence from the Borough, or if a
member of the Board in attendance at any meetings shall neglect or refuse
to vote or by his withdrawal from the Board or otherwise refuse to act in his
official capacity as a member of the Board, the Borough Council may declare
his office as a member of the Board vacant and may fill such vacancy. For
such actions, a majority of the Council shall constitute a quorum.
§ 263-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-21
1:255
§ 263-21. Chairman and Secretary; bylaws.
The Plumbing Board shall at their first organization meeting appoint a
Chairman and a Secretary of the Board, and adopt a set of bylaws governing
the administration of the Board and conduct of the meetings. The bylaws
to be adopted shall be submitted to Borough Council for approval and
ratification.
§ 263-22. Quorum.
A quorum for all actions taken by the Plumbing Board shall constitute not
less than a majority of the members of the Board.
§ 263-23. Reports to Borough Manager.
Following each meeting of the Board, and in no case not more than two
weeks following each meeting of the Board, the Secretary of the Board shall
file with the Borough Manager a copy of the minutes of the Board meeting,
together with a report of all matters, whether informal or formal, being
considered by the Board.
§ 263-21 HANOVER CODE § 263-23
1:256
ARTICLE V
Examinations
§ 263-24. Appropriate examinations; fee. [Amended 4-18-1973 by
Ord. No. 1570; 8-26-2015 by Ord. No. 2231]
Except for master plumbers and journeyman plumbers licensed under the
provisions of § 263-12 of this Part 2, all persons desiring to be licensed as
master or journeyman plumbers must pass the appropriate examinations
given by the Plumbing Board. Such persons shall make written application
to the Board not less than 15 days prior to the date fixed for the
examination. The fee for examination as a master plumber shall be $100.
The fee for examination as a journeyman plumber shall be $50. Said fees
shall be adjusted from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.
Payment of said fee shall accompany the application for the examination.
§ 263-25. Reexaminations.
Any applicant who fails the examination the first time may, after the
expiration of 30 days, apply for one reexamination without additional fee.
If he shall fail twice, thereafter he shall be examined only if he pays the
examination fee for every additional examination that he takes. Examination
fees are not returnable.
§ 263-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-25
1:257

ARTICLE VI
Plumbing Permits
§ 263-26. Permit required to do work. [Amended 4-18-1973 by Ord.
No. 1570]
No plumbing work of any kind, except as provided in § 263-29 below, shall
be undertaken until a permit has been issued by the Borough Secretary.
Said permit may be issued only to a licensed master plumber or to the
property owner of the property in question.
§ 263-27. Application; drawings; payment of fees.
An application for a plumbing permit shall be made on a prescribed form,
and shall designate the lot, block or street name or number where the work
is to be performed and the name of the owner of the property, and shall
be accompanied by a legible drawing indicating fixtures, pipe sizes, vent
locations, character of materials and measurements. The applicant, shall
pay all fees for plumbing permits when he submits his application.
§ 263-28. Changes or corrections to plans or drawings.
If, in the course of work, it is desired to alter or deviate in any manner
from the plans or specifications, notice of such intentions shall be given
the Plumbing Inspector and a corrected drawing furnished before the
inspection is made. Permits shall be revoked for any material departure
from the approved plans or drawings or in case any false statement or
nondisclosure was made in securing the permit.
§ 263-29. Work by property owner; certain repairs excluded.
[Amended 4-18-1973 by Ord. No. 1570]
§ 263-30. Termination of permits.
All permits shall lapse by limitation and become void if the work is not
started within 12 months from the date of issuance. Permit fees are not
returnable.
A. Single-family dwellings. Any permit required by this Part 2 may be
issued to a bona fide owner-occupant of a single-family dwelling, which
is to be occupied exclusively for living purposes, to do any work
regulated by the code on the said dwelling and any of its accessory
buildings and quarters on the condition that the said owner personally
purchase all material and perform all labor in connection therewith.
B. Repairs. Repairs which involve only the working parts of a faucet or
valve, the clearance of stoppages, the repairing of leaks or the
replacement of defective faucets or valves may be made without permit,
provided no alterations are made in the existing piping to fixtures.
§ 263-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-31
1:259
§ 263-31. Permit fees. [Amended 12-31-1971 by Ord. No. 1539;
11-16-1988 by Ord. No. 1849; 8-26-2015 by Ord. No. 2232]
The fees for plumbing permits shall be as follows:
A. For each set of drawings and ground plans submitted requiring at least
two or more inspections (namely, a roughing-in inspection and a final
inspection):
(1) For each inspection for one to seven fixtures' installation: $25.
(2) Per fixture for each additional fixture in excess of seven: $5.
B. For each set of drawings submitted for alterations or additions, etc.,
requiring only a final inspection:
(1) For one to seven fixtures' installation: $15.
(2) Per fixture for each additional fixture in excess of seven: $2.50.
C. Said fees for plumbing permits may be adjusted from time to time by
resolution passed by the Borough Council of the Borough of Hanover.
§ 263-31 HANOVER CODE § 263-31
1:260
ARTICLE VII
Plumbing Inspector
§ 263-32. Creation of office; duties.
There is hereby created the position of Plumbing Inspector of the Borough
of Hanover. Said Plumbing Inspector shall work under the direction of
the Borough Manager. It shall be his duty to supervise and inspect all
plumbing work to ensure that the same is done in conformity with the
provisions of this Part 2 and in conformity with the plans and specifications
for which the plumbing permit was issued. All applications for plumbing
permits, together with the drawings and other data, shall be submitted to
the Plumbing Inspector. No permit shall be issued by the Borough Secretary
until the same has been authorized, in writing, by the Plumbing Inspector.
The Plumbing Inspector shall keep suitable records of all permits issued,
including drawings and other pertinent data.
§ 263-33. Official badge; right of entry.
The Plumbing Inspector shall be identified by an official badge. The
Plumbing Inspector shall, after proper identification, have the right to enter
any premises for the purpose of inspecting any plumbing system, at such
times as may be reasonably necessary to protect the public health.
§ 263-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-33
1:261

ARTICLE VIII
National Plumbing Code
§ 263-34. Adoption by reference; amendments. [Amended
4-18-1973 by Ord. No. 1570; 10-21-1992 by Ord. No. 1912]
The rules, regulations and requirements for the construction of plumbing
and house and building drainage shall be those specified in the National
Standard Plumbing Code, 1990 Edition, subject to the following revisions,
supplements and additions thereto:
A. Paragraph 2.6.4, page 2-3, "Safety Precautions," shall be changed to
read:
"All rules and regulations pertaining to safety and protection of
workmen, other persons in the vicinity and neighboring property shall
be observed where trenching, blasting or other hazardous operations
are being conducted."
B. Paragraph 2.9.1, page 2-4, "Breakage," shall be omitted.
C. Paragraph 2.16, page 2-5, "Freezing," shall be changed to read:
"Water service piping and sewers shall be installed below recorded
frost penetration but not less below grade than four feet for water and
three feet for sewer in the case of installation of piping and sewer.
Water, soil or waste piping are not permitted outside of a building or
in an exterior wall unless complete and proper provision is made to
protect such pipe from freezing."
D. Paragraph 5.4.6, page 5-3, "Building Drain and Building Sewer
Junction," shall be changed to read:
"a. There shall be a cleanout near the junction of the building drain and
building sewer. This cleanout shall be installed outside the building
wall and brought up to finish grade."
E. Paragraph 12.8.1, page 12-4, Table 12.8.1, "Maximum Distance of
Fixture Trap From Vent," shall be changed to read:
Size of Fixture Drain
(inches)
Distance, Trap to Vent
(feet)
1 1/2 8
2 8
3 9
4 10
F. Paragraph 13.1.5, page 13-2, "Subsoil Drains," shall be changed to
read:
§ 263-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-34
1:263
"a. Subsoil Drains. Subsoil drains may be provided around the
perimeter of all buildings having basements, cellars or crawl spaces
or floors below grade. Such subsoil drains may be positioned inside or
outside of the footing and shall be of perforated or open joint approved
drain tile or pipe not less than three inches in diameter and be laid
in gravel, slag, crushed rock or other approved porous material with a
minimum of four inches surrounding the pipe on all sides."
G. The first sentence of Paragraph 11.5.5, page 11-6, shall be changed to
read: [Amended 11-16-1988 by Ord. No. 1849]
"No portion of the drainage system installed underground or below
basement or cellar shall be less than three inches in diameter except
floor drains, which may be no less than two inches if five feet in length
or less. If the drain is over five feet, its entire length shall be three
inches in diameter.
"The Plumbing Inspector will have authority to prohibit floor drains
installed below grade with connection to the sanitary sewer. Where
allowed due to the physical layout of the property and the need to
provide sewer hookup without unusual hardship, backwater valves
may be required in floor drains in lieu of a trap primer where traps
receive little use and sewer gas backflow could be a problem.
"Sump pumps may be allowed and flow meters may be required, at
the discretion of the Plumbing Inspector, where the physical layout of
the property and the need to provide sewer hookup without unusual
hardship is necessary, but he shall safeguard such to prohibit
groundwater infiltration as is practical, given the physical layout."
H. Paragraph 13.1.5, page 13-1, "Subsoil Drains," shall be changed to
read:
"a. Subsoil drains may be piped to a storm drain or to an approved
watercourse or to the front street curb or gutter or to the alley; or the
discharge from the subsoil drains may be conveyed to the alley by a
concrete gutter."
I. Add Paragraph 13.1.5(g) to page 13-2:
"Where a continuous flowing spring or excessive groundwater is
encountered, a subsoil drain must be piped to a storm drain or an
administrative-approved watercourse."
J. The Plumbing Inspector may require a gate valve on the discharge line
of all sewage ejector pumps installed in the sewer system. [Added
11-16-1988 by Ord. No. 1849]
K. Section 3.6.3, Building Sanitary Sewer, shall be changed to read as
follows:
§ 263-34 HANOVER CODE § 263-34
1:264
§ 263-35. Future revisions; reports to Council.
The Plumbing Board shall study from time to time the National Plumbing
Code and latest revisions thereof and make a report to the Borough Council
of suggested revisions to this Part 2 and Plumbing Code as adopted by the
Borough Council. Such a report shall be filed at the first regular meeting
of the Borough Council held in January of each year or from time to time
during the year as the Board deems necessary.
§ 263-36. Variances.
Where the Plumbing Boards finds that extraordinary hardships may result
from strict compliance with the regulations of the Plumbing Code as
adopted, it may vary them, in specific instances, so that substantial justice
may be done and public interest secured; provided, however, that such
variation will not have the effect of nullifying the interest and purpose of the
general community welfare or these regulations, and provided further that
such variation, to be effective, must be approved at an official meeting by at
least four members of the Board, and provided further that such variation,
to be effective, must be ratified by the Hanover Borough Council.
Sewer pipe material shall be bituminized fiber, cast iron, concrete,
vitrified clay, copper, ABS or PVC sewer pipe (SDR 35 or heavier)
plastic pipe or PVC sewer pipe (PS 46 PSI or stiffer) plastic pipe. Joints
shall be watertight and rustproof.
§ 263-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-36
1:265

ARTICLE IX
Administration and Enforcement
§ 263-37. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Part 2 shall, upon
conviction thereof before the Mayor or any Magisterial District Judge of the
Borough of Hanover, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $100, plus
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment in the York County Jail for not more than 30 days. Each day
that a violation is permitted to continue without correction shall constitute
a separate offense punishable by like fine or penalty.
§ 263-38. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this
Part 2, and specifically Ordinance No. 741, enacted December 20, 1950, as
amended, are hereby repealed.
§ 263-39. Attachment of copy.
The Secretary of the Borough of Hanover shall attach to the ordinance
book of the Borough of Hanover a copy of the National Plumbing Code as
herein incorporated by reference, with the same force and effect as if duly
recorded therein.
§ 263-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-39
1:267
Chapter 265
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 142.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 170.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 212.
Housing standards — See Ch. 230.
Plumbing — See Ch. 263.
Snow and ice removal — See Ch. 316, Art. III.
§ 265-1. Adoption of standards.
The International Property Maintenance Code, 2009 edition, as published
by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the Property
Maintenance Code of the Borough of Hanover for regulating and governing
the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures
located in the Borough; providing the standards for supplied utilities and
facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that
structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; providing for the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and
use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; and
providing each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions
and terms of said Property Maintenance Code on file in the office of the
Borough of Hanover which are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part
hereof, as if fully set out in this legislation, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 265-2 of this chapter.
§ 265-2. Revisions and modifications.
The following sections are hereby revised (Those sections or portions
thereof not revised hereby shall remain as originally stated in the Code.):
A. Section 101.1 Title. Insert: Borough of Hanover.
B. Section 103.5 Fees.
The fees for activities and services performed by the department in
carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be as set forth
in a resolution adopted by the Borough Council, with such fees to be
modified from time to time by a resolution of the Borough Council.
C. Section 106.3 Prosecution of violation. Substitute for first sentence:
Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order served
in accordance with Section 107 shall be deemed guilty of a summary
offense and prosecution for every such offense shall be according to
the practice in the case of summary convictions. Any such violation
shall be deemed a strict liability offense.
§ 263-39 HANOVER CODE § 265-2
1:268
D. Section 106.4 Violation penalties.
Any person who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply
therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall, upon
conviction, be liable to pay a fine not to exceed $1,000, plus court
costs, or, in default thereof, to be sentenced and committed to the
county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days. Any such person shall
also be subject to all penalties as set forth in the Borough Code (53 P.S.
§§ 45101 to 48501) or as otherwise provided by law. Each day that a
violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a
separate offense.
E. Section 107.2 Form.
Such notice prescribed in Section 107.1 shall be in accordance with all
of the following:
1. Be in writing and be delivered to the property owner and occupant
(if applicable).
5. Inform the property owner and the occupant of the right to appeal.
F. Section 107.3 Method of service.
Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is:
1. Delivered personally to the owner and/or the occupant, as
appropriate;
2. Sent by certified or first-class mail to the last known address of the
owner and/or occupant, as appropriate.
G. Section 108.3 Notice.
Whenever the code official has condemned a structure or equipment
under the provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice and
served on the owner, occupant or other person or persons responsible
for the structure or equipment in accordance with Section 107.3....
H. Section 108.4 Placarding.
Upon failure of the owner, occupant or person responsible to comply...
I. Section 112.4 Failure to comply.
Any person who shall continue any work after having been served
with a stop-work order, except such work as that person is directed
to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall, upon
conviction, be liable to pay a fine not to exceed $1,000, plus court
costs, or, in default thereof, to be sentenced and committed to the
county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
J. Section 302.4 Weeds. Insert: six inches.
§ 265-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-2
1:269
Chapter 266
PROPERTY, VACANT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 142.
Building regulations — See Ch. 150.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 170.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 212.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 265.
Solid waste — See Ch. 308.
K. Section 304.14 Insect screens. Insert: from April 1 to November 30.
L. Section 602.3 Heat supply. Insert: from October 1 to April 30.
M. Section 602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Insert: from October 1 to April
30.
§ 265-2 HANOVER CODE § 265-2
1:270
ARTICLE I
Registration of Vacant Property
[Adopted 9-27-2017 by Ord. No. 2262]
§ 266-1. Purpose; applicability; enforcement; list.
§ 266-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, where terms are not defined, such terms
shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. The
following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them as
follows:
BOARDED — A building, structure or dwelling unit subject to the provisions
of this article if in place of one or more exterior doors, other than a storm
door, or of one or more windows, there is a sheet or sheets of plywood or
similar material covering the space for such door or window.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
NOTICE — Written notice of a violation or requirement under this article
mailed, pursuant to first class mail, proof of mailing, to the last known
address of the owner of the property in question.
OCCUPIED — As applied to a building or structure subject to the provisions
of this article, where one or more persons actually conduct a lawful business
A. The purpose of this article is to require property owners to register
vacant buildings and to require payment of registration fees to assist
the Borough in protecting the public health, safety and welfare, to
monitor the number of vacant buildings in the Borough, to assess the
effects of the condition of those buildings on nearby businesses and the
neighborhoods in which they are located, particularly in light of fire
safety hazards and unlawful, temporary occupancy by transients,
including illicit drug users and traffickers, and to promote efforts to
rehabilitate such vacant buildings.
B. The provisions of this article are applicable to the owners of vacant
buildings as set forth herein and are in addition to and not in lieu of any
and all other applicable provisions of the Codified Ordinances of the
Borough of Hanover.
C. Administration and enforcement of this article shall be the
responsibility of the Borough Manager, or his designee(s). The Borough
Manager or his designee(s) shall have the authority to institute
summary criminal proceedings as a means of enforcement of this
article.
D. The Borough Manager shall provide a list of registered property to the
Chief of Police, the Fire Chief, Code Enforcement personnel, and the
Public Safety Committee of the Borough Council.
§ 266-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-2
1:271
or reside in all or any part of the building as the business occupant, or
as the legal or equitable owner/occupant(s) or tenant(s) on a permanent,
nontransient basis, or any combination of the same. For purposes of this
article, evidence offered to prove that a building is so occupied may include,
but shall not be limited to, the regular receipt of mail through the U.S. Postal
Service; proof of continual telephone, electric, gas, heating, water and
sewer services; a valid Borough business license; the most recent federal,
state, or local income tax statements indicating that the subject property
is the official business or residence address of the person or business in
question; or proof of occupancy through a Borough inspection.
OPEN — A building or structure or dwelling unit subject to the provisions
of this article in which any one or more exterior doors, other than a storm
door, is broken, open and/or closed, but, without a properly functioning lock
to secure it, or if one or more windows is broken or not capable of being
locked and secured from intrusion or any combination of the same.
OWNER — Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity having a legal
or equitable interest in the property as evidenced by documents recorded in
the official records of York County or the Borough of Hanover, or otherwise
having legal control of the property, including the guardian of the estate
of any person and the personal representative of the estate of a deceased
person.
VACANT — As applied to a building or structure subject to the provisions
of this article, no person or persons actually, currently conduct a lawfully
licensed business, or lawfully reside or live in any part of the building as
the legal or equitable owner(s) or tenant-occupant(s), or owner-occupants,
or tenant(s) on a permanent nontransient basis.
§ 266-3. Registration; fee.
The requirements of this article shall be applicable to each owner of any
building whether governmental, industrial, commercial, residential or
institutional or owned by a nonprofit or a for-profit organization in which the
building in total shall have been vacant for more than 45 days. Each such
owner shall cause to be filed a notarized registration statement, which shall
include the street address and parcel number of each such vacant building,
the names and addresses of all owners, as herein described, and any other
information deemed necessary by the Borough. The registration statement
and, where applicable, registration fee, shall be filed with and/or paid to the
Borough Treasurer on or before November 15 or, if November 15 falls on
Saturday or Sunday, by the following Monday, of each year. For purposes of
this action, the application initially shall be due on November 15, 2017. For
purposes of this article, the following shall also be applicable:
A. If the owner is a corporation, the registration statement shall provide
the names and residence address of the corporation and the name of a
responsible corporate officer to whom correspondence and notices
from the Borough may be sent;
§ 266-2 HANOVER CODE § 266-3
1:272
§ 266-4. Registration statement; local agent.
B. If an estate, the name(s) and address(es) of the personal
representative(s) of the estate;
C. If a trust, the name and address of all trustees;
D. If a limited liability company, the name(s) and address(es) of all
members and managers;
E. If a partnership, the names and residence addresses of all partners;
F. If any other form of unincorporated association, the names and
residence addresses of all principals of the association;
G. If an individual person, the name and residence address of that
individual person.
A. If none of the persons listed in § 266-3 is shown at an address within the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the registration statement also shall
provide the name and address of a person who resides within the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and who is authorized to accept service
of process on behalf of the owners and who shall be designated as a
responsible, local party or agent, both for purposes of notification in the
event of an emergency affecting the public health, safety or welfare and
for purposes of service of any and all notices or registration statements
as herein authorized and in connection herewith.
B. Registration shall be required for all vacant buildings, whether vacant
and secure, vacant and open or vacant and boarded, and shall be
required whenever any building has remained vacant for 45
consecutive days or more. In no instance shall the registration of a
vacant building and the payment of registration fees be construed to
exonerate the owner, agent or responsible party from responsibility for
compliance with any requirement of the Borough Property Maintenance
Code, Building Code, Fire Code or other applicable federal, state or
municipal laws, ordinances or regulations. One registration statement
may be filed to include all vacant buildings of the owner so registering.
C. The owner of a vacant property as of November 15 of each year shall be
responsible for the filing of his/her registration statement and, where
applicable, paying a nonrefundable registration fee. Said fee shall be
billed by the Borough Treasurer and shall be established from time to
time by resolution of the Borough Council. The registration fee shall be
paid for each vacant building owned by the owner notwithstanding the
inclusion of multiple buildings or structures included on one
registration statement. In addition to the registration fee, the owner of
a vacant property shall pay a property inspection fee as billed by the
Borough Treasurer. The amount of said fee shall be established from
time to time by resolution of the Borough Council. The inspection fee
shall be paid for each vacant building owned by the owner
§ 266-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-4
1:273
§ 266-5. Uses of fees and fines.
notwithstanding the inclusion of multiple buildings or structures
included on one registration statement.
(1) Council hereby approves the initial registration fee for vacant
buildings within the Borough to be imposed in accordance herewith
as $100 per building.
(2) Council hereby approves the initial inspection fee for vacant
properties within the Borough to be imposed in accordance
herewith as $150 per building. (This fee shall include an initial
inspection and one reinspection. Subsequent reinspections shall be
charged at $75 each.)
(3) Upon the registration of a property, an inspector authorized by the
Borough may conduct an inspection of the property to determine if
it complies with the Property Maintenance Code, Fire Code,
Building Code and all other applicable laws, ordinances and
regulations. If the building is found to be in violation of any such
codes, laws, ordinances or regulations, the Borough shall issue a
notice of violation as per the requirements of each such code, law,
ordinance or regulation violated or refer the matter to the
appropriate federal, state or county agency for enforcement
proceedings. With respect to matters to be enforced by the
Borough, Borough officials shall direct that the owner comply with
the enforcement notice. The inspector authorized by the Borough
may conduct additional inspections of a property when he/she
determines that there has been a modification of a structure or
building, a change of use of a structure or building, damage to a
structure or building from any source, a potential or actual
violation of any law, ordinance or regulation applicable thereto, or
a determination by the inspector that circumstances have changed
with respect to the condition or use of any structure or building on
the property.
(4) The inspector is authorized and directed to make inspections at any
reasonable hour to determine compliance with the Property
Maintenance Code, Fire Code or any other applicable code, law,
ordinance or regulation. For this purpose, the inspector is
authorized to enter and examine any building, structure, yard, or
portions thereof and every owner, operator, tenant or occupant
shall allow the Inspector, his agents or assistants, access thereto.
A. Registration fees shall be dedicated to a line item in the budget for the
enforcement and administration of the vacant property registration
requirements within this chapter.
B. Fines for violations of this chapter shall be deposited in to the
Borough's General Fund to be used for general purposes.
§ 266-4 HANOVER CODE § 266-6
1:274
§ 266-6. One-time waiver of registration fee.
A one-time, one-year waiver of the registration fee may be granted by
the Borough Manager upon application of the owner and upon review and
advice of the Borough Solicitor, if the owner:
§ 266-7. Two-year waiver.
Upon application by the owner and satisfaction of § 266-6, the Borough
Manager may, upon advice and review of the Borough Solicitor, grant a
two-year waiver of the registration fee if the owner meets the criteria for
a charitable nonprofit organization as defined by § 501(c)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code or if the building owner is the United States, Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania or a subdivision thereof, or a county, municipality or school
district or a related department, agency or authority.
§ 266-8. Decision on application for waiver; appeals.
Within 30 days after the waiver application is received by the Borough
Manager, and upon review and advice by the Borough Solicitor, the Borough
Manager or designee shall grant or deny the waiver in writing, and mail
the written decision to the owner. If the owner properly submitted an
application for a waiver to the Borough Manager and the Borough Manager
has rendered a decision which the owner seeks to appeal, the owner must
file an application, in writing, within 15 calendar days of mailing of the
Borough Manager's decision, with the Public Safety Committee of the
Borough Council, stating the basis for the appeal. If the Public Safety
A. Demonstrates with satisfactory proof to the Borough Manager that he/
she has submitted valid architectural or building plans, based on the
Borough's building permit and/or planning application procedures, and
otherwise has shown good faith efforts to rehabilitate, demolish, or
otherwise substantially repair, improve or remove the vacant building;
or
B. Demonstrates with satisfactory proof to the Borough Manager that he/
she is actively marketing the property for sale/lease. Actively marketing
will be defined as an owner having placed a "for sale" or a "for lease"
sign on the exterior of the property with accurate contact information,
which information is provided to the Borough and has done at least one
of the following:
(1) Engaged the services of a licensed real estate broker, whose name,
address, telephone number and email will be provided to the
Borough Manager;
(2) Placed weekly advertisements in print or electronic media;
(3) Distributed printed advertisements;
(4) Listed the property for sale or lease in the local multiple listing
service (MLS).
§ 266-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-8
1:275
Committee determines that the appeal should be granted, it shall
recommend to the full Borough Council that the Borough Manager's
decision should be vacated and shall recommend what, in its judgement,
is an appropriate remedy or disposition of the application. If the Public
Safety Committee determines that the appeal should not be granted, it
shall make such recommendation to the Borough Council. The Borough
Council shall render the final decision of the appeal, after consideration
of the determination of the Public Safety Committee, the recommendation
of the Borough Manager and any relevant staff or third-party reports or
documentation. The Borough Manager shall be afforded an opportunity to
present the basis of his decision to both the Public Safety Committee and to
the Borough Council.
§ 266-9. Delinquent fees.
If the owner fails to pay the registration or inspection fee when due, the
registration shall be deemed incomplete, the owner shall be in violation
hereof and he/she/it shall be subject to penalty as set forth below.
§ 266-10. Duty to amend registration statement.
If the status of the registration information changes, including, but not
limited to, the ownership of the property, it is the responsibility of the
owner to contact the Borough Manager within 30 days of the occurrence of
such change and to provide the Borough with an amended registration, in
writing, detailing such changes.
§ 266-11. Violations and penalties.
The failure or refusal for any reason of an owner to file a registration
statement or to pay any fees required to be paid pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter or any other violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
constitute a summary offense punishable upon conviction thereof by a fine
not to exceed $1,000 per violation and/or imprisonment as provided by law
for summary offenses. Each day in which an owner is in violation of the
terms hereof and each section of the chapter violated shall be considered
separate offenses for which the above penalties may be imposed.
§ 266-8 HANOVER CODE § 266-11
1:276
Chapter 267
PUBLIC MARKET
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Eating and drinking establishments — See
Ch. 137, Part 2.
Food handlers — See Ch. 217.
Parks and other public areas — See Ch. 259.
§ 267-1. Establishment; hours.
There is hereby established a public market in the Hanover Market House
Building situate on the north side of East Chestnut Street, in the Borough of
Hanover, York County, Pennsylvania, to be held upon such days and at such
hours as the Market House Committee of the Borough Council shall from
time to time authorize and direct.
§ 267-2. Stall rentals; rates; subletting prohibited. [Amended
11-21-1962 by Ord. No. 1161; 9-1-1976 by Ord. No. 1670]
A. The stalls shall be let from year to year from the first day of January of
each year, or for six-month terms from the first day of January and from
the first day of July of each year, or for three-month terms from the first
day of January, the first day of April, the first day of July and the first day
of October of each year, at such rental as the Borough Council may from
time to time by motion fix, which said rentals shall be payable quarterannually
in advance. In the event that any rental payments shall
become delinquent for more than 15 days, a penalty of 10% shall be
added and collected as a part of said rent. Nothing herein contained
shall be construed as prohibiting the payment of rentals semiannually
in advance.
B. The 2017/2018 stall rental rates shall be as follows: [Amended
10-27-2004 by Res. No. 830; 9-27-2006 by Res. No. 862;
12-23-2008 by Res. No. 899; 10-13-2010 by Res. No. 938;
9-26-2012 by Res. No. 1012; 9-24-2014 by Res. No. 1081;
9-28-2016 by Res. No. 1135]
(1) Annual stall rental rate: $305.
(2) Semiannual stall rental rate: $235.
(3) Quarterly stall rental rate: $215.
(4) Weekly stall rental rate: $25.
(5) Restaurant stall rental rate, plus eating space: $955 ($650 plus
$305).
§ 266-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-2
1:277
§ 267-3. Responsibilities of stall holders; repossession.
All stall holders will be held responsible for any damage to stalls and
fixtures caused by them or their employees, and the cost of repairing
the same will be collected by the Market Master. All stall holders shall
keep their stalls in a clean and sanitary condition and, at the cost of the
market, deposit all refuse in cans provided by the market for that purpose.
Renters of butcher stalls must comply with the laws regulating the sale of
fresh meats. All aisles are to be kept open to their full width, and neither
fixtures nor merchandise will be allowed to stand in said aisles. The Council,
through the Market House Committee, reserves the right without further
notice to repossess any stall in case the lessee thereof fails to comply with
the foregoing rules and regulations.
§ 267-4. Market Master.
The Borough Council shall appoint a person, subject to dismissal at any
time, to act as Market Master. Said Market Master shall supervise the
market, keep it clean and in good order, shall open the Market House on
market days and see that proper order is maintained and that the rules
pertaining to the government of the market are carried out. He shall remain
in attendance until the close of the market, shall act as janitor of the Market
House Building, shall have the sidewalks swept dally and remove all snow
therefrom and shall attend to the heating plant and see that the same is
kept and maintained in proper condition. He shall assign stalls to transient
vendors, collect all rentals from stall holders, issue a receipt in triplicate
and turn the money over to the Borough Secretary weekly.
§ 267-5. Reserving or selling prior to opening time.
There shall be no selling of any article offered for sale before the appointed
hour of opening the market.
§ 267-6. Stall rentals to be decision of Borough; vendors to attend.
[Added 11-20-1985 by Ord. No. 1810]
The Borough of Hanover reserves the right to rent stalls to vendors as it
believes to be in the best interests of the Borough. Vendors are expected
to attend to their stalls every market day rented. The Borough of Hanover
reserves the right not to rent stalls to vendors who serve the public poorly.
C. All purchasers of stalls for the year term or six-month term shall sign a
lease agreement for the rental money for their respective stalls for the
year term or the six-month term, as the case may be; and in default of
payment, the same shall be collectible as are other debts of such
nature. All purchasers of stalls for the three-month term shall pay the
rental therefor prior to the commencement of the three-month term.
D. Stall purchasers are prohibited from subletting all or part of their stalls
to any other person or persons; the use of the stall is and shall be
limited to the purchaser thereof.
§ 267-2 HANOVER CODE § 267-6
1:278
Chapter 274
RAILROADS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
§ 274-1. Restriction on use of horns and whistles.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a locomotive within the limits of the
Borough of Hanover, York County, Pennsylvania, to sound a horn or whistle
attached to a locomotive when approaching a street, grade or crossing.
§ 274-2. Construal of provisions.
This chapter shall not be construed as to relieve a railroad or the operator
of a locomotive from any duty or responsibility to give warnings by means
of a bell or by any other device which is not herein specifically prohibited.
§ 274-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalties prescribed and set forth in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty,
of the Code of the Borough of Hanover.
Chapter 278
RENTAL PROPERTY
§ 267-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-3
1:279

ARTICLE I
Occupancy Reports
[Adopted 12-19-1984 by Ord. No. 1796]
§ 278-1. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them as set forth in this section, unless the context shall clearly
indicate or require a different meaning:
LANDLORD — Any person who owns and leases all or any part of his real
estate to another person for a dwelling unit for a consideration, monetary
or otherwise, or who owns and permits another person to use or occupy all
or a part of his real estate for a dwelling unit with or without consideration.
OCCUPANT — Any person who uses or occupies real estate other than the
owner/landlord thereof.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, firm, company,
corporation or other entity.
TENANT — Any person who leases real estate for a consideration, monetary
or otherwise.
§ 278-2. Duties of landlord.
Within 30 days of the effective date of this article, or within 30 days of a
new tenant occupying a rental unit, all landlords shall distribute to each
tenant occupying a dwelling unit owned by such landlord a report form
furnished by the Secretary of the Borough of Hanover for purposes of
reporting such information as is required thereon. The landlord shall certify
to the Borough of Hanover that such report form has been distributed to
such tenant and further state that a tenant is occupying a certain dwelling
unit or numbers of dwelling units by specifying the address of the same, unit
number, apartment number or some other meaningful method which will
allow the Borough of Hanover to identify such dwelling unit as it is occupied
by the tenant.
§ 278-3. Duties of tenant.
Within 30 days of the receipt of such report form from the landlord, each
tenant shall complete such information as the form may require, including
but not limited to the names or names and sex of the tenants and occupants
of said units; if natural persons, the age of each occupant and tenant and
recertification as to which unit is leased or occupied by each.
§ 278-4. Duties of Borough Secretary.
The Borough Secretary is hereby authorized to prepare and distribute such
form or forms as shall be necessary for recording and filling information
required by this article, together with such other information as the
Borough Secretary shall deem reasonably necessary and relevant to enable
§ 278-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-4
1:281
the Borough to determine the taxability of any person under any Borough
taxing ordinances now or hereafter in effect.
§ 278-5. Violations and penalties.
Any landlord or tenant who shall violate any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a Magisterial
District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine not in excess of $300, and costs of
prosecution, and, in default of such payment, to undergo imprisonment in
the York County Jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 278-4 HANOVER CODE § 278-5
1:282
Chapter 282
RUNNING SAFETY
§ 282-1. General requirements.
Any person running for exercise on the public rights-of-way 30 minutes
prior to dusk and 30 minutes after dawn is required to wear reflective
clothing with phosphorescent qualities capable of reflecting automobile
light a distance of 1,000 feet or the same distance as auto lights are
required to shine under the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code,71 as the same may
be amended from time to time.
§ 282-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this chapter will be subject to a fine and/or
imprisonment as provided for by Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, of the
Code of the Borough of Hanover, as amended.
§ 282-3. Construal of provisions.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed as granting permission to use
the public streets contrary to the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.72
Chapter 286
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Building regulations — See Ch. 150.
Housing standards — See Ch. 230.
Plumbing — See Ch. 263.
Sewer use regulations — See Ch. 290.
Water — See Ch. 355.
71.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
72.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 278-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-3
1:283

ARTICLE I
Cesspools; Privy Vaults; Septic Tanks
[Adopted 12-29-1954 by Ord. No. 86273]
§ 286-1. Permit required.
In any location within the Borough of Hanover where connection with
a sanitary sewer is not or shall not hereafter be required by any other
ordinance, a privy vault, cesspool or septic tank may be constructed and
maintained, the owner of such property having first obtained a permit
therefor from the Board of Health of the Borough.
§ 286-2. Plans and specifications; repair and cleaning.
All privy vaults, cesspools and septic tanks hereafter constructed in the
Borough of Hanover shall be constructed according to plans and
specifications approved by the Board of Health. Such approval shall be
granted only when such plans and specifications meet standards of
construction such as will not result in a menace to the health of any user
of such privy vault, cesspool or septic tank, and of the other inhabitants
of the Borough, or the creation of any annoyance to any inhabitant of the
Borough. All cesspools, privy vaults and septic tanks in the Borough shall be
kept in good repair and shall be cleaned out with sufficient frequency as not
to create any condition of annoyance, offensiveness or menace to health. All
privy vaults, cesspools and septic tanks constructed or maintained contrary
to the provisions of this article shall constitute a nuisance, abatable under
the direction of the Board of Health.
§ 286-3. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 326, approved the seventh day of June 1919 and entitled "An
ordinance regulating the location, construction and maintenance of privy
vaults, and providing for the issuing of a permit and prescribing penalties
for the violation hereof," is hereby repealed.
73.Editor's Note: This ordinance was amended 10-31-1968 by Ord. No. 1411.
§ 286-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 286-3
1:285

ARTICLE II
Connections
[Adopted 4-18-1956 by Ord. No. 898]
§ 286-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORITY — Refers to Hanover Borough, York County, Authority, as
presently or hereafter constituted, which has been created by said Borough
Council and to which has been referred by said Borough Council the specific
project of sewers.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Hanover, York County, Pennsylvania, or the
duly constituted and elected municipal authorities thereof.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Refers to the liquid, gaseous or solid waste from
industrial processes, as distinct from domestic sewage.
LATERAL — Refers to that part of the sewer system extending from a public
main or street sewer to curbline, or property line if there is no curb, and
where the main or street sewer line is laid under a sidewalk, the word
"lateral" shall mean and refer to the Y-connection from the main or street
sewer line.
OCCUPIED BUILDING — Refers to any structure erected and intended for
continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or
animals, and from which structure sewage and industrial waste, or either
thereof, is or may be discharged.
PERSON — Includes individuals or natural persons, artificial persons
existing only in contemplation of law, and shall be construed to include
associations, partnerships, limited partnerships, joint-stock companies and
corporations.
PROPERTY ACCESSIBLE TO THE SEWER SYSTEM — Refers to real estate
which adjoins, abuts on or is adjacent to the sewer system, except that
portion of such property from which sewage cannot be made to flow by
gravity to the sewer system.
SEWAGE — Refers to the normal water-carried household and toilet wastes
from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial
establishments.
SEWER SYSTEM — The sanitary sewer collection system and sewage
treatment plant, together with appurtenant facilities, presently constructed
in and for the Borough of Hanover and any improvements, additions or
extensions that hereafter may be made thereto by the Authority or the
Borough or to any part or parts of any or all thereof.
§ 286-5. Connections required.
§ 286-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 286-5
1:287
§ 286-6. Sewage disposal systems restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning any property accessible to the
sewer system to erect, construct or use or maintain or cause to be erected,
constructed, used or maintained any privy, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or
other receptacle on such premises for receiving sewage after the expiration
of the particular period specified in § 286-5 hereof or otherwise at any time
to erect, construct, use or maintain any pipe, conduit, drain or other facility
for the discharge of sewage, except into the sewer system.
§ 286-7. Violation constitutes nuisance; abatement.
Any person who erects, constructs, uses or maintains a privy, cesspool,
sinkhole or septic tank on any property accessible to the sewer system in
violation of this article shall be deemed and shall be declared to be erecting,
constructing and maintaining a nuisance, which nuisance the Borough is
hereby authorized and directed to abate in the manner provided by law.
§ 286-8. Compliance required; rules and regulations.
No connection shall be made to the sewer system except in compliance with
the ordinances and resolutions, as well as such rules and regulations, as
may from time to time be enacted, adopted, approved or promulgated by
the Borough.
A. All persons owning any occupied building now erected upon property
accessible to the sewer system shall, at their own expense, connect
such building with the sewer system within 60 days from the date of
this article.
B. All persons owning any property accessible to the sewer system, upon
which a building is hereafter erected, shall, at the time of erection of
such building and at their own expense, connect the same with the
sewer system.
C. All persons owning any occupied building upon property which
hereafter becomes accessible to the sewer system shall, at their own
expense, connect such building with the sewer system within 60 days
after notice to do so from the Borough.
A. No person shall tap or make any connection into the sewer system in
the Borough of Hanover or adjacent municipalities served by the sewer
system of said Borough of Hanover and administered-maintained by the
Borough of Hanover without first having obtained therefor a plumbing
permit from the Borough Secretary; and for original connections to
existing laterals in the Borough of Hanover, a connection fee of $1,200
shall be paid to the Borough Secretary prior to the issuance of said
plumbing permit. [Added 12-28-1961 by Ord. No. 1122; amended
12-31-1971 by Ord. No. 1538; 10-21-1992 by Ord. No. 1914;
2-26-2003 by Ord. No. 2065; 1-25-2006 by Ord. No. 2105]
§ 286-5 HANOVER CODE § 286-8
1:288
B. The Council of the Borough of Hanover reserves unto itself the right to
refuse to grant permits for connections through which might be
discharged into the sewer system industrial or other wastes of a nature
which may be or which may become injurious to the sewer system.
[Added 12-28-1961 by Ord. No. 1122]
C. In areas within the Borough of Hanover where the sewer lateral from
the sewer main to the curbline has not been laid, said sewer lateral
shall be laid from the sewer main to the inside of the building wall by
the Borough of Hanover or a plumber, registered in the Borough of
Hanover, at the expense of the property owner, in which case the
connection fee of $250 may be waived. In areas within the Borough of
Hanover where said sewer lateral from the sewer main to the curbline
must be replaced or repaired, said lateral shall be replaced or repaired
at the expense of the Borough of Hanover. [Added 12-28-1961 by
Ord. No. 1122; amended 12-31-1971 by Ord. No. 1538;
10-21-1992 by Ord. No. 1914]
D. In areas within the Borough of Hanover where the sewer lateral from
the sewer main to the curbline has been laid and requires no
replacement or repairs thereto, a plumber, registered in the Borough of
Hanover, shall lay the sewer lateral from the existing sewer lateral at
the curbline to the inside of the building wall at the expense of the
property owner. [Added 12-28-1961 by Ord. No. 1122]
E. In areas outside the Borough of Hanover, the sewer lateral from the
sewer main to the inside of the building wall shall be laid by a plumber,
registered in the Borough of Hanover, at the expense of the property
owner. [Added 12-28-1961 by Ord. No. 1122]
F. No stormwater, either from street or gutter inlets or from roof or other
rainwater connections, shall be permitted to enter the sanitary sewer
system, and no construction shall be made and no apparatus shall be
constructed which shall be intended for or shall render possible such
entry. [Added 12-28-1961 by Ord. No. 1122]
G. No surface or subsurface water shall be permitted to enter the sanitary
sewer system, and no construction shall be made and no apparatus
shall be constructed which shall be intended for or shall render possible
such entry. [Added 12-28-1961 by Ord. No. 1122]
H. No insoluble solids of any kind, and no inflammable or volatile liquids,
grease, oils, tar or any other matter not customary to be handled in
sanitary sewers shall be permitted to enter the sanitary sewers, and no
construction shall be made and no apparatus shall be constructed
which shall be intended for or shall render possible such entry. [Added
12-28-1961 by Ord. No. 1122]
I. All connections for garages or other buildings in which grease or oil is
handled as a waste must be equipped with a suitable mechanism to trap
§ 286-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 286-8
1:289
§ 286-9. Noncompliance procedures.
After the expiration of the particular period specified in § 286-5 of this
article, if any owner of an occupied building or property accessible to the
sewer system shall have failed to connect such property with the sewer
system as required by said § 286-5, the Borough shall cause to be served on
the owner of such property so failing to connect to said sewer system, and
also upon the occupants of the building in question, a copy of this article
and a written or printed notice requiring such connection to be made, and
such notice shall further state that its requirements shall be complied with
within 60 days from the date thereof.
§ 286-10. Violations and penalties.
The provisions of this article are declared to be for the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the Borough, and persons violating any provisions
of this article, upon conviction before the Mayor or any Magisterial District
Judge of York County, shall be fined $25 and costs. Each ninety-day period
during which such violation of such provisions shall continue shall be
deemed to be a separate offense.
and collect all oils and greases. [Added 12-28-1961 by Ord. No.
1122]
J. All new residential toilet fixtures or replacement residential toilet
fixtures installed shall be of a low-flow certification, that is, flush with
one and six-tenths gallons or less per flush. [Added 7-1-1992 by Ord.
No. 1908]
K. A cleanout shall be provided behind the curb by every property owner
connecting and/or reconnecting or renewing laterals to the sewer. All
developers or builders preparing lots for sale and arranging for
construction of a service lateral to the main shall provide a cleanout
behind the curb before the sidewalk at the time the service lateral is
constructed. This cleanout shall be in addition to other cleanouts
required. [Added 12-4-1996 by Ord. No. 1993]
§ 286-8 HANOVER CODE § 286-10
1:290
ARTICLE III
Sewer Rents
[Adopted 4-18-1956 by Ord. No. 897]
§ 286-11. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms
used in this article shall be as follows:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Hanover, York County, Pennsylvania.
COUNCIL — The group of elected officials acting as the governing body of
the Borough.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or form
of energy rejected and escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, trade
or business process or from the development, recovery or processing of
natural resources, as distinct from sanitary sewage.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation
or groups.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The normal water-carried household and toilet
wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, commercial and
industrial establishments.
SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities operated by the Borough for the collection,
treatment and disposal of sewage.
§ 286-12. Imposition of sewer rent or charge.
There is hereby imposed upon each property served by the sewer system
and having the use thereof, a quarterly sewer rent or charge, payable as
hereinafter provided, for the use, whether direct or indirect, of the sewer
system, based on the rates hereinafter set forth.
§ 286-13. Rent and charges for sanitary sewage.
A. For collection and treatment of sanitary sewage discharged into the
sewer system from single family dwelling units the rates shall be a
quarterly charge, payable upon receipt of the bill therefore, and based
upon the water used by the property in accordance with the following
rate schedule: [Last amended 12-28-2011 by Res. No. 986]
Gallons Per Quarter Charge
First 7,000 or less $54 (minimum)
Next 18,000 $6.75 per 1,000 gallons
Next 25,000 $6.65 per 1,000 gallons
B. Multiple occupancy or use.
(1) In case two or more dwellings, flats, apartments, stores or offices
or two or more families in one dwelling unit have the use of the
§ 286-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 286-13
1:291
sewer system through one sewer connection, each and every such
dwelling, flat, apartment, store or office shall be charged the
minimum charge set forth in § 286-13A above, the same as if each
such unit or family had a direct and separate connection to the
sewer system. The charge in excess of such minimum shall be
determined by dividing the total quantity of water used, as shown
by the meter readings, by the number of units or families using
such single sewer connection, and applying the rate schedules set
forth in § 286-13A above to the quantity so determined.
(2) For hotels, rooming houses and boardinghouses having the use of
the sewer system through one sewer connection, the quarterly
sewer rent or charge shall be determined as follows: The number
4 1/2 (representing bedrooms) shall be divided by the percentage
of occupancy of all bedrooms during the quarter-yearly period
immediately preceding the then-current quarterly billing period,
and the quotient, rounded out to the next highest whole number,
shall be considered the number of groups of bedrooms in such hotel
or boardinghouse. The number of such groups shall then be divided
into the actual number of bedrooms therein, and this quotient,
rounded out to the next highest whole number, shall be considered
the number of bedroom units in such hotel or boardinghouse for
the current billing period. The number of such bedroom units, plus
the number of each separate public dining room, office, store, shop,
bar, taproom and cocktail lounge in such hotel or boardinghouse,
shall be the total number of units therein, as to each of which there
shall be charged the minimum set forth in § 286-13A above as if
each such unit had a separate and direct connection to the sewer
system. The charge in excess of such minimum shall be determined
by dividing the total quantity of water used, as shown by the meter
readings, by the total number of units, determined as above, using
such single sewer connection, and applying the rate schedules set
forth in § 286-13A above to the quantity so determined.
C. Garbage grinders. The charge for each garbage grinder connected to
the sewer system shall be a quarterly charge, based on the following:
[Amended 10-31-1968 by Ord. No. 1411; 6-6-1973 by Ord. No.
1586]
(1) Private homes, per quarter: $2.50.
(2) Apartments, per dwelling unit, per quarter: $2.50.
(3) Restaurants, hotels, cafeterias and other with seating capacity:
Number of Seats Charge Per Quarter
Over 100 $25
67 to 100 $18.75
33 to 66 $12.50
Less than 33 $6.25
§ 286-13 HANOVER CODE § 286-13
1:292
§ 286-14. Sanitary sewage and industrial wastes from outside of
Borough limits. [Last amended 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2142]
§ 286-15. Measuring volume of sanitary sewage.
D. For collection and treatment of sanitary sewage discharged into the
sewer system from commercial, industrial, institutional and non-single
family dwelling units, the rate shall be a quarterly charge, as set forth
above in the amount of $54, payable based upon the water used by the
property and shall be computed for every such user having direct
connection to the sewer system at the above rates or a minimum of not
less than 75% of the highest quarterly bill in the twelve-month period
immediately preceding the then current billing period, whichever
minimum is higher. The charges in excess of such minimum shall be
determined by the total quantity of water used, as shown by the meter
readings, and applying the rate schedules set forth above to the
quantity so determined. [Last amended 12-28-2011 by Res. No.
986]
A. Single occupancy or use (except commercial and industrial
establishments) outside Hanover Borough in Penn Township using
Blettner Avenue transmission mains to the Hanover Regional
Wastewater Treatment Plant. Effective January 1, 2009, the charge for
collection and treatment of sanitary sewage discharged into the sewer
system from single-family dwelling units or from property used for a
single purpose shall be a quarterly charge, payable as hereinafter
provided, based upon the water used by the property first and shall be
computed from the following rate schedule, until such time as flow
exchange meters shall allow implementation of the Service Agreement
billing existing between the two municipalities dated August 3, 1983:
Gallons Per Quarter Charge
First 7,000 or less $32 (minimum)
All over 7,000 $3 per 1,000 gallons
B. Commercial and industrial establishments. Effective January 1, 2009,
every commercial or industrial user having direct connection to the
sewer system shall pay, for sanitary sewerage service, a minimum
quarterly charge, as set forth in Subsection A above, of $32, or a
minimum of not less than 75% of the highest quarterly bill in the twelvemonth
period immediately preceding the then-current billing period,
whichever minimum is higher. The charges in excess of such minimum
shall be determined by the total quantity of water used, as shown by the
meter readings, and applying the rate schedules set forth in Subsection
A above to the quantity so determined.
A. Methods of measuring volume.
(1) Whenever a person purchasing all water used from the Borough
municipal waterworks discharges sanitary sewage into the sewer
§ 286-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 286-15
1:293
system, the volume of water used, as determined from meter
readings of the Borough, shall be used in computing the sewer
rental.
(2) In cases where dwellings and establishments have sources of water
supply in addition to or other than Borough water and discharge
sanitary sewage into the sewer system, those dwellings and
establishments shall provide a meter on such additional or other
source of supply. The total amount of water consumed, as shown by
these meter readings, will be used in computing the sewer rental.
(3) In cases where establishments use water from the Borough and/or
from an independent supply for industrial purposes and/or for
cooling or air-conditioning purposes, such that all or part of the
water so used is not discharged into the sewer system, the quantity
of water used to determine the sewer rental shall be computed by
one of the following methods:
(a) Method No. 1. By placing a meter or measuring device on the
sewer connection. The readings from this meter or measuring
device shall be used in computing the sewer rental.
(b) Method No. 2. By placing a meter or measuring device on the
effluent not discharging into the sewer system, the readings
from this meter or measuring device will then be deducted
from the total water meter readings and the remainder will be
used in computing the sewer rental.
(c) Method No. 3. When, in the opinion of the Borough Manager, it
is not practical to install measuring devices to continuously
determine the quantity of water not discharged to the sewer
system, the Borough Manager will determine, in such manner
and by such method as he may prescribe, the percentage of
metered water discharged into the sewer system, and the
quantity of water used to compute the sewer rental shall be the
percentage so determined of the quantity measured by the
water meter or meters. Any dispute as to the estimated amount
shall be submitted to the Borough Council after notice of the
estimate, whose decision on the matter shall be final for the
current calendar year.
B. Measuring devices. All meters or measuring devices not provided by
the Hanover municipal waterworks but required to be used under the
provisions of this article shall be furnished and installed by the property
owner and shall be under the control of the Borough, and may be
tested, inspected or repaired by the Borough employees whenever
Council deems necessary. The owner of the property upon which the
measuring device is installed shall be responsible for its maintenance
and safekeeping, and all repairs thereto shall be made at the property
owner's expense, whether such repairs are made necessary by ordinary
wear and tear or other causes. Bills for such repairs, if made by the
§ 286-15 HANOVER CODE § 286-15
1:294
§ 286-16. Additional sewer rent for industrial wastes. [Amended
3-18-1959 by Ord. No. 985]
Borough, shall be due and payable at the same time and collected in
the same manner as are the bills for sewer services; such bills from and
after their due date shall constitute a lien upon the property upon which
such measuring device is installed.
C. Meter reading. Borough shall be responsible for the reading of all
meters or measuring devices, and they shall be made available to
Borough employees for meter reading at any reasonable time.
A. The sewer rent for collection and treatment of industrial wastes
discharged into the sewer system shall be made in accordance with
§ 286-13 above. In addition thereto, further charges shall be made for
all industrial waste or sewage discharged into the sewer system having
suspended solids and biochemical oxygen demand in excess of the
following concentrations:
(1) Suspended solids, 350 parts per million.
(2) Biochemical oxygen demand, 300 parts per million.
B. The additional charge for industrial waste or sewage having
concentration in excess of the foregoing shall be based on the strength
factor determined according to the following formula:
* Where these figures are less than 300 parts per million in
biochemical oxygen demand or 350 parts per million in suspended
solids, the value in the parenthesis shall be equal to one.
C. In cases where the suspended solids, in the opinion of the Borough, do
not represent the true characteristics of the solids leaving, the Borough
reserves the right to use total solids instead of suspended solids.
D. No industrial user shall begin or continue to discharge any industrial
waste into the sewer system until he has first submitted a written
application to the Borough for permission to do so, accompanied by a
detailed report prepared by a sanitary engineer registered in
Pennsylvania and satisfactory to the Borough setting forth such
information relating to such industrial waste as Borough may require.
E. The Borough reserves the right to refuse connection to the sewer
system or to compel discontinuance of use of any sewer deemed to be
harmful to the sewer system or to have a deleterious effect on the
sewage treatment or sludge-handling processes.
§ 286-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 286-17
1:295
§ 286-17. Time and method of payment. [Amended 12-30-1983 by
Ord. No. 1769]
§ 286-18. Delinquent sewer rentals and penalties; liens.
All sewer rentals, together with all penalties thereon not paid on or before
the end of one year from each billing date, shall be deemed to be delinquent.
All delinquent sewer rentals and all penalties thereon shall be a lien against
the property served and shall be entered as a lien against such property in
the office of the Prothonotary of York County and shall be collected in the
manner provided by law for the filing and collection of municipal claims and
liens.
§ 286-19. Segregation of sewer rentals.
The funds received by the Borough from the collection of the sewer rentals
and all penalties thereon as herein provided for and any fines collected by
the Borough in connection with the sewer system shall be segregated and
kept separate and apart from all other funds of the Borough and shall be
used only for the purpose of defraying the expenses of the Borough in the
operation, maintenance, repair, alteration, inspection, depreciation or other
expenses in relation to such sewer system and for such payment as the
Borough may be required to make under any lease or agreement it may
enter into for and of, or in connection with, said sewer system with the
Authority, in accordance with the provisions of the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L.
382, as amended.74
§ 286-20. Service during portion of quarter.
Whenever sewer service to any property begins after the first day or
terminates before the last day of any calendar quarter, the sewer rental for
such period shall be a pro rata amount for that portion of the period during
which said property is served; provided, however, that in making any such
A. Sewer charges computed on a metered-rate basis shall be due and
payable at the same intervals as charges for water consumed in the
same property are payable and shall be subject to a penalty of 1 1/4%
per month if not paid within 20 days after the date of the bill.
B. Payments mailed as evidenced by the United States Post Office
cancellation stamp on or previous to the end of the period during which
the bills are payable at par will be deemed to be a payment within such
period.
C. All persons connected to the sewer system must give the Borough their
correct address. Failure to receive bills will not be considered an excuse
for nonpayment, nor permit an extension of the period during which
bills are payable at face.
74.Editor's Note: The Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382 (53 P.S. § 301 et seq.), was repealed by Act
22 of 2001 (June 19, 2001, P.L. 287, No. 22). See now the Municipality Authorities Act, 53
Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 286-17 HANOVER CODE § 286-20
1:296
apportionment, a fraction of a calendar month amounting to 1/2 or more of
a calendar month shall be counted a full month, and a fraction of a calendar
month amounting to less than 1/2 of a calendar month shall be disregarded.
§ 286-21. Rules and regulations.
The Borough reserves the right to, and may from time to time, adopt, revise,
amend and readopt such rules and regulations as it deems necessary and
proper for the use and operation of the sewer system, and all such rules and
regulations shall be and become a part of this article.
§ 286-22. Effective date.
This article and the rules and regulations hereunder shall become effective
May 1, 1956. Borough reserves the right to make such changes from time
to time as in its opinion may be desirable or beneficial, and to amend this
article or to change the rates or charges in such manner and at such times
as in its opinion may be advisable.
§ 286-23. Amendments by resolution. [Added 12-28-2011 by Ord.
No. 2181]
Effective with the initial billing period in 2012, the sewer rentals and
charges for the collection and treatment of sewage discharged or to be
discharged into the sanitary sewers and sewer system of the Borough of
Hanover for residential, commercial, industrial, institutional and all other
uses located within the boundaries of the Borough of Hanover or located
outside the boundaries of the Borough of Hanover in Penn Township shall
be at the rates established for such users by resolution(s) passed from time
to time by the Hanover Borough Council.
§ 286-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 286-23
1:297

ARTICLE IV
Billing Credits for Water Leaks
[Adopted 12-23-2013 by Res. No. 1067]
§ 286-24. Stipulations for credit.
The following stipulations apply to those seeking financial relief on a sewer
charge in a situation where a water leak has not entered the sanitary sewer
system:
A. A letter of explanation shall be submitted for consideration to the
Hanover Borough Manager, along with written documentation from a
plumber that the water did not enter the sanitary sewer system;
B. The repair shall be made in a timely manner from when it was first
discovered and no negligence shall be shown;
C. No credit shall be given for water leaks that have entered the sanitary
system, or if no proof thereof is given;
D. Consumers are allowed only one credit per household, one time only.
§ 286-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 286-24
1:299

ARTICLE V
Sewer Connection Permit; Tapping Fee
[Adopted 7-22-2015 by Ord. No. 2222]
§ 286-25. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of the terms used in this article shall be as follows:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Hanover, York County, Pennsylvania.
COMMERCIAL — Any room, group of rooms, building or enclosure used or
intended for use in the operation of one business enterprise for the sale and
distribution of any product, commodity, article or service or use or intended
for use for any social, amusement, religious, education, charitable or public
purpose and containing plumbing facilities for kitchens, toilet or washing
facilities.
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT (EDU) — With regard to residential uses,
any dwelling, house, residential unit, group of rooms, house trailer, mobile
home, enclosure, etc., occupied or intended for occupancy as separate
living quarters for an individual, family or other group of persons living
together or by persons living alone. Wastewater flow from residential
customers is assumed to be 200 gallons per day (gpd) pursuant to the
guidelines set forth in Act 5775 for calculating residential flow contributions
for the purpose of assessing tapping fees for use of the sewer system.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the Borough upon which
there is a structure erected prior to the effective date of this article and
intended for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human
beings or animals and from which structure sewage shall or may be
discharged.
INDUSTRIAL — Any room, group of rooms, building or other enclosure used
or intended for use, in whole or in part, in the operation of one business
enterprise for manufacturing, fabricating, processing, cleaning, laundering
or assembling from which any waste, as distinct from sanitary sewage, shall
be discharged.
OWNER — Any person, partnership, company, association, society, trust,
corporation, or other group or entity owning real estate within the Borough
of Hanover.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation. The singular shall include the plural.
RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER — Any person owning or occupying a
residential property which is connected to or entitled to connect to the
sanitary sewer system of Hanover Borough and shall also include those
persons developing property for residential dwellings that require multiple
tapping fee permits.
75.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 286-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 286-26
1:301
§ 286-26. Permit required.
No person shall connect any improved property to any part of the Hanover
Borough sewer system without first making application for and securing
a permit, in writing, from the Borough, as provided for by ordinance of
the Borough. Such application shall be made on a form provided by the
Borough.
§ 286-27. Tapping fee imposed.
There is hereby fixed and imposed a tapping fee upon the owner of each
residential, industrial or commercial property (other than such owner who
is subject to contractual or special agreements providing for payment of
certain sums in lieu of a tapping fee) making any connection to the sewer
system in the Borough, regardless of whether such connection is direct
or indirect, including changing the type of use of property previously
connected or connecting one or more new uses of the types hereinafter
referred to through an existing connection, and regardless of whether
such property is connected separately or through one or more existing or
new lateral or sewer connection(s) or such collection line is owned by the
Borough or owned by any owner other than the Borough. Such fee is based
upon the fee schedule duly adopted herewith. The fee shall be in addition
to any charges assessed against the owner in the construction of a sewer
main, as well as any other user charge imposed.
§ 286-28. Tapping fee for capacity part of system.
With respect to the capacity part of the sewer system, the tapping fee shall
be fixed at a sum established by resolution adopted from time to time by
the Hanover Borough Council at a rate per EDU. A detailed itemization of
all calculations, showing the maximum fee allowable for the capacity part
of the tapping fee and the manner in which the fee was determined shall be
made part of any future resolution establishing said fee.
§ 286-29. Tapping fee for collection part of system.
With respect to the collection part of the sewer system, the tapping fee is
hereby fixed at the sum established by resolution adopted from time to time
by the Hanover Borough Council at a rate per EDU. A detailed itemization of
all calculations showing the maximum fee and the manner in which the fee
was determined shall be made a part of any future resolution establishing
said fee.
§ 286-30. EDUs to be charged separately.
Each EDU shall be charged separately even though two or more domestic
units are or will be connected to either new or old collection lines through a
single connection (a building sewer, a wye or a manhole). For nonresidential
owners (commercial or industrial), the number of EDUs to be assigned
to each owner shall be determined from the nature of the establishment
and estimated and actual loads which may be or are discharged into said
§ 286-26 HANOVER CODE § 286-30
1:302
collection lines. Whenever actual loads exceed estimates, an additional
tapping fee shall be charged.
§ 286-31. Additional uses.
Where any improved property connected to said collection line shall be
converted, enlarged or remodeled or additional buildings shall be
constructed on a property and connected indirectly to said collection line
through an existing lateral, so as to create or establish additional uses
as classified in § 286-30 hereof, an additional tapping fee determined in
accordance with § 286-30 hereof for each such additional use shall be
payable to the Borough by the owner of said property.
§ 286-32. Other fees.
The tapping fee imposed hereunder shall be in addition to:
§ 286-33. When fees due.
The tapping fee shall be due and payable at the time application is made to
the Borough to make any such connection to the sewer system, as provided
in § 286-26 or, if no such application is made, upon the date when the
Borough shall connect any such improved property to the sewer system,
at the cost and expense of the owner, when such owner shall have failed
to make such connection as required by the Borough pursuant to the
provisions of the ordinance then in effect requiring such connection.
§ 286-34. Where fees payable.
All tapping fees shall be payable to the Treasurer of the Borough Council
or to such other officer or representative of the Borough as shall be
authorized, from time to time, to accept payment thereof.
§ 286-35. Enforcement.
Payment of tapping fees charged by the Borough pursuant to this article
shall be enforced by the Borough in any manner appropriate under laws at
the time in effect.
§ 286-36. Amendments.
The Borough reserves the right, from time to time, to adopt modifications
of, supplements to, or amendments to the resolution(s) establishing the
A. Any connection fee, inspection charge or administrative fee imposed by
the Borough;
B. Any customer facilities fee imposed by the Borough; and
C. Any rental or other charges fixed, charged or imposed by the Borough
by reason of the use, or availability of use, of the sewer system by such
property.
§ 286-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 286-36
1:303
tapping fees referred to herein, to reflect appropriate amendments to the
cost components, design capacity, or other elements of the required
calculations of the tapping fee. Said modifications, supplements and
amendments shall be available for public inspection at the Borough of
Hanover Municipal Building.
§ 286-36 HANOVER CODE § 286-36
1:304
Chapter 290
SEWER USE REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Building regulations — See Ch. 150.
Housing standards — See Ch. 230.
Plumbing — See Ch. 263.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 286.
Water — See Ch. 355.
Penalty assessment for violation of
pretreatment standards — See Ch. A403.
§ 286-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 286-36
1:305

Part 1
[Adopted 11-21-1984 ByInOdruds. tNrioa.l 1W7a9s0t;e Amended In Its Entirety
12-23-2019 By Ord. No. 2293]
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 290-1. Purpose and policy.
A. This part sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect
contributors into the municipal wastewater collection and treatment
system of The Borough of Hanover (Borough) and enables the Borough
to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean
Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment
Regulations (Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations [CFR] Part
403). The objectives of this part are:
(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the
system;
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will pass through the system,
inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere, or
otherwise be incompatible with the system;
(3) To protect both wastewater system personnel who may be affected
by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and
the general public;
(4) To promote reuse and recycling of wastewaters and sludges from
the system;
(5) To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost for the
implementation of the Borough's pretreatment program as well as
for the operation, maintenance, and improvement of the
wastewater system; and
(6) To enable the Borough to comply with its National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit conditions, sludge
use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws
to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject.
B. This part provides for the regulation of contributions to the municipal
wastewater system through the issuance of permits to certain
nonresidential users and through enforcement of general requirements
for other nonresidential users; authorizes monitoring, compliance and
enforcement activities; requires user reporting; assumes that existing
customer's capacity will not be preempted, and provides for the setting
of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program
established herein and imposes penalties for user noncompliance.
§ 290-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-1
1:307
§ 290-2. Administration.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the Borough Manager shall have the
responsibility to administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this
part. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Borough Manager
may be delegated by the Borough Manager to a duly authorized Borough
employee, i.e., Pretreatment Officer. The Pretreatment Officer shall be the
primary Borough official delegated by the Borough Manager to enforce the
provisions of this part. Other employees, but not limited to, that may be
given authority to enforce the provisions of this part are the Wastewater
Plant Superintendent/Supervisor and wastewater plant operations
personnel.
§ 290-3. Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations, when used in this part, shall have the
designated meanings:
AO Administrative order
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
BMP Best management practice
BMR Baseline monitoring report
BOD5 Biochemical oxygen demand, five-day
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
CIU Categorical industrial user
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Gpd Gallons per day
IU Industrial user
l Liter
LEL Lower explosion limit
Mg Milligrams
mg/l Milligrams per liter
NH3-N Ammonia nitrogen
NOV Notice of violation
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System
NSCIU Nonsignificant categorical industrial user
O & G Oil and grease
O & M Operation and maintenance
C. This part shall apply to The Borough of Hanover, York County and to all
persons within and outside the Borough who are users of the POTW.
§ 290-1 HANOVER CODE § 290-3
1:308
PA DEP Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
QA/QC Quality assurance/quality control
RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIC Standard industrial classification
SIU Significant industrial user
SNC Significant noncompliance
SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. 6901, et
seq.
TRC Technical review criteria
TSS Total suspended solids
U.S.C. United States Code
§ 290-4. Definitions.
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this part, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated.
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the Clean Water Act, as amended (February 4, 1987), 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et
seq.
ADMINISTRATIVE COST — The cost incurred by the Borough to perform
clerical, managerial and maintenance work. The cost includes postage,
hourly wages, returned check charges, and other miscellaneous costs that
can occur from handling an account out of the normal billing cycle.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The regional administrator of the EPA.
APPROVED PRETREATMENT PROGRAM — A program administered by the
Borough that meets the criteria established in 40 CFR 403.8 and 403.9 and
which has been approved by the approval authority in accordance with 40
CFR 403.11.
AUTHORIZED OR DULY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER
—
If the user is a corporation:
The president, vice-president, secretary or treasurer of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other
person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions
for the corporation; or
(1)
The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make
management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated
(2)
A.
§ 290-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-4
1:309
BASELINE MONITORING REPORT — A report required in 40 CFR 403.12
to be submitted by all industrial users and waste generators subject to
categorical pretreatment standards.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — The schedule of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to implement the prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b).
BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices
to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or
drainage from raw materials storage.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures for five days at 20° C., expressed as a concentration
(mg/L) and/or loading (lbs/d).
BIOSOLIDS — The solid, semisolid or liquid residue generated from the
collection and treatment of municipal wastewater by a POTW. Sometimes
referred to as sewage sludge.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Hanover, York County, Pennsylvania, its
agents or authorized representatives.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
extending five feet beyond the inner face of the building wall.
facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making
major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct
other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental
compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure
that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to
gather complete and accurate information for the wastewater
discharge permit requirements; and where authority to sign
documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures.
If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or
proprietor, respectively.
B.
If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director
or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their
designee.
C.
The individuals described in Subsections A through C, above, may
designate a duly authorized representative if the authorization is in
writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the
discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to
The Borough of Hanover.
D.
§ 290-4 HANOVER CODE § 290-4
1:310
BUILDING SEWER — That part of the service connection from the building
drain to the service lateral.
BYPASS — The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of
an industrial user's treatment facility.
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL
STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act
(33 U.S.C. § 1317) that apply to a specific category of users and that appear
in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 to 471.
CATEGORICAL USER — An industrial user subject to the National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD) — A measure of the oxygen required
to oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — The sample resulting from the combination of
individual wastewater samples collected at selected intervals based on an
increment of either time or flow that reasonably represent the discharge
conditions at the time of collection.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The Borough of Hanover.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from water-cooling systems,
such as air conditioners, product cooling or refrigeration, which carries off
excess heat.
DAILY MAXIMUM — The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a
pollutant collected during a calendar day.
DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT — The maximum allowable discharge limit of a
pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed
in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the
course of the day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a
concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement
of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that
day.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA) — The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional
Water Management Division Director, the Regional Administrator, or other
duly authorized official of said agency.
EXISTING SOURCE — Any source of discharge, the construction or
operation of which commenced prior to the publication of EPA of proposed
categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source
if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of
the Act.
GARBAGE — Animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
storage, sale, preparation, cooking and serving of foods. Also see "solid
waste."
§ 290-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-4
1:311
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample that is taken from a waste stream without
regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to
exceed 15 minutes.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any wastewater from holding tanks, such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump
tank trucks.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge or introduction of pollutants into
the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b),
(c), or (d) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317), including holding tank waste
discharged into the system.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any nondomestic source of indirect discharge to the
POTW.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any solid, liquid, or gaseous substance discharged
intentionally or otherwise from any industrial or commercial establishment,
as distinct from sanitary wastewater.
INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT — The
maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any
time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample
collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the
sampling event.
INTERFERENCE —
LOCAL LIMIT — Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by The
Borough of Hanover upon any user, but not limited to, industrial or
commercial facilities to implement the general and specific discharge
prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b).
MEDICAL WASTE — Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and
blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, not only inhibits or disrupts the POTW,
its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use
or disposal, but also causes a violation of any requirement of the
Borough's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or
duration of a violation).
A.
The term includes prevention of wastewater biosolids use or disposal
by the Borough in accordance with 405 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. § 1345)
or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the
Solids Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) including Title II, more commonly
referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), the
Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, the Marine Protection,
Research and Sanctuaries Act, or more stringent state criteria,
including those contained in any state sludge management plan
prepared pursuant to Title IV (Subtitle D) of SWDA applicable to the
method of disposal or use employed by the Borough.
B.
§ 290-4 HANOVER CODE § 290-4
1:312
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and
dialysis wastes.
mg/L — Milligrams per liter.
MONTHLY AVERAGE — The sum of all "daily discharges" measured during
a calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured
during that month.
MONTHLY AVERAGE LIMIT — The highest allowable average of "daily
discharges" over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all "daily
discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the number of
"daily discharges" measured during that month.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
PERMIT — A permit for the discharge of wastewaters to waters of the U.S.,
issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342).
NEW SOURCE —
Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is
(or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards
under section 307(c) of the Act that will be applicable to such source
if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that
section, provided that:
The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a
site at which no other source is located; or
(1)
The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the
process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
(2)
The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing
plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the
same general type of activity as the existing source, should be
considered.
(3)
A.
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in
a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the
criteria of Subsection A(2) or (3) above but otherwise alters, replaces,
or adds to existing process or production equipment.
B.
Construction of a new source as defined under this subsection has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite
construction program:
(1)
C.
§ 290-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-4
1:313
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used for cooling that does not
come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product, or finished product.
PASS THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation
of any requirement of The Borough of Hanover's NPDES permit, including
an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental
entities.
pH — A measure of the degree of acidity or alkalinity of a solution,
expressed in standard units. Specifically, pH is the logarithm (base 10) of
the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per
liter of solution.
PLANT SUPERINTENDENT AND/OR SUPERVISOR — The person
designated by the Borough to manage the operations and maintenance of
the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by
this part. The term also means a duly authorized representative of the Plant
Superintendent.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, wastewater biosolids and sludge, munitions,
medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive
materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt,
industrial, municipal, and agricultural wastes; and certain characteristics of
wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity,
or odor).
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water.
Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
(a)
Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or
facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or
installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
(b)
Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its
operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial
loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies
do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection.
(2)
§ 290-4 HANOVER CODE § 290-4
1:314
PRETREATMENT OFFICER — The individual designated by the Borough
of Hanover as having authority to administer, implement and enforce the
pretreatment program.
PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of
pollutants or pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior
to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or
alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by
process changes; or by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR § 403.6
(d) Dilution prohibited as substitute for treatment.
PRETREATMENT PROGRAM — A program administered by the
Pretreatment Officer that regulates existing and new sources of pollution
and meets the criteria established in 40 CFR §§ 403.8 and 403.9, and which
has been approved by the approval authority in accordance with 40 CFR
§ 403.11.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a
pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — Pretreatment standards shall mean
national prohibited discharge standards, National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards, and local limits.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGES (NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS)
— Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the
EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317),
which applies to industrial users. This term includes absolute prohibitions
against the discharge of certain substances established pursuant to § 403.5.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW — A treatment works,
as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which is owned and
operated by the Borough of Hanover. This definition includes any devices
or systems used in the collection, storage, transportation, treatment,
recycling, and reclamation of municipal wastewater or industrial wastes of
a liquid nature. It also includes pipes, sewers, pumping stations and other
conveyances which convey wastewater to the Borough treatment plant even
though those sewers may not have been constructed by the Borough, or are
not located within the Borough boundaries or are not owned or maintained
by the Borough. It does not include separate storm sewers or culverts which
have been constructed for the sole purpose of carrying storm and surface
runoff, the discharge from which is not and does not become tributary to
the treatment facility.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SANITARY WASTEWATER — The wastewater generated in residential
kitchens, bathrooms and laundries (human waste and gray water); and from
toilet facilities in commercial and industrial establishments.
§ 290-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-4
1:315
SEPTIC TANK WASTE — Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
SEWER SYSTEM — The complete sewer system from time to time operated
by the Borough including the existing systems of sewers within the Borough
and the sewage treatment collection sewers, interceptor sewers, sewer
mains and force mains, pumping stations and sewer facilities to be
constructed, together with all further improvements, extensions and capital
additions acquired or constructed by the Borough.
SHALL — Is mandatory; May is permissive.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU) —
A nonresidential user of the Borough's wastewater system who:
(1) Is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards; or
Any user that:
Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact
cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater);
(a)
Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or
more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity
of the Borough's treatment plant; or
(b)
Is designated as such by the Borough on the basis that it has
an adverse effect (either realized or a reasonable potential) on
the POTW's operation, on effluent and biosolids quality, or for
violating a pretreatment standard or requirement.
(c)
(2)
The Borough may determine that an industrial user subject to
categorical pretreatment standards under § 403.6 and 40 CFR
Chapter I, Subchapter N is a nonsignificant categorical industrial
user rather than a significant industrial user on a finding that
the industrial user never discharges more than 100 gallons per
day (gpd) of total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary,
noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless
specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and the
following conditions are met:
The industrial user, prior to Borough's finding, has consistently
complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment
standards and requirements;
(a)
The industrial user annually submits the certification
statement required in 40 CFR 403.12(q) together with any
additional information necessary to support the certification
statement; and
(b)
The industrial user never discharges any untreated
concentrated wastewater.
(c)
(3)
A.
§ 290-4 HANOVER CODE § 290-4
1:316
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE (SNC) —
Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in Subsection A(2)
of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting
the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard
or requirement, the Borough may at any time, on its own initiative
or in response to a petition received from an industrial user, and in
accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that
such user should not be considered a significant industrial user.
(4)
Any violation of pretreatment standards or requirements that meets
one or more of the following criteria:
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken for
the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by
any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1);
(1)
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of all of the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed
the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1)
multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil,
and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
(2)
Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) (daily maximum, long-term average,
instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the Borough
determines has caused, alone or in combination with other
discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering
the health of POTW personnel or the general public);
(3)
Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or
has resulted in the Borough's exercise of its emergency authority
under 40 CFR § 403.8(f)(l)(vi)(B) to halt or prevent such a
discharge;
(4)
Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control
mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
(5)
Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, required
reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance
reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on
compliance with compliance schedules;
(6)
(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance;
A.
§ 290-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-4
1:317
SLUDGE — The solid, semisolid or liquid residue resulting from the
collection and treatment of industrial, commercial and municipal
wastewaters. This term may refer particularly to chemical or physical (not
biological) residues.
SLUG LOAD or SLUG DISCHARGE — Any discharge at a flow rate or
concentration, which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge
standards in § 290-5 of this part. A slug discharge is any discharge of
a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental
spill or a noncustomary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential
to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the
Borough's regulations, local limits or permit conditions.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials, including,
but not limited to, solid and liquid waste materials resulting from municipal,
industrial, commercial, agricultural and residential activities.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the U.S.
Office of Management and Budget, 1987.
STATE — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN — A sewer which carries storm and
surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial
wastes.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including
snowmelt.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total nonfilterable residue retained on a glass
fiber filter and dried at a temperature of 103° to 105° C. to a constant
weight.
TERMINOLOGY — Technical terminology contained in these rules and
regulations or in ordinances above referred to shall be interpreted by and
through and shall have the meanings set forth in the Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water, Sewerage and Industrial Wastes and the Glossary,
Water and Sewerage Control Engineering, both prepared by the American
Public Health Association.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter that floats on
the surface or is suspended in water, wastewater, or other liquids, and
which is removable by laboratory filtering.
Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best
management practices, which the Borough determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.
(8)
For the first two criteria [Subsection A(1) and (2)], SNC must be
evaluated through the "rolling quarters" method using the six-month
periods of October through March, January through June, April through
September, and July through December.
B.
§ 290-4 HANOVER CODE § 290-4
1:318
USER — Any person who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution of
wastewater into the Borough's POTW.
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial or sanitary wastes
from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and
manufacturing facilities, and institutions, together with any groundwater,
surface water, and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or
untreated, which are contributed into or permitted to enter the Borough's
system.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT — That
portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal
sewage and industrial waste.
§ 290-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-4
1:319

ARTICLE II
Sewer Use Regulations
§ 290-5. Prohibited discharge standards.
A. General prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to be
contributed into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes
pass through or interference with the operation or performance of the
POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW,
whether or not they are subject to National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards
or requirements.
B. Specific prohibitions. No user may contribute or cause to be
contributed the following substances into the POTW:
(1) Any liquids, solids or gases which, by reason of their nature or
quantity, are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction
with other substances to cause a fire or explosion hazard or be
injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the
POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closedcup
flashpoint of less than 140° F. (60° C.) using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21. At no time shall two successive
readings on any explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge
into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than 5% nor
any single reading be over 10% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of
the meter.
(a) Prohibited materials include but are not limited to gasoline,
fuel oil, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, paint
products, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides,
acids or bases, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides,
hydrides and sulfides and any other substances which the
Borough, the state or EPA has notified the user is a fire hazard
or a hazard to the system.
(2) Having a pH, stabilized, lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0 or having
any other corrosive or scale forming a property capable of causing
damage to structures, equipment, bacterial action or personnel of
the POTW.
(3) Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause
obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in
no case solids greater than 1/2 inch or 1.27 centimeter(s) in any
dimension.
(a) Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to garbage,
offal, ashes, cinders, spent lime, stone dust, sand, mud, straw,
shavings, metals, glass, straw, shavings, rags, grass clippings,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch manure,
bentonite, lye, building materials, rubber, asphalt residues,
§ 290-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-5
1:321
hair, bones, leather, porcelain, china, ceramic wastes, polishing
wastes, glass grinding, residues from refining or processing
of fuel or lubricating oil, or other solid or viscous substances
capable of causing obstruction or other interference with the
operation of the POTW.
(4) Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD5, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW.
(a) In no case shall a wasteload have a flow rate or contain
concentrations or qualities of pollutants that exceed for any
time period longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the
average twenty-four-hour concentration, quantities, or flow
during normal operation, unless otherwise authorized in
writing by the Pretreatment Officer.
(5) Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the Borough's treatment plant resulting in interference,
but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the
introduction into the POTW to exceed 104° F. (40° C.) or is less than
32° F. (00° C.).
(6) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through.
(7) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems, included but not limited to human life
or public nuisance.
(8) Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the Borough of Hanover in accordance with § 290-16
of this part.
(9) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life,
or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair.
(10) Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by
the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to
the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the Borough's
NPDES permit.
(11) Color (in combination with turbidity) shall not cause the treatment
plant effluent to reduce the depth of the compensation point for
photosynthetic activity by more than 10% from the seasonably
established norm for aquatic life.
§ 290-5 HANOVER CODE § 290-5
1:322
(12) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of
such half-life or concentration except in compliance with applicable
state or federal regulations.
(13) Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted
industrial or nonresidential process water, unless specifically
authorized in writing by the Pretreatment Officer.
(a) The discharge of cooling water from air conditioning units with
cooling towers or recirculating systems is prohibited. The
sanitary sewers are not designed to handle the cooling water
volumes produced by air conditioning units. Cooling water,
free from bacteria and harmful chemicals, should be drained
into storm sewers in accordance with state and federal
requirements. Should discharge not be approved by state and
federal authorities written approval from the Pretreatment
Officer must be obtained for discharge to POTW.
(14) Any residue, including biosolids, chemical sludges or screenings
from the pretreatment of industrial wastes.
(15) Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the
Pretreatment Officer in a wastewater discharge permit, general
permit or written authorization.
(16) Any wastewater containing pollutants in sufficient quantity which,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants may create a
toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW, cause the plant
effluent to fail a toxicity test, or exceeds the limitations set forth in
a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard. A toxic pollutant
shall include, but not limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to
Section 307(a) of the Act.
(17) Any detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances in
sufficient quantities which causes excessive foaming in the POTW;
(18) Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other
product of the POTW, such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be
unsuitable for reclamation or reuse, or to interfere with the
reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the
POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or
disposal criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed under
Section 405 of the Act; or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations
affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid
Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control
Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method
being used.
(19) Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than 60 mg/l;
§ 290-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-5
1:323
(20) Containing BOD or suspended solids concentration of such
character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is
required to handle such materials in the POTW. Discharges in
excess of 300 mg/l shall be subject to surcharge as provided for in
the Borough of Hanover Sewer Use Ordinance.76 Discharges in
excess of 1,000 mg/l shall be subject to a penalty surcharge as
provided for in the Borough's Sewer Use Ordinance. Discharge
limitations, for nondomestic users, for BOD and total suspended
solids shall be developed and issued into an industrial wastewater
discharge permit, on a case by a case basis.
(21) Containing total solids greater than 2,000 mg/l or of such character
and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to
handle such materials at the POTW.
(22) Having a chlorine demand in excess of 12 mg/l at a detention time
of 20 minutes.
(23) Any substance and/or discharge not listed above which will cause
the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or state permit or the receiving
water quality standards.
(24) Any substance prohibited by any permit issued by, but not limited
to, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the Environmental
Protection Agency.
C. Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall
not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be
discharged to the POTW.
D. All floor drains located in process or materials storage areas must
discharge to the industrial user's pretreatment facility before
connecting to the POTW.
E. If such amounts of any waters or wastes are discharged to the sewer
system, which waters contain the substance or possess the
characteristics enumerated in this section or which in the judgement of
the Borough may have a deleterious effect upon the sewer system or
receiving waters, the Borough may, upon giving notice to the
discharger:
(1) Reject the waste.
(2) Require pretreatment to reduce characteristics to maximum limits
permitted by this part or any other applicable rules or law.
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
(4) Require immediate discontinuance of the waste discharge until
such time as it meets the requirements of this section.
76.Editor's Note: See Ch. 286, Sewers and Sewage Disposal.
§ 290-5 HANOVER CODE § 290-5
1:324
§ 290-6. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards found at 40 CFR Chapter
1, Subchapter N, § 405 to 471 are hereby incorporated into this part.
Upon promulgation of a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard under
Section 307 of the Clean Air Act for a particular industrial subcategory, the
pretreatment standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under
this part for sources in that subcategory, shall supersede the limitations
imposed by the Borough. All affected significant industrial users must
comply with the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR
§ 403.12(b).
§ 290-7. Modification of National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards.
§ 290-8. State pretreatment standards.
State requirements and limitations on discharges apply in any case where
they are more stringent than national pretreatment standards or
requirements, or those in this part.
§ 290-9. Local limits.
F. The use of mechanical garbage grinders producing a finely divided
mass, properly divided mass, properly flushed with an ample amount of
water, shall be permitted upon the condition that no such mechanical
garbage grinder to serve premises used for commercial purposes shall
be installed until permission for such installation shall have been
obtained from the Borough.
G. Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided
for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense, and
shall be accessible to the Borough for inspection and testing.
A. EPA regulations at 40 CFR § 403.13 authorize a CIU to obtain a
variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the CIU can prove,
pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR
§ 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally
different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the
categorical pretreatment standard. The POTW will recognize revised
standards if the CIU has obtained an FDF variance from EPA on the
bases of 40 CFR § 403.13.
B. When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the
Borough may impose an alternate limit using the combined waste
stream formula in 40 CFR § 403.6(e).
A. The Borough is authorized to establish local limits pursuant to 40 CFR
403.5(c) and, but not limited to, the POTW NPDES permit. The local
§ 290-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-9
1:325
limits will follow the procedure as outlined in 40 CFR 403.5(c)(3) and
made part of this part. Specific limitations will require acceptance by
EPA. Local limits may be detailed in a user's wastewater discharge
Permit, issued pursuant to § 290-19 of this part.
B. The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass
through and interference.
(1) No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the
following daily maximum limit.
Pollutant Local Limit, mg/L
Antimony, total 0.14
Arsenic, total 0.12
Cadmium, total 0.01
Chromium, total 3.30
Chromium, hexavalent 0.38
Copper, total 1.00
Cyanide, total 0.30
Lead, total 0.13
Mercury, total 0.008
Molybdenum, total 0.28
Nickel, total 1.00
Selenium, total 0.14
Silver, total 0.24
Zinc, total 0.67
Chloroform 0.45
Methylene chloride 0.60
Tetrachloroethene 0.20
Trichloroethylene 0.29
Naphthalene 0.98
(2) The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is
discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances
are for total metal unless indicated otherwise.
C. The Borough may develop best management practices (BMPs), by
ordinance or in a wastewater discharge permit, to implement the
conditions of this part. Such BMPs shall be considered local limits and
pretreatment standards for the purposes of the Act.
§ 290-9 HANOVER CODE § 290-10
1:326
§ 290-10. Borough's right of revision.
The Borough reserves the right to establish through a wastewater discharge
permit more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the
POTW if deemed necessary and appropriate to comply with the objectives
presented in this part.
§ 290-11. Diluted discharge.
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt
to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or with any other
pretreatment standard or requirement.
§ 290-12. Falsifying information.
No user shall knowingly make any false statements, representations, or
certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other document
filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this part or to a wastewater
discharge permit, or falsify, tamper with, or knowingly render inaccurate
any monitoring device or method required under this part.
§ 290-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-12
1:327

ARTICLE III
Pretreatment of Wastewater
§ 290-13. Pretreatment facilities.
Users shall provide wastewater treatment as required to comply with this
part and shall achieve compliance with all National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in § 290-5
of this part within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the
Borough, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities required to pretreat
wastewater to a level acceptable to the Borough shall be provided,
operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the
pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the
Pretreatment Officer for review, and shall be acceptable to the Pretreatment
Officer before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and
operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility
of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable
to the Borough under the provisions of this part. Any subsequent changes in
the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and
be accepted by the Borough prior to the user's initiation of the changes.
§ 290-14. Additional pretreatment measures.
A. Whenever deemed necessary, the Borough may require users to restrict
their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or
consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from
industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be
necessary to protect the POTW and to determine the user's compliance
with the requirements of this part.
B. The Borough may require any person discharging into the POTW to
install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable
storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A
wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
C. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Borough, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease, oil or sand in such amounts as to cause
obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the
operation of the wastewater treatment facilities; except such
interceptors may not be required for residential users. All interceptors
shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Borough and shall be
located to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner(s) shall be
responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means
of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates and
means of disposal which are subject to review by the Pretreatment
Officer. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not
performed by owner's (owners') personnel must be performed by
§ 290-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-14
1:329
§ 290-15. Accidental discharge/slug discharge control plans.
All industrial users will be evaluated by the Pretreatment Officer to
determine whether they will be required to develop a spill and slug loading
control plan or other action to control slug discharges. All industrial users
are required to notify the POTW immediately of any changes at its facility
affecting potential for a slug discharge. In addition, any user may be
required to develop a plan. A plan must address the facilities to be provided
and maintained at the user's expense to prevent spills or slug discharges of
prohibited materials. Detailed plans showing these facilities and operating
procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the
Pretreatment Officer for review and approval by the Borough before
construction may begin. A spill and slug loading control plan shall address,
at a minimum, the following:
§ 290-16. Hauled wastewater.
The Borough does not accept hauled wastewater under normal operating
conditions. Should the need to accept hauled wastewater become necessary
the following regulations will apply once the Borough approves acceptance
of hauled wastewater.
currently licensed waste disposal firms. Such interceptors shall be
inspected, cleaned, and repaired by the user at their expense.
D. Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection
meter.
A. Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
B. Description of stored chemicals;
C. Procedures for immediately notifying the Borough of any spill or slug
discharge, as required by § 290-36 of this part; and
D. Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any spill or slug discharge.
Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials,
loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker
training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures
for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or
measures and equipment for emergency response.
A. Holding tank wastes may be introduced into the POTW only at locations
designated by the Plant Superintendent and at such times as are
established by the Plant Superintendent. Such waste shall not violate
Article II of this part or any other requirements established by the
Borough. The Pretreatment Officer may require septage haulers to
obtain wastewater discharge permits.
§ 290-14 HANOVER CODE § 290-16
1:330
B. The Borough may require generators of hauled industrial waste to
obtain a wastewater discharge permit. The Borough may require
industrial waste haulers to also obtain a wastewater discharge permit.
The Borough may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The
discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements
of this part.
C. Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations
designated by the Plant Superintendent. No load may be discharged
without prior consent of the Plant Superintendent. The Plant
Superintendent may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a
waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. The Pretreatment Officer
may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with
applicable standards.
D. Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every
load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the following information:
(1) The name and address of the industrial waste hauler;
(2) Permit number;
(3) Truck identification;
(4) Names and addresses of sources of waste;
(5) Type of industry;
(6) Known or suspected waste constituents;
(7) Volume and characteristics of waste; and
(8) Whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.
§ 290-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-16
1:331

ARTICLE IV
Individual Wastewater Discharge Permits
§ 290-17. Wastewater survey.
When requested by the Pretreatment Officer, a user must submit
information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater by
completing a wastewater user survey questionnaire within 30 days of the
request. The Pretreatment Officer is authorized to prepare a form for this
purpose and may periodically require users of the POTW to update the
survey. Users will be required to periodically update this survey. Failure
to complete the wastewater survey questionnaire shall be considered a
violation of this part which subjects the user to the enforcement actions set
forth in this part.
§ 290-18. Wastewater discharge permit requirement.
§ 290-19. Existing connections.
Any existing user, required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who
was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of
this part and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall,
within 30 days after the effective date of this part apply to the Borough for
a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with § 290-21 of this part.
§ 290-20. New connections.
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to
begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit
prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application
for this individual wastewater discharge permit in accordance with § 290-21
of this part, must be filed at least 90 days prior to the date upon which any
discharge will begin or recommence to the Borough.
A. All significant industrial users proposing to connect or contribute to the
POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting to
or contributing to the POTW from the Pretreatment Officer. An
application for a wastewater discharge permit, submitted in accordance
with § 290-19 of this part, must be filed at least 30 days prior to the date
upon which any discharge will begin or recommence.
B. The Pretreatment Officer may require other users to obtain wastewater
discharge permits, as necessary, to carry out the purposes of this part.
C. Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge
permit shall be deemed a violation of this part and subjects the user to
the enforcement actions described in Articles X through XII of this part.
Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the
permittee of its obligation to comply with all national pretreatment
standards or requirements or with any other federal, state, and local
law.
§ 290-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-21
1:333
§ 290-21. Wastewater discharge permit application contents.
A. All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit
a permit application which shall contain the following information:
(1) Name, mailing address and location of the facility;
(2) Name of the operator and/or owner of the facility;
(3) Contact information (if different from above), description of
activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including
all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which
are or could be discharged to the POTW;
(4) SIC number, according to the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, Office of Management and Budget 1987, as amended;
(5) Water usage data; and time and duration of discharges;
(6) Average daily and thirty-minute peak wastewater flow rates,
including daily, monthly, and seasonal variations, if any;
(7) Each product produced by type, amount, process, or processes, and
rate of production. This should include a schematic process
diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the
regulated processes;
(8) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day);
(9) Number and type of employees, hours of operation of plant, and
proposed or actual hours of operation;
(10)Wastewater constituents and characteristics as determined by a
reliable analytical laboratory (EPA approved); sampling techniques
and pollutant analyses shall be performed in accordance with
§§ 290-40 and 290-41 of this part. The sample shall be
representative of daily operations. Where the standard requires
compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the
user shall submit documentation as required by the Pretreatment
Officer or the applicable standards to determine compliance with
the standard;
(11) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details
to show all sewers, sewer connections, floor drains, and
appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of
discharge;
(12) Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by any local, state or national
pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not
the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis,
and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M)
§ 290-21 HANOVER CODE § 290-21
1:334
§ 290-22. General permits.
and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet
applicable pretreatment standards;
(13) If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the
pretreatment standards; the shortest schedule by which the user
will provide such additional pretreatment in accordance with the
conditions in § 290-32 of this part. The completion date in this
schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for
the applicable pretreatment standard;
(14) A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the
facility;
(15) Types of wastes generated, and a list of all raw materials and
chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could
accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;
(16) The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit;
(17) Any requests for a monitoring waiver (or a renewal of an approved
monitoring waiver) for a pollutant neither present nor expected to
be present in the discharge based on 40 CFR 403.12(e)(2);
(18) Any request to be covered by a general permit based on § 290-22;
(19) Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the
Pretreatment Officer to evaluate the permit application;
(20) The permit application shall be signed and certified by an
authorized representative of the user in accordance with § 290-44
of this part.
B. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be
returned to the user for revision.
C. A permit fee is required at the time of permit application. Permit fees
are established by Borough resolution.
A. At the discretion of the Borough, the Borough may use general permits
to control SIU discharges to the Borough if the following conditions are
met. All facilities to be covered by a general permit must:
(1) Involve the same or substantially similar types of operations;
(2) Discharge the same types of wastes;
(3) Require the same effluent limitations;
(4) Require the same or similar monitoring; and
§ 290-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-22
1:335
§ 290-23. Application signatories and certifications.
(5) In the opinion of the Borough, the SUI's are more appropriately
controlled under a general permit than under individual
wastewater discharge permits.
B. To be covered by the general permit, the SIU must file a written request
for coverage that identifies its contact information, production
processes, the types of wastes generated, the location for monitoring all
wastes covered by the general permit, any requests in accordance with
§ 290-34B for a monitoring waiver for a pollutant neither present nor
expected to be present in the discharge, and any other information the
Borough deems appropriate. A monitoring waiver for a pollutant
neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge is not
effective in the general permit until after the Borough has provided
written notice to the SIU that such a waiver request has been granted in
accordance with § 290-34B.
C. The Borough will retain a copy of the general permit, documentation to
support the Borough's determination that a specific SIU meets the
criteria in Subsection A(1) through (5) above, and a copy of the user's
written request for coverage for three years after the expiration of the
general permit.
D. The Borough may not control an SIU through a general permit where
the facility is subject to production-based categorical pretreatment
standards or categorical pretreatment standards expressed as mass of
pollutant discharged per day or for IUs whose limits are based on the
combined waste stream formula or net/gross calculations.
A. All wastewater discharge permit applications, waste surveys and user
reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user as
defined in § 290-4 of this part and contain the certification statement in
§ 290-44A.
B. If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer accurate
because a different individual or position has responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company, a new written authorization
satisfying the requirements of this section must be submitted to the
Pretreatment Officer prior to or together with any reports to be signed
by an authorized representative.
C. A facility determined to be a nonsignificant categorical industrial user
by the Borough pursuant to 1.4 FFF(3) must annually submit the signed
certification statement in § 290-44B.
§ 290-22 HANOVER CODE § 290-23
1:336
ARTICLE V
Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance
§ 290-24. Wastewater discharge permit duration.
A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period,
not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater
discharge permit may be issued for a period of one year or less, at the
discretion of the Pretreatment Officer. Each wastewater discharge permit
will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire.
§ 290-25. Wastewater discharge permit contents.
A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed
reasonably necessary by the Borough to prevent pass through or
interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment
plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge
management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW.
A. Wastewater discharge permits must contain:
(1) A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit
issuance date, expiration date and effective date;
(2) A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable without prior notification to the Borough in
accordance with § 290-28 of this part, and provisions for furnishing
the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater
discharge permit;
(3) Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on
applicable national pretreatment standards for wastewater
constituents and characteristics;
(4) Monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping
requirements as described in Article VI of the part. These
requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be
monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type
based on federal, state, and local law;
(5) The process for seeking a waiver for a pollutant neither present nor
expected to be present in the discharge, or a specific waived
pollutant in the case of an individual control mechanism, in
accordance with Article VI of this part;
(6) A statement of applicable penalties for violation of pretreatment
standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance
schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance
beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law;
(7) Requirements to control slug discharges, if determined by the
Borough to be necessary; and
§ 290-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-25
1:337
§ 290-26. Permit issuance or denial.
The Borough will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may request
further additional information. Within 45 days of receipt of a complete
wastewater discharge application, the Borough will determine whether
or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. After evaluation and
acceptance of the data furnished, the Borough may issue a wastewater
discharge permit subject to the terms and conditions provided therein. The
Borough may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit.
(8) Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the Borough, such as for
pollutants not present as described in § 290-34B of this part, must
be included as a condition in the user's permit (or other control
mechanism).
B. Wastewater discharge permits may also contain, but not be limited to,
the following conditions:
(1) Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and
equalization;
(2) Requirements for the construction and/or installation and
maintenance of pretreatment facilities, pollution control, or
appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or
prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW;
(3) Requirements for the development and implementation of spill and/
or slug control plans or other special conditions including
management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental,
unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges;
(4) Requirements for the development and implementation of waste
minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged
to the POTW;
(5) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
(6) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment, including flow measurement
devices;
(7) A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with
all applicable federal, state and local pretreatment standards or
requirements, including those which become effective during the
term of the permit; and
(8) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Borough to ensure
compliance with this part, and state and federal laws, rules, and
regulations.
§ 290-25 HANOVER CODE § 290-27
1:338
§ 290-27. Permit modification.
A. Within 90 days of promulgation of a National Categorical Pretreatment
Standard, the wastewater discharge permit subject to such standards
shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the
time frame prescribed by each standard. Where a significant industrial
user, subject to a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, has not
previously submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit
as required by § 290-18, the significant industrial user shall apply for a
wastewater discharge permit within 180 days after the promulgation of
the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard. In addition,
the significant industrial user with an existing wastewater discharge
permit shall submit to the Borough within 180 days after the
promulgation of an applicable National Categorical Pretreatment
Standard the information required by § 290-21A(12) and (13). Permit
modification applications shall be subject to a fee as established by
separate resolution.
(1) The Borough may modify the wastewater discharge permit for good
cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
(a) To incorporate any new or revised national, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
(b) To address significant alterations or additions to the user's
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since
the time the wastewater discharge permit issuance;
(c) A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized
discharge;
(d) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a
threat to the Borough's collection and treatment facilities,
personnel, or receiving waters;
(e) Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater
discharge permit;
(f) Misrepresentations or failure, upon the permittee's part, to
fully disclose all relevant facts in the permit application or any
required reporting;
(g) Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical
pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
(h) To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater
discharge permit;
(i) To reflect the transfer of facility ownership and/or operation to
a new owner or operator where requested in accordance with
§ 290-28; or
§ 290-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-27
1:339
§ 290-28. Wastewater discharge permit transfer.
§ 290-29. Wastewater discharge permit revocation.
(j) Requests by the permittee, provided such requests do not
create a violation of any applicable requirements, standards,
laws, or rules and regulations.
B. The permittee shall be informed of any proposed changes in their
wastewater discharge permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date
of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a
reasonable time schedule for compliance as determined by the
Pretreatment Officer. The filing of a request by the permittee for a
permit modification, revocation or reissuance, or termination, or a
notification of planned changes or anticipated noncompliance, does not
stay any permit condition.
A. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific
operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned,
transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a
new or changed operation without the written approval of the
Pretreatment Officer.
B. The permittee must give at least 30 days advance notice to the
Pretreatment Officer. The notice to the Pretreatment Officer must
include a written notarized certification by the new owner or operator
which:
(1) States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent
to change the facility's operations and processes;
(2) Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
(3) Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
wastewater discharge permit.
C. Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater
discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer.
A. The Borough may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good
cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
(1) Failure to notify the Pretreatment Officer of significant changes to
the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
(2) Failure to provide prior notification to the Pretreatment Officer
changed conditions pursuant to § 290-35 of this part;
(3) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application;
(4) Falsifying monitoring reports and certification statements;
§ 290-27 HANOVER CODE § 290-29
1:340
§ 290-30. Wastewater discharge permit reissuance.
The permittee shall apply for permit renewal a minimum of 90 days prior
to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. If the
wastewater discharge permit is not reissued by the Pretreatment Officer
prior to its expiration date, the conditions of the existing permit shall
continue until such time that a new permit is issued by the Pretreatment
Officer.
(5) Tampering with monitoring equipment;
(6) Refusing to allow the Borough representative timely access to the
facility premises and records;
(7) Failure to meet effluent limitations;
(8) Failure to pay fines;
(9) Failure to pay sewer charges;
(10) Failure to meet compliance schedules;
(11) Failure to complete a wastewater survey questionnaire or the
wastewater discharge permit application;
(12) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility; or
(13) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this part.
B. Any wastewater discharge permit shall be voidable upon cessation of
operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge
permits issued to a user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater
discharge permit to that user.
§ 290-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-30
1:341

ARTICLE VI
Reporting Requirements
§ 290-31. Baseline monitoring reports (BMR).
A. Within either 180 days after the effective date of a National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard, or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later,
existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to
discharge to the POTW, shall be required to submit a BMR to the
Pretreatment Officer. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their
discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users
subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard,
shall be required to submit a BMR. A new source shall also report the
method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical
standards, and provide estimates of its anticipated flows and quantity of
pollutants discharged.
B. Users described above shall submit the information set forth below.
(1) The name and address of the facility, including the name of the
operator and owner;
(2) A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the
facility;
(3) A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and
standard industrial classifications (SIC) of the operation(s) carried
out by the user. The description shall include a schematic process
diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the
regulated processes;
(4) Information showing the measured average daily and maximum
daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
waste streams and other waste streams, as necessary, to allow use
of the combined waste stream formula, as established in 40 CFR
§ 403.6(e);
(5) The categorical standards applicable to each regulated process and
the results of sampling and analysis of the regulated pollutants for
each regulated waste stream. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and
long-term average concentrations or mass, where required, shall
be reported;
(6) A certification statement indicating whether pretreatment
standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether
additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment, is required to meet the pretreatment standards and
requirements;
(7) If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the
pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user
§ 290-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-31
1:343
§ 290-32. Compliance schedule progress reports.
The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by
the discharge permit application and/or by the BMR:
§ 290-33. Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment
standard deadline.
will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment
standard. A compliance schedule shall meet the requirements of
§ 290-32 of this part;
(8) All baseline monitoring reports must be certified in accordance
with § 290-44A of this part and signed by an authorized
representative as defined in § 290-4;
(9) In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance
with a best management practice (or pollution prevention
alternative), the user shall submit documentation required by the
Borough or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine
compliance status of the user.
A. The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for
the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the
user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events
include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components,
commencing and completing construction, and beginning and
conducting routine operation);
B. No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;
C. No later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final
date of compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the
Pretreatment Officer, including, as a minimum, whether or not it
complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date, and if
not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of
progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to
return to the established schedule; and
D. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress
reports to the Pretreatment Officer.
A. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any
user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit
to the Pretreatment Officer a report indicating the nature and
concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated
§ 290-31 HANOVER CODE § 290-33
1:344
§ 290-34. Periodic compliance reports.
process which are limited by pretreatment standards or requirements
and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in
the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards and
requirements. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration
limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR
§ 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's
long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant
discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this
report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate
sampling period. All sampling will be done in conformance with
§ 290-41.
B. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards
or requirements are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not,
whether additional O&M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the
use into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements. This report shall be signed and certified in accordance
with § 290-44A of this part. In cases where the pretreatment standard
requires compliance with a best management practice (or pollution
prevention alternative), the user shall submit documentation required
by the Borough or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine
compliance status of the user.
A. Any significant industrial user subject to a pretreatment standard after
the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or in the case of a
new source, after commencement of the discharge to the POTW, shall
submit to the Pretreatment Officer during the months of June and
December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment
standard or by the Borough, a report indicating the nature and
concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by such
pretreatment standards and the average and maximum daily flows for
the reporting period. All periodic compliance monitoring reports must
be signed and certified in accordance with § 290-44A of this part. In
cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best
management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the
user shall submit documentation required by the Borough or the
pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of
the user.
B. The Borough may authorize an industrial user (IU) subject to a
categorical pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a pollutant
regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard if the IU has
demonstrated through sampling and other technical factors that the
pollutant is neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge,
or is only present at background levels from intake water and without
any increase in the pollutant due to activities of the IU, as subject to the
§ 290-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-34
1:345
conditions in 40 CFR § 403.12(e). This authorization is subject to the
following conditions:
(1) The waiver may be authorized where a pollutant is determined to
be present solely due to sanitary wastewater discharged from the
facility provided that the sanitary wastewater is not regulated by an
applicable federal categorical pretreatment standard and
otherwise includes no process wastewater.
(2) The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the effective
period of the wastewater discharge permit, but in no case longer
than five years. The user must submit a new request for the waiver
before the waiver can be granted for each subsequent wastewater
discharge permit.
(3) In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the IU
must provide data from at least one sampling of the facility's
process wastewater prior to any treatment present at the facility
that is representative of all wastewater from all processes.
(4) The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed by an
authorized representative of the user, as defined in § 290-4 of this
part, and include the certification statement in § 290-44 of this part
for each waiver request and each self-monitoring report.
(5) Nondetectable sample results may be used only as a demonstration
that a pollutant is not present if the EPA approved method from 40
CFR § 136 with the lowest minimum detection level for that
pollutant is used in the analysis.
(6) Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the Borough must be
included as a condition in the user's wastewater discharge permit.
The reasons supporting the waiver and any information submitted
by the user in its request for the waiver must be maintained by the
Borough for three years after expiration of the waiver.
(7) In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or is
expected to be present because of changes that occur with the
user's operations, the user must immediately comply with the
monitoring requirements of § 290-34A of this part, or more
frequent monitoring requirements imposed by the Borough.
(8) This provision does not supersede certification processes and
requirements established in categorical pretreatment standards,
except as otherwise specified in the categorical pretreatment
standard.
C. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with § 290-44A of this part.
D. All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
§ 290-34 HANOVER CODE § 290-34
1:346
§ 290-35. Reports of changed conditions.
Each user, whether permitted or not, must notify the Pretreatment Officer
of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which
might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 30 days
before the change occurs.
§ 290-36. Reports of potential problems.
properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order
at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good
working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample
results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
E. If the user monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate
sampling location more frequently than required by the Borough, using
the procedures prescribed in § 290-41 of this part, the results of this
monitoring shall be included in the report. At the discretion of the
Pretreatment Officer and in consideration of such factors as local high
and low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the Pretreatment
Officer may agree to alter the months during which the above reports
are to submitted. This report shall be signed and certified in accordance
with § 290-44A of this part.
A. The Borough may require the user to submit such information as may
be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including a
BMR and/or the submission of a wastewater discharge permit
application under § 290-21 of this part.
B. The Pretreatment Officer may issue a wastewater discharge permit
under § 290-30 of this part or modify an existing wastewater discharge
permit under § 290-27 of this part in response to changed conditions or
anticipated changed conditions.
A. In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental
discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge, a slug discharge or slug load, that
might cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall
immediately telephone and notify the Pretreatment Officer of the
incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge,
type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective
actions taken by the user.
B. Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived
by the Borough, submit a detailed written report describing the
cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to
mitigate and prevent any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which
may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW or aquatic life or
any other damages to person or property. Such notification shall not
relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may
§ 290-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-36
1:347
§ 290-37. Reports from unpermitted users.
All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide
appropriate reports to the Borough as the Borough may require.
§ 290-38. Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting.
If sampling by the user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the
Pretreatment Officer within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation.
The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results
of the repeat analysis to the Pretreatment Officer within 30 days after
becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the
Borough performs sampling at least once per month for the parameter in
violation at the user's facility, or if the Borough performs sampling at the
user's facility between the time when the user performs its initial sampling
and the time the user or the Borough receives the results of this sampling.
§ 290-39. Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste.
be imposed by this article or other applicable law. This written report
shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user.
C. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a
discharge described in Subsection A, above. Employers shall ensure
that all employees, who could cause such a discharge to occur, are
advised of the emergency notification procedure.
D. Industrial users are required to notify the Borough immediately of any
changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge.
A. Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify
the Pretreatment Officer, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division
Director, and PADEP Waste Management authorities in writing of any
discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of,
would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261.
(1) Such notification must include:
(a) The name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part
261;
(b) The EPA hazardous waste number; and
(c) The type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other).
(2) If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per
calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the
following information to the extent such information is known and
readily available to the user:
(a) An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
wastes;
§ 290-36 HANOVER CODE § 290-39
1:348
§ 290-40. Analytical requirements.
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as
part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part
136 and amendments thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable
categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain
(b) An estimation of the mass and concentration of such
constituents in the waste stream discharged during that
calendar month; and
(c) An estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream
expected to be discharged during the following 12 months.
(3) All notifications shall take place no later than 180 days after the
discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph need
be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged.
However, notifications of changed discharges shall be submitted
per § 290-35 of this part. This notification requirement does not
apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical
standards under the monitoring requirements of §§ 290-31, 290-33
and 290-34 of this part.
B. Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of Subsection A, above,
during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15
kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous
wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of
more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar
month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40
CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification.
Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such
quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification.
C. In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user shall notify the
Pretreatment Officer, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste
Division Director, and PADEP Waste Management authorities of the
discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such
regulations.
D. In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall
certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity
of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.
E. This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this part, a wastewater
discharge permit issued hereunder, or any applicable federal or state
law.
§ 290-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-40
1:349
sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where
the EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques
are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall
be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable
sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the
Borough or other parties approved by EPA.
§ 290-41. Sample collection.
Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on
data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during
the period covered by the report, based on data that is representative of
conditions occurring during the reporting period.
A. Except as indicated in Subsections B and C below, the user must collect
wastewater samples using twenty-four-hour flow-proportional
composite sampling techniques. The Pretreatment Officer may
authorize the use of time proportional sampling, or grab samples where
the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of
the effluent being discharged. The decision to allow the alternative
sampling must be documented in the user's wastewater discharge
permit and/or in the user's file for the facility or facilities. Using
protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part
136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected
during a twenty-four-hour period may be composited prior to the
analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples
may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics
and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory.
Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing
procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be
authorized by the Borough, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples
may be required to show compliance with instantaneous limits.
B. Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols,
sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab
collection techniques.
C. For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and ninety-day
compliance reports required in §§ 290-31 and 290-33 [40 CFR 403.12(b)
and (d)], a minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide,
total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for
facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist. For facilities
for which historical sampling data are available, the Borough may
authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by § 290-34 [40
CFR 403.12(e) and 403.12(h)], the Borough shall require the number of
grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance by industrial
users with applicable pretreatment standards and Requirements.
§ 290-40 HANOVER CODE § 290-42
1:350
§ 290-42. Date of receipt of reports.
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports, which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.
§ 290-43. Recordkeeping.
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this part shall retain, and
make available for inspection and copying, all records of information
obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this part, any
additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities
undertaken by the user independent of such requirements, and
documentation associated with best management practices established.
Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling,
and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses
were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or
methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain
available for a period of at least three years or longer as specified by the
Borough, and affording the Borough access thereto. This period shall be
automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the
user or the Borough.
§ 290-44. Certification statements.
A. Certification of permit applications, user reports and initial monitoring
waiver. The following certification statement is required to be signed
and submitted by users submitting permit applications in accordance
with § 290-23; users submitting baseline monitoring reports under
§ 290-31B(8); users submitting reports on compliance with the
categorical pretreatment standard deadlines under § 290-33; users
submitting periodic compliance reports required by § 290-34A through
E, and users submitting an initial request to forego sampling of a
pollutant on the basis of § 290-34B(4). The following certification
statement must be signed by an authorized representative as defined in
§ 290-4:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with
a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather
and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the
person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly
responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted
is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and
complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations.
B. Annual certification for nonsignificant categorical industrial users. A
facility determined to be a nonsignificant categorical industrial user
§ 290-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-44
1:351
pursuant to 40 CFR 403.3(v)(2) must annually submit the following
certification statement signed in accordance with the signatory
requirements in 40 CFR 403.12(1). This certification must accompany
an alternative report required by the Borough:
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible
for managing compliance with the categorical pretreatment standards
under 40 CFR _____, I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and
belief that during the period from _____, _____ to _____, _____ [months,
days, year]:
(a) The facility described as __________ [facility name] met the
definition of a nonsignificant categorical industrial user as
described in 403.3(v)(2);
(b) The facility complied with all applicable pretreatment standards
and requirements during this reporting period; and
(c) The facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total
categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting
period.
This compliance certification is based on the following information.
C. Certification of pollutants not present. Users that have an approved
monitoring waiver based on § 290-34B must certify on each report with
the following statement that there has been no increase in the pollutant
in its waste stream due to activities of the user.
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible
for managing compliance with the pretreatment standard for 40 CFR
_____, I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, there
has been no increase in the level of _____ [list pollutant(s)] in the
wastewaters due to the activities at the facility since filing of the last
periodic report under § 290-34A.
§ 290-44 HANOVER CODE § 290-44
1:352
ARTICLE VII
Compliance Monitoring
§ 290-45. Right of entry: inspection and sampling.
The Borough shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to
determine compliance with this part, the discharge permit, compliance
orders and pretreatment standards and requirements. Persons or occupants
of premises where wastewater is generated or discharged shall allow the
Borough or its representative ready access at all reasonable times to all
parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection sampling, records
examination and copying, and the performance of any of their duties.
A. Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user
shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that,
upon presentation of suitable identification, the Borough shall be
permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific
responsibilities.
B. The Borough, state, and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's
property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to
conduct sampling, compliance monitoring, and/or metering of the
user's operations.
C. The Borough may require the user to install monitoring equipment as
necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the
user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow
and quality shall be calibrated as designated by the Borough to ensure
their accuracy.
D. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by
the user at the written or verbal request of the Borough and shall not be
replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user.
E. Unreasonable delays in allowing the Borough access to the user's
premises shall be a violation of this part.
F. If the Borough has been refused access to a building, structure, or
property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause
to believe that there may be a violation of this part at the facility, or that
there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection
and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this part or
any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public
health, safety and welfare of the community, the Borough may seek
issuance of a temporary restraining order or a preliminary injunction
granting relief for entry.
§ 290-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-45
1:353

ARTICLE VIII
Confidential Information
§ 290-46. Requests for confidentiality.
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and
monitoring programs, and from the Borough's inspection and sampling
activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user
specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Borough, that the release of such information would divulge information,
processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets
under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of
submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated
by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held
confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or
secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public,
but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental
agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program,
and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data, as
defined at 40 CFR 2.302 shall not be recognized as confidential information
and shall be available to the public without restriction.
§ 290-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-46
1:355

ARTICLE IX
Publication of Users in Significant Noncompliance
§ 290-47. Publication of noncompliance list.
A. The Borough shall publish at least annually, in a newspaper of general
circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the
jurisdictions served by the POTW, a list of the users which, at any time
during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with
applicable pretreatment standards and/or requirements. The
notification also shall summarize any enforcement actions taken by the
Borough against the users during the same 12 months. For the
purposes of this provision, a significant industrial user is in SNC (or any
other industrial user that violates Subsection A(3), (4) or (8) of this
section) if its violation meets one or more of the following criteria:
(1) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for the
same pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period exceed
(by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or
requirement, including instantaneous limits as defined by 40 CFR
403.3(1) and Article II of this part;
(2) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds
the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) and
Article II of this part, multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for
BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants
except pH);
(3) Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) and Article II of this part (daily
maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative
standard) that the Borough determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass through,
including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the
general public;
(4) Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted
in the Borough's exercise of its emergency authority under 40 CFR
§ 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) to halt or prevent such a discharge;
(5) Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing
construction, or attaining final compliance;
§ 290-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-47
1:357
(6) Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on
compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines,
periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules;
(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
(8) Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best
management practices, which the Borough determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.
B. For the first two criteria [Subsection A(1) and (2)], SNC must be
evaluated through the "rolling quarters" method using the six-month
periods of October through March, January through June, April through
September, and July through December.
§ 290-47 HANOVER CODE § 290-47
1:358
ARTICLE X
Administrative Enforcement Remedies
§ 290-48. Notification of violation.
When the Pretreatment Officer finds that a user has violated, or continues
to violate, any provision of this part, a wastewater discharge permit, or
any order, prohibition, limitation or requirement contained herein, the
Pretreatment Officer may serve upon such person a written notice stating
the nature of the violation. Within 30 days of the receipt of this notice, an
explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and
prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted
to the Pretreatment Officer by the user. Submission of such a plan in no
way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after
receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the
authority of the Borough to take any action, including emergency actions or
any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
§ 290-49. Consent orders.
The Borough is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances
of compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with
the user responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders will include
specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a
time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same
force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to §§ 290-51
and 290-52 of this part and shall be judicially enforceable.
§ 290-50. Show cause hearing.
Notwithstanding the aforesaid enforcement provisions, the Pretreatment
Officer may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge
to enter the POTW to show cause before the Borough why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the
user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the Borough
regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the
proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause before
the Borough why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken.
The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or
certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 10 days before the hearing.
Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user as
defined in § 290-4 and required by § 290-23A. A show cause hearing shall
not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the
user.
§ 290-51. Compliance orders.
When the Pretreatment Officer finds that a user has violated, or continues
to violate this part, the wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
§ 290-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-51
1:359
Pretreatment Officer may issue a compliance order to the user responsible
for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a
specified time period. If the user does not come into compliance within
the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate
treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed
and properly operated. Compliance orders may also contain other
requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address
the noncompliance, including the installation of pretreatment technology,
additional self-monitoring and management practices. A compliance order
may not extend the deadline for compliance established for National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards or requirements, nor does a
compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including
any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
§ 290-52. Cease and desist orders.
When the Borough finds that a user has violated or continues to violate this
part, the wastewater discharge permit, or any other order issued hereunder,
the Pretreatment Officer may issue an order to cease and desist all such
violations and direct the user in noncompliance to:
§ 290-53. Administrative fines.
A. Immediately comply with all requirements; and
B. Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed
to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a
cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the user.
A. When the Borough finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate,
any pretreatment standard or requirement, any provision of this part,
and the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued hereunder, may
be fined by the Pretreatment Officer an amount not to exceed $25,000
for each violation. The minimum fine to be issued shall be $1,000. The
fine or penalty fee must be received by the Borough within 30 days of
notification. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall
be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In the case of monthly or
other long-term average discharge limit violation, fines shall be
assessed for each day during the period of violation.
B. Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after 30 calendar days, be
assessed an additional penalty of 15% of the unpaid balance. The
Borough may also file suit against the user for the amount of the fee if
deemed necessary. Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall constitute
a lien against an individual user's property.
C. Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request, along
with full payment of the fine amount, for the Borough to reconsider the
§ 290-51 HANOVER CODE § 290-53
1:360
§ 290-54. Emergency suspensions.
§ 290-55. Termination of discharge.
fine, within 10 days of being notified of the fine or penalty. Failure to
appeal within this period shall result in a waiver of all legal rights to
contest the violation or the amount of the penalty. Where the Borough
believes a request has merit, the Borough may convene a hearing on
the matter. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the fine or
penalty may be returned to the user. The Borough may add the costs
of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and
orders, to the fine.
D. Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
A. The Borough may immediately suspend wastewater treatment service
and/or the wastewater discharge permit when such suspension is
necessary, in the opinion of the Pretreatment Officer, in order to stop
any discharge which presents, or may present, an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the
environment, threatens interference with the operation of the POTW, or
threatens to cause the Borough to violate any condition of its NPDES
permit.
(1) Any user notified of a suspension of wastewater treatment service
and/or the wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or
eliminate the discharge to the POTW. In the event of a failure by the
user to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
Pretreatment Officer may take steps as deemed necessary,
including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent
or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or
endangerment to any individuals. The Pretreatment Officer may
reinstate the wastewater discharge permit upon proof of the
elimination of the noncomplying discharge by the user, and
payment of any damages, fines, penalties or cost associated with
the discharge.
(2) A user which is responsible, in whole or in part, for imminent
endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement,
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the Borough within 15
days of the date of occurrence.
B. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior
to any emergency suspension under this section.
A. Any user who violates the following conditions of this part, or applicable
state and federal regulations, is subject to having their wastewater
discharge permit revoked for:
§ 290-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-55
1:361
(1) Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
(2) Failure of the user to factually report the wastewater constituents
and characteristics of its discharge;
(3) Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to the
changed discharge;
(4) Refusal to permit reasonable access to the user's premises for the
purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
(5) Failure to terminate new or increased discharges that have not
been permitted or are prohibited.
B. Noncompliant users will be notified of the proposed termination of their
wastewater discharge permit and be offered an opportunity to show
cause under § 290-50 of this part why the proposed action should not be
taken. Exercise of this option by the Borough shall not be a bar to, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
§ 290-55 HANOVER CODE § 290-55
1:362
ARTICLE XI
Judicial Enforcement Remedies
§ 290-56. Injunctive relief.
§ 290-57. Civil penalties.
A. When the Borough finds and/or a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this part, wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the Borough may petition the Court of Common Pleas of
York County through the Solicitor for the issuance of a temporary or
permanent injunction or both (as may be appropriate) which restrains
or compels the activities on the part of the user. The Borough shall have
such remedies to collect these fees as it has to collect other sewer
service charges. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
B. If any user or other person discharges wastewater, industrial wastes, or
other wastes into the POTW contrary to the provisions of this part,
national or state pretreatment requirements, or any order of the
Borough, the Borough may commence an action for appropriate legal
and/or equitable relief in the Court of Common Pleas of York County.
Issuance of any judicial remedies shall not bar against, or be a
prerequisite for, taking any other enforcement action against the user.
A. Any user who has violated, or continues to violate this part, and the
orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the Borough for
a civil penalty of not more than $25,000 (but not less than $1,000) plus
actual damages incurred by the Borough per violation per day as the
violation continues. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average
discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of
the violation.
B. The Borough may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and
other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including
sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages
incurred by the Borough.
C. In determining the amount of civil liability, the Court shall take into
account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of
the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation,
corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and
any other factor as justice requires.
D. Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
§ 290-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-58
1:363
§ 290-58. Criminal prosecution.
In addition to any other remedies for noncompliance set forth under this
part, or under any federal or state law or regulation, the Borough shall
have the right to institute criminal prosecution for violation of any provision
of this part. Procedures to be filed and penalties imposed as a result of
such criminal proceedings shall be as permitted or required by law for the
violation of Borough ordinance generally, and penalties imposed as a result
of conviction of violation of this part shall be those penalties provided in
Chapter 1, Article I and Ch. A403 of the Code of the Borough of Hanover.
§ 290-59. Remedies nonexclusive.
In the event of noncompliance with any one or more of the provisions of
this part, the Borough may impose the enforcement responses set forth
in this part and may take any other actions authorized by applicable laws
or regulations. The Enforcement Response Plan (ERP) of the Borough also
outlines the procedures to be followed by Borough personnel to identify,
document and respond to pretreatment violations and instances of
noncompliance. The guidelines and details of the ERP may be amended
from time to time by action of Borough Council. None of the following
enforcement remedies are exclusive. The Borough may impose any, all
or any combination of these enforcement responses if the violation or
circumstance warrants. The Borough may impose penalties for violations
under this part before the expiration of compliance deadlines. Issuance of
any administrative response, judicial remedy or other enforcement remedy,
or filing a suit for civil penalties shall not bar against, or be a prerequisite
for, taking any other enforcement action against the user.
§ 290-58 HANOVER CODE § 290-59
1:364
ARTICLE XII
Supplemental Enforcement Action
§ 290-60. Performance bonds and liability insurance.
The Borough may decline to reissue a permit to any industrial user which
has failed to comply with the provisions of this part or any order or previous
permit issued hereunder, unless the industrial user first submits proof that
it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair POTW
damage caused by its discharge.
§ 290-61. Payment of outstanding fees and penalties.
The Borough may decline to issue or reissue a permit to any industrial user
which has failed to pay any outstanding fees, fines or penalties incurred
as a result of any provision of this part, a previous permit, or order issued
hereunder.
§ 290-62. Water supply severance.
Whenever any user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this
part or any order or permit issued hereunder, water service to the user may
be severed and service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it
has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.
§ 290-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-62
1:365

ARTICLE XIII
Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations
§ 290-63. Upset.
A. For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident
in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with
categorical standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control
of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent
caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities,
inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or
careless or improper operation.
B. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for
noncompliance with Categorical Standards if the requirements of
Subsection C, below, are met.
C. A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating
logs, or other relevant evidence that:
(1) An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
(2) The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
professional manner and in compliance with applicable operation
and maintenance procedures; and
(3) The user has submitted the following information to the
Pretreatment Officer within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission
must be provided within five days):
(a) Description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
(b) The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is
expected to continue; and
(c) Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
D. In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
E. A user will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance
with categorical standards.
F. The user shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
§ 290-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-63
1:367
§ 290-64. Bypass.
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This
requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the
primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or
fails.
A. For the purposes of this section:
(1) "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of waste streams from
any portion of a user's treatment facility.
(2) "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to
become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural
resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the
absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean
economic loss caused by delays in production.
B. A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it
also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These
bypasses are not subject to the provision of Subsections C and D of this
section.
C. Bypass notifications.
(1) If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit
prior notice to the Pretreatment Officer, at least 10 days before the
date of the bypass, if possible.
(2) A user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that
exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the Pretreatment
Officer within 24 hours from the time the industrial user becomes
aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided
within five days of the time the industrial user becomes aware of
the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of
the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including
exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected,
the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or
planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the
bypass. The Borough may waive the written report on a case-bycase
basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours.
D. Bypass.
(1) Bypass is prohibited, and the Borough may take an enforcement
action against a user for a bypass, unless all of the following
conditions are met:
(a) The bypass is unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury, or severe property damage;
§ 290-63 HANOVER CODE § 290-64
1:368
(b) There is no feasible alternative to the bypass, including the use
of auxiliary treatment, retention of the wastewater, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime.
This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment
should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable
engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive
maintenance; and
(c) The user properly notifies the Pretreatment Officer as
described in this section.
(2) The Borough may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering
its adverse effects, if the Borough determines that it will meet the
three conditions listed in Subsection D(1) of this section.
§ 290-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-64
1:369

ARTICLE XIV
Wastewater Surcharge Rates
§ 290-65. Surcharges.
A. Discharges containing concentrations of BOD and/or suspended solids
in excess of 300 mg/l shall be subject to a surcharge in accordance with
Borough's Sewer Use Ordinance.77
B. Discharges containing concentrations of BOD and/or suspended solids
in excess of 1,000 mg/l shall be subject to a penalty surcharge of three
times the standard surcharge rate for that portion of the concentration
in excess of 1,000 mg/l, and the standard surcharge rate for the portion
of the concentration in excess of 300 mg/l but less than 1,000 mg/l.
77.Editor's Note: See Ch. 286, Sewers and Sewage Disposal.
§ 290-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-65
1:371

ARTICLE XV
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 290-66. Pretreatment charges and fees.
It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of costs from
users of the Borough's POTW for the implementation of the program
established herein. The applicable charges or fees shall be set forth by
resolution of the Borough of Hanover Council. The Borough may adopt
industrial user charges and fees, which may include:
§ 290-67. Severability.
If any provision, paragraph, word, section, or article of this part is
invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining
provisions, paragraphs, words, sections, and chapters shall not be affected
and shall continue in full force and effect.
§ 290-67.1. Conflict.
Any other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or
conflicting with any part of this part are hereby repealed to the extent of
such inconsistency or conflict.
§ 290-67.2. Borough's rights to promulgate rules and regulations.
The Borough reserves the right to, and may, from time to time, revise,
amend or readopt these rules and regulations as it deems necessary and
proper for the use and operation of the sewer system.
A. Fees for reimbursement of costs for setting up and operating the
Borough's pretreatment program;
B. Fees for sampling, monitoring, inspections, and surveillance
procedures, including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's
discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports and certification
statements submitted by users;
C. Fees for reviewing spill response procedures and construction;
D. Fees for permit and modified permit applications;
E. Fees for filing appeals;
F. Fees to consistent removal by the Borough's POTW of pollutants over
and above the limitations specified herein and/or pollutants otherwise
subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards; and
G. Other fees as the Borough may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters
covered by this part and are separate from all other fees, fines, and
penalties chargeable by the Borough.
§ 290-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-67.2
1:373

Part 2
Penn [TAodwonpstheidp8 W-2a7s-t2e0w0a8teBr yTOreradt.m Neon. t2 S1t3a6n]dards
ARTICLE XVI
Adoption of Standards of Sewer System Use
§ 290-68. Adoption of standards; discharge limits.
§ 290-69. Exclusions and amendments.
A. Hanover Borough Council hereby enacts and ordains the standards of
the Sewer System Use Ordinance No. 683, Penn Township, York County,
Articles 3 through 13,78 as applicable regulations controlling the type
and composition of sewage which can be discharged to the Penn
Township sewage system collection and transmission line servicing the
Penn Township Wastewater Treatment Plant.
B. The Hanover Borough Council, York County, Pennsylvania, hereby
adopts the following allowable discharge limits for users of the Penn
Township Wastewater Treatment Facility: [Added 4-27-2011 by Res.
No. 956]
Parameter
Daily Maximum
MAIL,1 Lbs/Day
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5) 9,438
Copper 2.75
Lead 0.1434
Mercury 0.0016
Ammonia nitrogen 452
Oil and grease 2,887
Total phosphorus 162
Silver 1.04
Total suspended solids (TSS) 7,936
Zinc 5.91
NOTE:
1 "MAIL" is defined as maximum allowable industrial loadings.
A. Provisions of the ordinance defining and assessing connection fees to
the Penn Township sewer system, including but not limited to the
Article 1, Section 1.3, Definitions, Subparagraphs, Connection Fee, and
Tapping Fee, are not ordained; Article 2, Sewer Connections, is not
ordained.
78.Editor's Note: A copy of the entire Penn Township Ord. No. 683 may be found on the Penn
Township website, www.penntwp.com.
§ 290-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-69
1:375
§ 290-70. Savings clause.
The provisions of the Penn Township, York County, Code of Ordinances,
so far as they are the same as those ordinances and regulations in force
immediately prior to the adoption of this Part 2, are intended as a
continuation of such ordinances and regulations and not as a new
enactment. The provisions of this Part 2 shall not affect any suit or
prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any of the prior
ordinances or regulations except as otherwise provided by law.
B. The Penn Township, York County, Code of Ordinances is hereby
amended as is more fully shown in the complete text of Chapter 110
thereof, which is attached hereto and made part hereof by reference
hereto as if fully set out at length herein.79
79.Editor's Note: A copy of Penn Township Ordinance, Arts. 1 and 2, as amended and set forth
in Ord. No. 2136, is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 290-69 HANOVER CODE § 290-70
1:376
Chapter 294
SHADE TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 92. Parks and other public areas — See Ch. 259.
§ 294-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings hereby ascribed to them, except in those instances where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
PERMIT — Any permit in writing as issued by the Shade Tree Commission.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, association, partnership or
corporation.
SHADE TREE — Any tree, shrub or other woody plant within the right-ofway
lines of the public streets and highways in the Borough of Hanover.
§ 294-2. Permit application; duration of permit; revocation of
permit.
The application for any permit required hereunder shall be made, in writing,
to the office of the Borough Secretary upon forms furnished by him and
shall specify the particular kind of work or operation the applicant desires
to perform thereunder and shall state the exact location and species of any
tree or trees affected. It shall be the duty of the Tree Warden to promptly
approve or disapprove all routine trimming and pruning of shade trees.
All other matters shall be submitted to the Shade Tree Commission for
approval or disapproval. The permit shall be effective for such length of time
as the Shade Tree Commission shall in each case determine, which shall
be indicated on the permit, and such permit may be revoked at any time
at the direction of the Shade Tree Commission upon proof satisfactory to
the Shade Tree Commission that the terms and conditions upon which the
permit has been issued are or have been violated.
§ 294-3. Trimming; removal; noncompliance. [Amended 12-6-1989
by Ord. No. 1862]
A. All shade trees shall be kept trimmed so that the minimum height where
they overhang any public walk shall be seven feet, and over streets, 14
feet. However, the Shade Tree Commission reserves the right to
designate higher or lower clearances in instances where conditions
make it appropriate and expedient. All trees standing on private
property and having branches extending over sidewalks and
thoroughfares shall be kept trimmed by the owner of such property
within the above limits, unless otherwise specified by the Shade Tree
§ 290-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-3
1:377
§ 294-4. Impediments to passage of water and air to roots.
No person shall, without first obtaining a permit, place or hereafter
maintain any stone, cement or other substance which shall impede the
passage of water and air to the roots of any shade tree, unless such person
shall leave an open space of ground surrounding the trunk of the tree, such
space to be not less than four feet square; exception to the foregoing may
be granted by the Shade Tree Commission where appropriate or expedient.
§ 294-5. Planting requirements.
No person shall plant any shade tree within the right-of-way lines of the
public streets and highways of the Borough of Hanover until a permit is
granted by the Shade Tree Commission, and such permit shall designate
where such tree is to be planted. The Shade Tree Commission may refuse a
permit to plant any species of tree which, in its opinion, is not suited to the
location.
§ 294-6. Protective guards during construction. [Amended
5-17-1995 by Ord. No. 1976]
In connection with any building operation or street work anywhere in the
vicinity of any shade trees, before such work shall be commenced, guards
may be approved for placement in all shade trees which may be subject
Commission. The owner of the aforementioned trees may trim or
remove said trees himself or herself without a permit, but if a
contractor is used, the contractor shall obtain a permit and provide a
certificate of insurance concerning public liability. In case the owner
of such property shall refuse or neglect to trim such trees upon being
notified in writing by the Shade Tree Commission to do so and within
the time specified by such notice, the Shade Tree Commission may,
after the expiration of the date specified in such notice, cause such
trimming to be done at the expense of the owner, and the entire cost
thereof, if unpaid, shall be filed and collected by the Borough in the
same manner as municipal claims are filed and collected.
B. The intent of all tree trimming shall be to maintain the most natural
shape and promote the optimum health of the shade trees. Trimming
shall be permitted by the Shade Tree Commission for the following
purposes:
(1) To obtain clearance around utility wires.
(2) To obtain or maintain clearance from buildings.
(3) To remove dead wood.
(4) To maintain a manageable height.
C. Trimming shall not be permitted only for topping or decorative shaping
of trees.
§ 294-3 HANOVER CODE § 294-6
1:378
to the hazards of such work so as to effectively prevent injury to the tree
and to the worker in the tree. However, tree guards are not to be placed in
shade trees as a substitute for proper trimming or removal of shade trees
which the Shade Tree Commission may order from time to time. The longterm
use of tree guards or utility lines through shade trees as a substitute
for trimming or tree removal is prohibited.
§ 294-7. Overhead wires; pruning of trees.
§ 294-8. Temporary removal of wires.
Whenever, in order to take down or prune any shade tree in the custody of
the Shade Tree Commission, it shall be deemed necessary to remove any
wire or wires, every person having such wire or wires running through the
work area shall temporarily remove the same or cut off the flow of current
therefrom within 24 hours after service of written notice from the Shade
Tree Commission to do so.
§ 294-9. Damaging trees; violations and penalties. [Amended
3-28-2007 by Ord. No. 2119]
Any person who inflicts damage upon a shade tree under the custody of
the Shade Tree Commission, either willfully, carelessly or accidentally, shall
be liable for costs of professional care in treatment of tree wounds. If the
A. Every person having any wire or wires running through a public
highway shall securely fasten such wire or wires so they shall not come
in contact with any tree so as to injure the same due to slack or loose
condition. When public utility lines and tree branches are in conflict
with each other, threatening damage to either or both, the utility
company shall cause such judicious pruning or trimming as to relieve or
prevent such conditions. The methods, nature and extent of such work
shall be in keeping with directives issued by the Shade Tree
Commission governing such work and shall be intended to preserve the
health, natural beauty and symmetry of trees so involved. Due regard
shall be given to the protection of utility wires, and especially the safety
of the men doing such work. Written directives of the Shade Tree
Commission shall be interpreted by the Tree Warden, who may inspect
or supervise such work as described above.
B. All conifers and evergreen trees shall be pruned below and aside of
electrical conductors, whereby the tip or terminal leader or lenders are
within 10 feet of an electrical conductor, to a pyramidal shape, provided
that no drop crotch cutting is required to do so. On older trees where
center growth trimming is required, side branches shall be trimmed so
as to give trees a more natural shape. All pruning cuts shall be made to
lateral branches. These natural or lateral cuts shall be made on an
angle beyond the raised bark ridge so that a slight angular stub
remains. No drop crotch cuts will be allowed. [Added 12-6-1989 by
Ord. No. 1862]
§ 294-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-9
1:379
tree shall die within one growing season, in the opinion of a professional
expert, as a direct result of such damage, or if the damaged tree shall
be rendered unsuitable as Borough property and condemned by the Shade
Tree Commission, then the person responsible shall pay all costs of removal
of said tree and its stump and the costs of replacing it with a young tree
of approved specifications. Such work shall be performed by or contracted
for by the Borough, and the costs assessed to the responsible person. If
the damage described above shall be legally judged as deliberate, then the
responsible person shall be also liable to a fine not to exceed $1,000, if
found guilty as a result of information properly filed.
§ 294-10. Appeals.
Any person wishing to appeal a decision of the Tree Warden or of the Shade
Tree Commission may appeal in writing to the Shade Tree Commission
Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals of the Shade Tree Commission
shall be appointed by the Borough Council and shall consist of one member
of the Council, who shall act as Chairman, one member of the Planning
Commission and one member of the Shade Tree Commission. If the decision
of the Board of Appeals is not unanimous, the question shall be referred to
Borough Council, whose decision shall be final.
§ 294-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-18-1988 by Ord. No.
1844]
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the regulations
of the Shade Tree Commission shall be liable, on conviction thereof, to
a fine or penalty as provided for in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty,
as amended, for each and every offense, plus costs of damage to or
replacement of shade trees, where appropriate; and whenever such person
shall have been notified by the Shade Tree Commission or service of
summons in prosecution, or in any other way, that he is committing such
violation, each day in which he shall continue in such violation after any
such notification shall constitute a separate offense, punishable by like fine
or penalty. Such fines or penalty shall be collected as prescribed by law.
§ 294-12. When effective.
The foregoing regulations of the Shade Tree Commission of Hanover
Borough shall become effective 10 days after publication hereof as
prescribed by law.
§ 294-9 HANOVER CODE § 294-12
1:380
Chapter 298
SIGNS; STREET ENCROACHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advertising materials — See Ch. 120.
Awnings — See Ch. 133.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 147.
Zoning — See Ch. 370.
§ 294-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-12
1:381

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 298-1. Short title.
This chapter may be cited as the "Hanover Borough Sign Ordinance of
1975."
§ 298-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the safety and welfare
of the public.
§ 298-3. Compliance required.
After this chapter becomes effective, it shall be unlawful for any person
to erect, place, alter, locate, relocate or maintain within the Borough of
Hanover any sign or sign structure without complying with the procedures
and requirements of this chapter.
§ 298-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADVERTISING SIGN — A sign which directs attention to a business,
product, service or activity sold or conducted at a location other than upon
the premises where the sign is located.
ANIMATED SIGN — A sign with action or motion, flashing lights or color
changes requiring electrical energy, electronic or manufactured sources of
supply, but not including wind-actuated elements such as flags, banners or
pennants.
AWNING, CANOPY or MARQUEE — A sign or mark of identification on any
structure made of cloth, metal, wood or substitute material with a frame or
rigid form attached to a building and projecting out from the building.
BUNTINGS, PENNANTS, BANNERS AND SIMILAR MATERIAL —
Temporary signs announcing changes and/or openings for businesses and
industry and events concerning charitable, civic and religious
organizations.
BUSINESS SIGN — A sign which announces or directs attention to a
business, product, service or activity sold or conducted on the premises
where such sign is located.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — A sign which is for directing patrons or attendants
to an establishment off the main traveled thoroughfare or to service clubs,
churches or other nonprofit organizations.
GROUND SIGN (FREESTANDING) — A sign which is supported by uprights,
columns, etc., in or upon the ground and not attached to any building.
§ 298-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 298-4
1:383
HOME OCCUPATION — A sign depicting a use which is incidental or
secondary to the residential use of a dwelling.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign which identifies only the occupant of the
premises, the profession of an occupant and/or the name of the building
upon which the sign is placed.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign incorporating a source of light in order to
make the message readable. Included are internally and externally lighted
signs.
MOBILE BILLBOARD — A sign constructed on a moveable framework
which can be moved from location to location. The sign has no permanent
foundation in the form of footers or slab in the ground.
POLITICAL SIGN — A sign which takes sides in issues of public or group
interest and/or advertises candidates involved therein.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign which is attached to a building or other
structure and extends beyond the line of said building or structure.
PUBLIC SERVICE SIGN — A sign erected or located by a public agency
providing information or instructions.
ROOF SIGN — A sign erected upon or above the roof or parapet wall of a
building and which is wholly or partially supported by said building.
SANDWICH BOARD SIGN — A sign constructed of at least two boards
joined at the top; erected on the ground or a surface so as to form a
triangular shape.
SIGN — A lettered board, structure, wall or other surface, or any other
device used to visually announce, advertise or convey information to the
public for any purpose. Included would be:
STREET CLOCK — A timepiece used as a sign erected upon or in a frame or
structure placed or located upon the sidewalk by a person or business for
the convenience of the public and which also serves as a business sign.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign placed or erected for a limited time only.
TRESPASSING SIGN — A sign indicating the private nature of a driveway
or property.
WALL SIGN — A flat sign which is affixed in any manner against or parallel
to any exterior wall of a building or structure and which does not extend
above the parapet, eaves or facade of the building to which it is attached.
A separate structure consisting of a face or faces upon which
information is portrayed, including its supporting structural elements.
A.
B. A structure or device erected in the form of a symbol or trademark.
A structure or device attached or fastened to another structure, such as
on the wall or roof of a building.
C.
A surface of a structure or device upon which lettered, pictorial or other
visual information is placed.
D.
§ 298-4 HANOVER CODE § 298-4
1:384
ARTICLE II
Administration
§ 298-5. Permit required.
Except as otherwise provided, no sign shall be erected, placed, altered,
located or relocated anywhere in the Borough until a sign permit for such
sign has been issued by the Borough Manager.
§ 298-6. Application for sign permit.
Application for a sign permit shall be made upon forms provided by the
Borough Manager and shall include the following information:
§ 298-7. Issuance of permit. [Amended 5-25-2016 by Ord. No. 2244]
The Borough Manager shall examine the application and accompanying
information and the premises upon which the sign is proposed to be located,
and if it shall appear that the proposed sign is in compliance with all the
requirements of this chapter and any other applicable ordinance, he shall
then issue a permit. Such permit shall be valid for a period of six months
and all work for which the permit was issued shall be completed within said
time period. Should said work not be completed within six months after
issuance of the sign permit, the applicant shall be required to submit a new
application for review, which application shall be subject to all changes that
have been made to ordinances and regulations relevant to the proposed
sign.
A. Name, address and telephone number of applicant.
B. Location of building, structure or lot to which or upon which the sign or
other advertising structure is to be attached or located.
C. Position of the sign or other advertising structure in relation to nearby
buildings or structures.
D. Two blueprints or drawings or equivalent of the plans and specifications
and method of construction and attachment to the building or ground.
E. Name of person, firm, corporation or association erecting the sign.
F. Written consent of the owner of the building, structure or land to which
or on which the sign is to be located.
G. Any electrical permit required and issued for said sign.
H. Such other information as the Borough Manager shall require to show
full compliance with this and all other codes and ordinances of the
municipality.
§ 298-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 298-8
1:385
§ 298-8. Permit fees. [Amended 10-12-2011 by Ord. No. 2176]
Beginning November 1, 2011, every applicant for a sign permit shall pay to
the Borough a permit fee at the time such permit is granted in an amount
established from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 298-9. Inspection. [Amended 10-12-2011 by Ord. No. 2176;
5-25-2016 by Ord. No. 2244]
The Borough shall inspect and approve the initial installation of the sign
and shall make periodic inspections thereof to determine conformity of the
sign with the regulations set forth in this chapter and other relevant laws,
ordinances and regulations. In the event that a sign is changed, the Borough
Manager may inspect same to determine that such change does not result
in the failure of the sign to comply with the terms hereof and with other
relevant laws, ordinances and regulations. Should it be determined that
a sign is no longer in compliance with the terms hereof or any relevant
laws, ordinances or regulations or that a change to the sign results in such
noncompliance, the Borough Manager may initiate an enforcement action
pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
§ 298-10. Revocation of permits and licenses.
The Borough Manager is hereby authorized and empowered to revoke any
sign permit or annual license issued by him upon failure of the applicant to
comply with any provision of this chapter.
§ 298-11. Unsafe and unlawful signs.
A. If the Borough Manager shall find that any sign or part thereof is
unsafe, insecure, a menace to the public, not in good condition or repair
or has been constructed or located in violation of the provisions of this
chapter, he shall notify the permittee or owner thereof to comply with
the provisions of this chapter within 15 days from receipt of such
notice. Upon failure to comply with such notice within the prescribed
period, the Borough Manager is hereby authorized to remove or to take
whatever corrective action is necessary to bring the sign into
compliance with this chapter and to collect the cost of such removal or
corrective action, together with a penalty of 10% in addition thereto,
from the permittee or owner, in the manner provided by law.
B. The Borough Manager shall refuse to issue any sign permit or annual
license to any permittee or owner who refuses to pay any costs so
assessed.
C. The Borough Manager may cause any sign or part thereof which is an
immediate danger to persons or property to be removed summarily and
without notice.
§ 298-8 HANOVER CODE § 298-12
1:386
§ 298-12. Removal of certain signs.
Any sign which no longer advertises an existing business conducted or
product sold on the premises shall be removed by the owner of the sign
or premises upon which such sign is located. The Borough Manager, upon
determining that all business operations have ceased and noting that a sign
exists, shall notify the owner of the premises in writing to remove said sign
within 90 days after the date of such notice. Upon failure to comply with
such notice within the prescribed period, the Borough Manager is hereby
authorized to remove or cause removal of such sign and to collect the cost of
such removal, together with a penalty of 10% in addition thereto, from the
owner of such sign or of such property, as the case may be, in the manner
provided by law.
§ 298-13. Exemptions.
The exemption from the permit and licensing provisions of this chapter shall
not be construed as relieving the owner or person in control of the sign from
complying with all other applicable provisions of this chapter. The following
is a list of signs for which no permit or license shall be required:
A. The public service signs erected by public agencies in locations
approved by the Borough of a size not larger than permitted by state
highway regulations of this or other Borough ordinances. The following
signs are included in this group:
(1) Signs for regulatory purposes, such as traffic control signs,
trespassing signs and parking control signs.
(2) Signs for directional or informational purposes, such as street
name signs, location of public facilities, historic signs or markers
and utility information signs.
B. Signs or bulletin boards of schools, colleges, churches, hospitals and
other similar institutions, provided that:
(1) The sign area of any directional or information sign shall not be
more than eight square feet.
(2) The sign area of any other such sign shall not be more than 30
square feet.
C. Memorial plaques, cornerstones or historic markers, built in or
attached to the walls of structures, bearing only the name or use of the
structure, the date of erection of the structure and/or reading matter
commemorating a person or event.
D. Street addresses not exceeding two square feet in area for each main
entrance.
E. Signs identifying home occupations, provided that the area of such sign
shall not be larger than two square feet. No more than one such sign
shall be permitted for each occupation.
§ 298-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 298-13
1:387
F. Temporary signs of contractors, architects, mechanics or craftsmen,
provided that such signs shall:
(1) Be placed only off the public right-of-way on the property where
such work is being performed.
(2) Not exceed 12 square feet in size.
(3) Be removed promptly upon completion of the work.
(4) A sign permit is obtained with the building permit.
G. Temporary real estate signs:
(1) Advertising the sale or rental of premises, provided that the sign
area of such sign shall not exceed six square feet and no more than
two such signs shall be placed on any property, off the public rightof-
way, held in single ownership.
(2) On the property for sale or being developed, off the public right-ofway,
indicating the location of premises in the process of
development, provided that the sign area of such sign shall not
exceed 20 square feet and no more than one sign shall be placed for
each 500 feet of street frontage.
(3) Signs bearing the word "sold" or the word "rented" with or without
the name of the person affecting the sale or rental may be erected
and maintained, provided they are not in the public right-of-way
and that the conditions of this chapter are complied with. Such sign
shall not remain more than 30 days on the premises, and a permit
must be filed prior to erection stating the time the sign will be
erected and removed. The permit shall be without fee.
§ 298-13 HANOVER CODE § 298-13
1:388
ARTICLE III
General Regulations
§ 298-14. Restrictions and requirements for all signs.
A. No sign shall be erected that, by reason of position, shape or color, may
interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized
traffic sign, signal or device.
B. Except for a sign or lettering painted or placed directly on a door, store
window, door or window frame or building trim identifying the occupant
or activity of a building or structure, no sign shall be painted directly on
any surface which is not in itself the sign structure in the GB District.
C. Under no circumstance shall any sign or part thereof project over or
extend beyond a point two feet inside the curbline or edge of street
pavement.
D. No part of any sign shall project or extend over any pedestrian walkway
for a distance of more than four feet, and every such sign projecting out
for more than two feet shall have a clear space of at least eight feet
below all projecting parts.
E. In computing the area upon which information or copy can be placed,
only that face or faces which can be seen from any one direction at one
time shall be counted.
F. No signs shall be attached to or placed on any public utility pole or tree
located within any public right-of-way.
G. Illumination of any sign shall be indirect, shielded or otherwise
arranged to prevent glare.
H. All signs shall be constructed of durable materials and shall be kept in
good condition and repair.
I. All signs shall be erected or located so that they will permit free ingress
to or egress from any window, door or fire escape.
J. Indecent or obscene sign matter shall not be displayed in any manner.
K. Every sign for which a permit is required shall have its assigned
number clearly displayed on the sign face or front.
L. Any sign erected prior to the adoption of this chapter or as amended
that does not conform if damaged to an extent of 1/2 its replacement
value shall not be rebuilt. However, the normal maintenance, repainting
or posting of these signs or structures shall not be a factor in
determining the replacement costs.
M. The total aggregate square footage of sign area permitted for a single
business or activity located or conducted on a single property (or
individual store or shop in a shopping center) shall not be more than
§ 298-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 298-14
1:389
two square feet for each lineal foot of primary property street frontage
(or individual store or shop frontage in a shopping center). Under no
circumstances, however, shall the total permitted aggregate sign area
for any such individual business or activity exceed 200 square feet per
street frontage.
N. Identification signs, provided that:
(1) There is no more than one such sign for each business or activity.
(2) Such signs are attached to the building or structure in which the
business or activity is located.
O. Trespassing sign. No more than one such sign shall be permitted for
each driveway or property.
P. All temporary signs have a forty-five-day time limit unless otherwise
provided for by this chapter.
§ 298-14 HANOVER CODE § 298-14
1:390
ARTICLE IV
Size and Location
§ 298-15. Permitted sizes and locations of signs.
Classification
Permit
Required
Where Permitted
(Zoning
Districts)
Maximum Size
and Other
Regulations
Advertising sign X HI 300 square feet
Animated sign X M and HI 300 square feet
Awning, canopy or
marquee
X A, R-1, R-2, R-3
and LMD
Awning, canopy or
marquee
X LB, HB, GB, LM,
M and HI
§ 298-19
Buntings, pennants,
banners and similar
material
X LM, LB, HB, GB,
SC, M and HI
§ 298-14P
Business sign X LB, HB, GB, SC
and LM
200 square feet;
§§ 298-13 and
298-16 through
298-22
Business sign X M and HI 300 square feet;
§ 298-13
Directional sign X A, R-1, R-2, R-3
and LMD
8 square feet;
§ 298-13B
Directional sign X LB, HB, GB and
SC
50 square feet
Directional sign X M and HI 80 square feet
Ground sign X LB, HB, GB, SC,
LM, M and HI
§ 298-18
Home occupation X All districts 2 square feet;
§ 298-13E
Identification sign X A, R-1, R-2 and
R-3
2 square feet;
§ 298-14N
Identification sign X LMD 6 square feet;
§ 298-14N
Identification sign X LM, LB, HB, GB
and SC
20 square feet;
§ 298-14N
Identification sign X M and HI 300 square feet;
§ 298-14N
Illuminated sign X All districts
Mobile billboard X LB, HB, GB, SC,
LM, M and HI
16 square feet
§ 298-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 298-15
1:391
Classification
Permit
Required
Where Permitted
(Zoning
Districts)
Maximum Size
and Other
Regulations
Political sign X LB, HB, GB and
SC
30 square feet
Political sign X M and HI 300 square feet
Projecting sign X LM, LB, HB, GB
and SC
§ 298-17
Public service sign X All districts § 298-13
Roof sign X LM, LB, HB, GB
and SC
80 square feet;
§ 298-21
Roof sign X M and HI § 298-21
Sandwich board sign X LB, HB, GB, SC,
LM, M and HI
32 square feet
Street clock X LB, HB, GB and
SC
§ 298-20
Temporary sign X All districts §§ 298-13F and G
and 298-14P
Trespassing sign X A, R-1, R-2 and
R-3
2 square feet;
§ 298-14O
Trespassing sign X LM, LB, HB, GB
and SC
6 square feet;
§ 298-14O
Trespassing sign X M and I 12 square feet;
§ 298-14O
Wall sign X All districts § 298-16
SC — shopping center.
A sign may come under more than one classification; in such cases, all and/
or the most restrictive regulations apply. A new sign for a nonconforming
use or a new nonconforming sign or interpretation of the permitted use
of signs shall be submitted to the Zoning Hearing Board for review in
accordance with § 140-135 of the Hanover Borough Zoning Ordinance.80
80.Editor's Note: The Zoning Ordinance is on file in the Borough Secretary's office; see also
Ch. 370, Zoning.
§ 298-15 HANOVER CODE § 298-15
1:392
ARTICLE V
Specific Regulations
§ 298-16. Wall signs.
§ 298-17. Projecting signs.
§ 298-18. Ground (freestanding) signs; sandwich board signs;
mobile billboards.
§ 298-19. Awnings; canopies; marquees.
A. There shall be no more than one wall sign per wall on any building or
structure.
B. Wall signs shall not extend out from the building or structure to which
they are attached for more than nine inches, except that any wall sign
or part thereof which is less than nine feet above the ground level shall
not extend out for more than four inches.
A. Projecting signs shall not project or extend out from the building or
structure to which it is attached for more than four feet.
B. No glass shall be used in a projecting sign, other than safety glass.
A. Tops of ground signs shall not exceed 25 feet in height above the
ground level.
B. No part of any ground sign shall be closer than eight feet to a street
curbline or edge of cartway except for a sign less than three feet in
height.
C. No part of any ground sign shall be closer than five feet to any adjacent
lot or property line.
D. Sandwich board signs and mobile billboards shall be anchored by
chains to a permanent foundation or the attachment of secured
weights, such as concrete blocks and sandbags, such that they can be
certified by a professional engineer that they will not become airborne
during normal seasonal wind conditions in the area. Signs shall be so
placed as to avoid pedestrian hazard by giving pedestrians an adequate
four-foot area to walk around the structure. Signs must be positioned in
a manner not to obstruct driver's view.
A. Fixed or permanent awnings and canopies.
(1) All fixed or permanent awnings and canopies shall be constructed
and erected so that the lowest portion thereof shall not be less than
seven feet above the level of the sidewalk or the existing or finished
grade under said awning where pedestrian traffic only is a
consideration. It shall be permissible to have hanging below the
lowest rigid point of a fixed awning a flexible material, such as
§ 298-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 298-19
1:393
§ 298-20. Street clocks.
canvas or some other similar material, which shall be no longer
than six feet two inches above the existing or finished grade under
said awning.
(2) No part of the fixed awning projecting over a public way shall be
less than 14 feet above the existing finished grade where vehicular
traffic is a consideration for clearance.
B. All folding or collapsible awnings or canopies shall be constructed and
erected so that the lowest portion thereof shall not be less than seven
feet above the level of the sidewalk.
C. No portion of any awning or canopy or marquee shall be permitted to
extend beyond a point two feet inside the curbline.
D. No sign shall be placed on any awning or canopy, except that the name
of the owner and the business or activity conducted on the premises
may be painted or otherwise permanently placed in a space not
exceeding eight inches in height on the front and side portions thereof.
E. Retractable awnings.
(1) Retractable awnings over doors and windows of any building,
conforming to the provisions of this chapter, shall be permitted on
any building. Every retractable awning shall be located as not to
interfere with the operation of any exterior standpipe, stairway or
exit from the building.
(2) Retractable awnings shall be supported entirely from the building
by rigid attachment for frames or brackets thereto.
(3) The framework of retractable awnings shall be constructed only of
corrosion- or mildew-resisting material or materials adequately
protected against corrosion or mildew.
(4) There shall be no limitation on the permitted length or width of
retractable awnings, provided they conform to the other provisions
of this chapter.
F. Awnings, including supports, frames, arms, brackets and other devices,
shall be constructed throughout of incombustible material.
A. Street clocks erected on the sidewalk shall be not more than 25 feet in
height.
B. Only the name of the owner and/or name of the business or activity
conducted on the premises shall be permitted to appear on the clock.
C. In addition to all other applicable requirements, no street clock shall be
located upon any public sidewalk until permission therefor has been
granted by action of Borough Council.
§ 298-19 HANOVER CODE § 298-20
1:394
§ 298-21. Roof signs.
Roof signs shall not extend more than 10 feet above the highest part of the
building structure in M and HI Districts and three feet in all other districts;
furthermore, the height of the sign is not to exceed the distance from the
sign to the nearest side yard or rear lot line, whichever is less.
§ 298-22. Nonconforming signs.
D. Flashing or blinking lights are permitted only to indicate the time and/
or temperature.
A. Owners of nonconforming signs must apply to the Manager for a permit
to continue using a nonconforming sign.
B. Every sign in existence at the time this chapter becomes effective which
is not in conformance with the provisions herein shall be removed,
altered or replaced so as to conform with this chapter within five years
after the effective date hereof. The Hanover Borough Council may issue
a yearly permit to continue using a nonconforming sign after the
aforementioned five years. The Council may impose reasonable
conditions in granting same or may in their discretion deny the
application.
§ 298-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 298-22
1:395

ARTICLE VI
Street Encroachments
§ 298-23. Street displays.
No person, firm or corporation shall stand or place, or cause or permit
to be stood or placed, any casks, barrels, wares, goods or merchandise of
any kind or description whatsoever, whether for sale or otherwise, or in
any case, stand or table for the display thereof, on or over any part of any
pavement in the Borough of Hanover, for a space of more than one foot
from the property line where the distance from such property line to the
outside curbline is six feet or less, or for a space of more than two feet from
the property line where the distance from such property line to the outside
curbline is more than six feet, or permit or suffer the same to be of a height
greater than six feet, or to remain for a longer time than between sunrise
and sunset.
§ 298-24. Porches.
No structure commonly known as a "porch" shall be constructed, rebuilt,
enlarged, modified or changed on or over any Borough highway, unless and
until a permit therefor, in accordance with these requirements, is granted
by the Borough Secretary. The Borough Secretary is authorized to grant a
permit only upon the following conditions, and any permit granted contrary
to these conditions is invalid:
A. A plan of the porch, capable of being preserved, showing its
dimensions, material and complete construction shall accompany an
application for a permit, made in the form prepared by the Secretary.
B. No porch shall be constructed and maintained contrary to the plans and
specifications so filed.
C. No porch shall have a roof or other permanent covering.
D. By vote of Council, a canopy may be erected over the portion of the
porch in front of the doorway.
E. No part of the porch or steps and no construction thereon shall be
permitted to a greater height than three feet from the established grade
of the sidewalk; except that a handrail may be constructed not over 12
inches in perimeter, together with its necessary supports not closer
than three feet apart; except also that a bench or seat, to be used only
for the seating of persons, may be permitted; all of which exceptions
shall be shown on the plan. Furthermore, no objects or materials shall
be placed on or attached to any part of the porch which shall obstruct or
interrupt light, air or view at a height greater than three feet, as
measured from the lowest point on the portion of the sidewalk on which
the porch is erected.
F. No porch or any portion thereof, including steps, shall extend into the
highway except as follows: On streets 70 feet or more in width, the
§ 298-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 298-24
1:397
§ 298-25. Tanks, pumps and other articles.
From and after the passage of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for a person,
firm or corporation to place, erect or maintain any tank (except for fuel oil
for heating abutting premises), pump or other article on or under any public
highway of the Borough except under the following conditions:
§ 298-26. Bay windows.
From and after the passage of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any
person, persons or corporation to erect, construct or maintain, or cause to
be erected, constructed or maintained, any bay window or bow window that
extension shall not be in excess of five feet; on streets 60 to 70 feet in
width, the extension shall not be in excess of four feet six inches; on
streets 40 feet to 60 feet in width, the extension shall not be in excess
of three feet; and on streets under 40 feet in width, the extension shall
not be in excess of 2 1/2 feet.
G. An exception may be allowed by Council to § 298-24C and E of the
foregoing regulations whenever the Chairman of the Street Committee
reports that a majority of the Street Committee viewed the premises
and favor the granting of a permit, and Council is convinced that unless
an exception is granted, there will be a manifest injury to the beneficial
use of the property, and no reasonable injury can result to other
properties in the neighborhood or along the street.
A. A permit must be first obtained from the Borough Secretary, and a
payment of $25 made therefor, which permit shall be issued only after a
vote of Borough Council directing the permit to be issued, and only
after an application agreement has been signed by all parties interested
in such tank, pump or other article.
B. The applicant for the permit shall sign a form submitted by the
Secretary, in which he will set forth in detail the purpose, place, size
and description of the tank, pump or other article, and in which he
agrees that the work shall be done under the supervision of a person
designated by the Borough Council and in accordance with the
requirements of the Borough and the laws and requirements of the
state, and in which he further agrees that the tank, pump or other
article shall be removed at his expense upon 30 days' notice from the
Borough Secretary, and upon his failure to remove that, the Borough
may do so at his expense, and in which he further agrees that he will
pay for the privileges any license fee that the Borough may from time to
time generally impose on such tank, pump or other article, and in which
he still further agrees to assume and pay all liability for damages to
person or property by reason of the installation and maintenance of the
tank, pump or other article. If the applicant is not the owner of the
premises, the application agreement shall contain a provision signed by
the owner of the premises that the removal aforesaid shall be at his
expense if not paid by the applicant.
§ 298-24 HANOVER CODE § 298-26
1:398
may project into any street, alley, square or highway, within the Borough of
Hanover, beyond the building lines of said street, alley, square or highway,
without first submitting a plan of the proposed bay window to the Borough
Council of said Borough of Hanover and obtaining a permit therefor, the
same to be constructed under the supervision and subject to the approval of
the Street Committee of the said Borough Council.
§ 298-27. Steps and cellar doors.
On streets 70 feet and over in width, no steps or cellar doors hereafter
constructed shall extend further into the highway (which shall include the
street and sidewalk) than five feet; on streets 60 feet in width but less than
70 feet in width, the extension of steps or cellar doors shall not exceed four
feet six inches; on streets 40 feet in width but less than 60 feet in width,
the extension of steps or cellar doors shall not exceed three feet; on streets
under 40 feet, the extension of steps or cellar doors shall not be in excess of
two feet six inches. Any owner or owners of property who shall build, erect
or place, or cause to be built, erected or placed, upon his or their premises,
any step or cellar door of a greater extent than specified in this section, or in
any other manner not conforming to the provisions of this section, and who
shall fail to remove or remedy the same within 24 hours after notice from
the Borough, shall upon conviction thereof before the Magisterial District
Judge of the Borough, be sentenced to pay a fine as permitted under the
Fine Ordinance. It shall be the duty of the Borough Manager to remove
such steps or cellar door and collect the cost of such removal, together with
any additional penalty authorized by law, from the owner or owners of such
property.
§ 298-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 298-27
1:399

ARTICLE VII
Enforcement
§ 298-28. Notice of violation.
The Borough Manager, or any police officer or employee of the Borough
designated thereby for the purpose, is hereby authorized to give notice,
by personal service or by United States mail, to the owner and/or the
lessee of the premises where there is a sign in violation of this chapter,
directing and requiring the owner and/or lessee to remove said sign from
the premises within five days after issuance of such notice. In case any
person, partnership, firm, association or corporation shall neglect, fail or
refuse to comply with such notice within a period of time stated therein,
the Borough authorities may remove the sign which is in violation of this
chapter, and the cost thereof, together with any additional penalty
authorized by the law, may be collected by the Borough from such person,
partnership, firm, association or corporation in the manner provided by law.
§ 298-29. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership, firm, association or corporation who or which shall
fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter
within five days after receiving the notice as provided for in § 298-28 of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to the penalties as
provided for in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty.
§ 298-30. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective on August 20, 1975, and shall remain
in force until modified, amended or rescinded by the Borough Council of
Hanover.
§ 298-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 298-30
1:401
Chapter 304
SNOW EMERGENCIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Snow and ice removal — See Ch. 316, Art. III.
Vehicle impoundment — See Ch. 339.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 346.
§ 304-1. Authorization to declare emergency.
The Borough Manager is hereby directed and authorized to ascertain,
determine and declare a snow emergency whenever there is such an
accumulation or impending accumulation of snow as will constitute a
hazard for vehicular traffic upon streets within the Borough of Hanover.
§ 304-2. Announcements given when possible. [Amended 4-6-1994
by Ord. No. 1962]
The Borough Manager shall cause to be announced, whenever possible,
such snow emergency periods by the local radio station, if possible, several
hours in advance of the effective starting time of the emergency and, if
time permits, to also have the emergency published in a local newspaper.
Annually, the Borough Manager shall also publish a reminder of snow
emergency regulations to remind the public of snow-related regulations.
§ 304-3. Unlawful acts during emergency.
During the periods that such snow emergency is declared, it shall be
unlawful:
A. To operate any vehicle upon streets in the Borough of Hanover unless
said vehicles are equipped with snow tires or chains.
B. To park on the following state highways:
(1) Broadway from Locust Street to the Hanover Borough line.
(2) Carlisle Street from Park Avenue to the Hanover Borough line.
(3) Frederick Street from Centennial Avenue to the Hanover Borough
line.
(4) Baltimore Street from Middle Street to the Hanover Borough line.
(5) York Street from Middle Street to the Hanover Borough line.
(6) Elm Avenue from Carlisle Street to the Hanover Borough line.
(7) High Street from Frederick Street to Third Street.
§ 298-30 HANOVER CODE § 304-3
1:402
§ 304-4. Plows or similar equipment.
It shall be unlawful to use any snowplow or similar equipment upon any
street in the Borough of Hanover, except such snowplows authorized by
(8) Third Street from High Street to the Hanover Borough line.
C. To park at the following parking meter districts during the hours of the
snow emergency: [Amended 4-6-1994 by Ord. No. 1962]
(1) East and west sides of Carlisle Street from Center Square to the
Borough line.
(2) East and west sides of York Street from Center Square to the
Borough line.
(3) East and west sides of Baltimore Street from Center Square to the
Borough line.
(4) North and south sides of Broadway from Center Square to the
Borough line.
(5) North and south sides of Frederick Street from Center Square to
the Borough line.
(6) All the quadrants of the Center Square.
(7) North and south sides of Eisenhower Drive from Carlisle Street to
Broadway.
(8) North and south sides of Moulstown Road from Broadway to the
Borough line.
(9) East and west sides of Ruth Avenue from Walnut Street to Hanover
Street.
(10) East and west sides of Locust Street from Middle Street to Pleasant
Street.
(11) North and south sides of East and West Chestnut Streets from
Broadway to Forney Avenue.
(12) East and west sides of Forney Avenue from West Chestnut Street to
Frederick Street.
(13) North and south sides of High Street from Frederick to Third
Street.
(14) North and south sides of Third Street, High Street to the Borough
line.
D. To park on the side of such other Borough streets when snow
emergency signs have been posted thereon designating the same to be
snow emergency routes and specifying that parking is prohibited on the
side so posted.
§ 304-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-4
1:403
the State Department of Transportation or such snowplows under the
authorization of and supervision of the Borough Manager or his authorized
representative.
§ 304-5. Depositing snow on streets and sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful to remove snow from private property and place the
same on streets and/or sidewalks.
§ 304-6. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 308
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Responsibility for pet waste — See Ch. 126,
Art. II.
Board of Health rules and regulations — See
Ch. 137.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 142.
Open burning — See Ch. 159.
Abandoned or junked vehicles — See Ch. 342.
A. Any person violating this chapter will be subject to a fine and/or
imprisonment as provided for by Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty,
as amended.
B. Vehicles violating this chapter may also be towed to a safe, secure
impoundment and the charges of towing and impoundment collected in
addition to fines under Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty.
§ 304-4 HANOVER CODE § 304-6
1:404
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 308-1. Scope.
This chapter shall govern and control all aspects of the collection, storage,
transportation, processing and disposal of municipal waste and recycling
in the Borough of Hanover. It contains provisions applicable to individuals,
commercial, municipal and institutional establishments and community
activities.
§ 308-2. Purpose.
This chapter is being enacted in order to establish a program for the
collection, storage, transportation, processing and disposal of municipal
waste, to implement a recycling program, including mandatory source
separation and separate collection of designated recyclable materials and
leaf waste, in order to return valuable materials to productive use, to
conserve energy and to protect capacity at municipal waste processing and
disposal facilities.
§ 308-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENT — One who performs an act for his immediate family or for another
person gratuitously (without any form of monetary or material
compensation therefor).
ALUMINUM CANS — Empty, all-aluminum beverage and food containers.
BIMETALLIC CANS — Empty food or beverage containers consisting of both
steel and aluminum.
BOROUGH — Borough of Hanover, York County, Pennsylvania.
COMMERCIAL — Of or pertaining to any wholesale, retail, industrial,
manufacturing, transportation or financial or professional service or office
enterprise, business or establishment.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITY — An activity or event sponsored or organized
by a public or private nonprofit organization for recreational, educational,
cultural or civic purposes which may be attended by members of the public
whether or not an entrance or participation fee is charged therefor.
COMPOSTING — The process by which organic material is biologically
decomposed under controlled anaerobic or aerobic conditions to yield a
humus-like product.
COMPOSTING FACILITY — A facility using land for processing of organic
material by composting.
§ 308-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 308-3
1:405
CORRUGATED PAPER — Structural paper material with an inner core
shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges, of the type normally used to
make packaging cartons and boxes.
CURBSIDE COLLECTION — A method of collection of residentially
generated recyclables by which the owners or occupants of certain
residential properties place them at curbside, at times, designated by
authorized collectors, for collection and removal by an authorized collector
thereof for delivery to a recycling center.
DISPOSAL — The incineration, deposition, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking or placing of municipal waste into or on the land or water in a
manner such that the municipal waste or a constituent thereof enters the
environment, is emitted into the air or is discharged to the waters of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
DISPOSAL AREA — Any site, location, area, building, structure, transfer
station or premises to be used for municipal waste disposal.
GARBAGE — All putrescible animal and vegetable matter resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
GLASS CONTAINERS — All empty food and beverage jars or bottles made
from silica or sand, soda ash, and limestone, the product being transparent
or translucent (either clear, green or brown), excluding, however, blue
glass, flat glass, plate glass commonly known as "window glass," automotive
glass and ceramic and porcelain products.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — Any white paper other than newsprint,
magazines or other chemically coated paper or corrugated paper, of the
type commonly used for letter-writing stationery, note paper, plain paper
photocopying machines, computer printers and other general purpose
paper, whether or not any printed or written matter is contained thereon.
INSTITUTIONAL — Of or pertaining to any establishment engaged in
service to persons, including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes,
orphanages, schools, universities, es and social or fraternal societies and
organizations.
LANDLORD — The owner of residential property or such owner's
authorized agent.
LEAF COMPOSTING FACILITY — A facility for composting vegetative
material, including leaf waste, garden residue and chipped shrubbery and
tree trimmings.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree trimmings
and similar material, but not including grass clippings.[Amended
11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 2113]
MAGAZINES — Printed matter, also known as "periodicals," containing
miscellaneous written prices published at fixed or varying intervals, printed
on glossy or chemically coated paper. Expressly excluded are newspapers
and all other paper products of any nature whatsoever.
§ 308-3 HANOVER CODE § 308-3
1:406
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROPERTY — A type of residential property,
either under single ownership or organized as a condominium or
cooperative form of housing, which contains four or more dwelling units.
MUNICIPAL — Of or pertaining to any office or other property under the
control of any branch or arm of the federal government of the United States
of America, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any political subdivision
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, including, but not limited to, the
Borough of Hanover, any counties, cities, townships, boroughs and
municipal authorities.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities,
and any sludge not meeting the definition of "residual or hazardous waste"
as defined in the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act81 from a
municipal, commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant,
wastewater treatment plant or air pollution control facility. The term does
not include source-separated recyclable materials.
NEWSPAPER — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint"
and distributed at fixed or stated intervals, usually daily or weekly, having
printed thereon news and opinions and containing advertisements and
other matters of public interest. The term "newspaper" expressly excludes
magazines, glossy or other chemically coated paper, office paper and any
other paper products of any nature.
OPEN BURNING (FIRE) — A fire in which any solid waste is burned in the
open or in a receptacle other than a furnace or an incinerator permitted by
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipality, municipal authority,
federal government or agency, state institution or agency or any other legal
entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and
duties. In any provisions of this chapter prescribing a fine, imprisonment or
penalty, or any combination of the foregoing, the term "person" shall include
the officers and directors of any corporation or other legal entity having
officers and directors.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Empty plastic food and beverage containers, the
specific types of which are PET (soft drink and water bottles) and HDPE
(milk and water jugs, detergent and shampoo bottles), to be designated by
resolution of the Borough Council.
PROCESSING — Any technology used for the purpose of reducing the
volume or bulk of municipal waste, or any technology used to convert part
or all of such waste materials for off-site reuse. Processing facilities include,
but are not limited to, transfer stations, composting facilities and resource
recovery facilities.
81.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 308-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 308-3
1:407
RECYCLABLES — Materials designated as recyclable in this chapter, or
required by the terms of this chapter, any amendment hereto or designated
by resolution of the Borough, to be kept separate from municipal waste and
recycled, including leaf waste.
RECYCLING — The collection, separate maintenance, recovery and sale or
reuse of recyclables which would otherwise be disposed of or processed as
municipal waste, or the mechanized separation and treatment of municipal
waste (other than through combustion) and creation and recovery of
reusable materials other than a fuel for the operation of energy.
RECYCLING CENTERS — The facilities located at the public works yard
within the Borough, the transfer station, Barnhart Drive, Hanover, and
which are designed to, and which do, act as a collection center for the
processing, storage and shipment of recyclables.
RESIDENTIAL — Of or pertaining to any dwelling unit used as a place of
human habitation and which is not commercial, municipal, institutional or
a community activity. Home occupations incidental to the residential use
within a building are considered residential.
RUBBISH — Solid waste exclusive of garbage (e.g., nonrecyclable glass,
metal, paper or plastic) and noncompostable plant material, wood or
nonputrescible solid waste.
STEEL CANS — Empty food or beverage containers made of steel, tincoated
steel or other ferrous metal food or beverage containers.
STORAGE — The containment of any municipal waste on a temporary basis
in such a manner as not to constitute disposal of such municipal waste. It
shall be presumed that the containment of any municipal waste in excess
of one year constitutes disposal. This presumption can only be overcome by
clear and convincing evidence to the contrary.
TRANSPORTATION — The off-site removal of any municipal waste at any
time after generation thereof.
WASTE — A material whose original purpose has been completed and which
is directed to a disposal or processing facility or is otherwise disposed
of. The term does not include source-separated recyclable materials or
material approved by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection for beneficial use.
YARD WASTE COMPOSTING FACILITY — A facility that is used to compost
leaf waste, including a facility that is used to compost grass.
§ 308-4. Dumping and littering.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to store, dump, discard or deposit, or
to permit the storage, dumping, discarding or depositing, of any
municipal waste or recyclables upon the surface of the ground or
underground within the Borough, except in proper containers for
purposes of storage or collection, and except where the waste or
recyclables are of such size or shape as not to permit their being placed
§ 308-3 HANOVER CODE § 308-4
1:408
§ 308-5. Preparation and storage of municipal waste.
in such containers. It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or
deposit any municipal waste, recyclables or leaf waste in any stream or
body of water or on or near any public or private right-of-way within the
Borough.
B. Every owner of property or occupant thereof responsible for such
property's day-to-day operation or maintenance shall pick up and
discard in an appropriate receptacle any municipal waste, recyclables
or other debris deposited or accumulated on the sidewalk or gutter in
front of or adjacent to such property. All owners or operators of
commercial, industrial, institutional and municipal establishments in
the Borough shall take all reasonable precautions to prevent the
deposition and accumulation of debris in front of their premises, and in
furtherance of that end, may place appropriate waste containers along
the alleyways or, where no public alleyway exists, on the sidewalks in
front of or adjacent to their premises at a point which will not create a
hazard to traffic or pedestrians. Any such receptacles so placed shall be
emptied on a regular basis and maintained in a neat and clean
appearance.
C. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit a farmer from carrying out the
normal activities of his farming operations, including composting and
spreading of leaf waste, manure or other farm-produced agricultural
waste, provided such activities are conducted in accordance with all
applicable laws, rules and regulations.
A. The storage of all municipal waste shall be practiced so as to prevent
the attraction, breeding or harborage of insects or rodents and to
prevent conditions which may create potential hazards to the public
health or which may create fire and other safety hazards, odors,
unsightliness or public nuisance.
B. Any person accumulating or storing municipal waste on private or
public property in the Borough for any purpose whatsoever shall place
the same, or cause the same to be placed, in sanitary closed or covered
containers in accordance with the following standards:
(1) Containers used for the storage of municipal waste shall be of
metal, rubber, plastic or fiberglass construction, rust and corrosion
resistant, equipped with lids and waterproof.
(2) All garbage shall be drained of excess liquids and wrapped in paper
or be placed in plastic bags before being placed in the waste
storage containers described above, and all ashes shall be free of
any burning material before being deposited for collection.
(3) No person, except the occupant of the property on which a waste
container is placed or any Borough representative, shall remove
the lids of the container and/or remove the contents thereof.
§ 308-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 308-5
1:409
§ 308-6. Required collection and regulation thereof.
(4) All hazardous waste, including but not limited to waste of a highly
infectious or contagious waste, shall not be stored for ordinary
collection, but shall be specially disposed of in accordance with the
directions of the Borough or of any state or federal authority having
jurisdiction thereof.
(5) Bulk containers shall not be permitted to overflow or to have waste
strewn or left about them on the ground. A violation of this
provision shall be deemed a violation of this chapter by the person
on whose property the bulk container is located, if it is located on
private property.
C. Containers used by property owners for the storage and collection by
the Borough of municipal waste and recyclables shall be placed for
collection either at the curb (in the case of street collection) or at the
alley right-of-way line (in the case of alley collection). Placement at the
curb for street pickup shall be no more than 24 hours prior to the time
of collection by the Borough. The size and number of containers
permitted to be placed for collection and the frequency of such
collection shall be established from time to time by resolution of the
Hanover Borough Council. [Added 12-28-2011 by Ord. No. 2180]
(1) Special points of collection may be approved by the Hanover
Borough Manager upon a property owner providing proof of
hardship. "Hardship" is defined as either the physical inability of a
customer to bring containers to the curb or alley right-of-way line
or a unique characteristic of the property owner's property which
does not allow for the location of collection at the curb or alley
right-of-way line. An additional fee may be imposed on a property
owner by the Borough for collection other than at the curb or alley
right-of-way line.
A. All owners of property within the Borough shall provide for the regular
preparation for removal of all municipal waste generated at such
properties in one of the approved manners set forth herein.
B. All owners of property in the Borough of Hanover shall provide for the
preparation and storage of municipal waste and shall have such waste
collected, removed and disposed of by the Borough. No person, firm or
entity other than the Borough shall collect, remove and dispose of
municipal waste from any property in the Borough, unless the owner of
a property obtains approval from the Borough for such collection,
removal and disposal services to be provided by others, which cannot
otherwise be provided by the Borough. [Amended 12-28-2011 by
Ord. No. 2180]
C. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to prohibit any person from
collecting or hauling municipal waste on an irregular and unscheduled
basis to any facility permitted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
§ 308-5 HANOVER CODE § 308-6
1:410
§ 308-7. Transportation of municipal waste.
§ 308-8. Open burning.
§ 308-9. Public litter baskets.
The Borough is hereby authorized to provide for collection of municipal
waste from Borough property, to provide public litter baskets on sidewalks
in the Borough and to collect and dispose of such waste in the manner set
forth herein.
§ 308-10. Separation of leaf waste.
Unless otherwise provided for composting, all persons shall keep leaf waste
separate from all other forms of municipal waste and separate from
recyclables. Such waste shall be set out for collection in a manner to
be designated by the Borough and shall be delivered by the Borough for
Department of Environmental Protection, provided that such hauling
shall be in addition to, and not in place of, the regular removal of
municipal waste as required by this section and provided that such is
not in violation of any county or other municipal law or regulation.
D. Nothing in this section shall modify the requirements in this chapter
pertaining to separation and preparation of recyclables or leaf waste.
Nothing in this section shall impair the ability of the Borough to provide
a system of placement for removal and public collection of leaf waste, or
Borough residents to utilize such system of public collection of leaf
waste, anything herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.
A. Any person transporting municipal waste within the Borough shall
prevent or remedy any spillage and leakage from vehicles or containers
used in the transport of such municipal waste.
B. Any waste transportation must be done in vehicles that are provided
with either closed, covered containers or which have measures taken to
prevent leakage and waste from being blown or falling from the vehicle.
A. No person shall ignite, cause, feed, permit or maintain any open fire for
the destruction of solid waste, leaf waste or recyclables designated in
this chapter on any property under his control, except as hereinafter
provided.
B. Exceptions to open burning prohibition.
(1) Open fires may be set in the performance of an official duty, as
allowed by the Fire Prevention Code, if the fire is deemed
necessary for the prevention of a fire hazard, which cannot be
abated otherwise; and for the protection of public health.
(2) No open burning shall occur during any fire ban emergency
declared.
§ 308-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 308-10
1:411
composting at a facility operating in accordance with Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection's Regulations and Guidelines for
Leaf Composting Facilities. Nothing herein shall require any person to
gather leaf waste or grass clippings or prevent any person from utilizing
leaf waste for compost, mulch or other agricultural purposes.
§ 308-10 HANOVER CODE § 308-10
1:412
ARTICLE II
Recycling
§ 308-11. Separation of designated recyclables. [Amended
11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 2113]
§ 308-12. Requirements for residential properties.
A. Designated recyclables shall be kept separate from municipal waste for
the purpose of mandatory curbside recycling, to the extent required by
the following provisions:
(1) Owners and occupants of all residential properties shall keep
separate the following designated recyclables: aluminum cans,
corrugated paper, and bimetal cans. Leaf waste shall be kept
separate unless they have otherwise provided for composting.
(2) Owners and occupants of all commercial, municipal and
institutional establishments and properties and sponsors or
organizers of community activities shall keep separate the
following designated recyclables: aluminum cans, corrugated
paper, and bimetal cans. Leaf waste shall also be kept separate
unless they have otherwise provided for composting.
(3) Additionally the Borough may by resolution enumerate additional
recyclables that will be required to be separated from municipal
waste and collected in accordance with this chapter.
B. The following are the placement procedures for the curbside collection
of designated recyclables. Aluminum and bimetal cans shall be emptied
and cleaned. Corrugated cardboard shall be tied together or placed in
closeable refuse bags so it cannot become airborne not to exceed 50
pounds. Recyclables shall be placed at the curb or alleyway where
refuse/garbage is collected. Recyclables shall not be placed in the same
garbage can or other containers or otherwise mixed with municipal
waste for collection, removal or disposal. Leaf waste shall be set out for
collection in a manner to be designated by the Borough. Stormdamaged
tree branches and shrubbery shall be collected by the
Borough when placed at the curb or alleyway for collection in a manner
prescribed by the Borough Manager.
A. For residential properties other than multifamily housing projects, all
recyclables and leaf waste that is required to be kept separate in
residential properties pursuant to § 308-11A above, shall be placed at
the appropriate location on the premises to be collected at times
designated by the Borough. The frequency of curbside collection shall
be a scheduled day at least once per month for designated recyclables.
Leaf waste shall be collected curbside seasonally. The Borough's
dropoff site will complement the leaf waste program by providing
receptacles for dropoff of branches, tree and shrub trimmings and
§ 308-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 308-12
1:413
§ 308-13. Requirements for multifamily housing properties.
[Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 2113]
§ 308-14. Requirements for commercial, municipal and
institutional establishments and community activities. [Amended
11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 2113]
All recyclables that are required to be kept separate in commercial,
municipal, and institutional establishments and properties and community
activities pursuant to § 308-11A above shall either be delivered directly
to the recycling center or shall be picked up by the Borough separately
from municipal waste on a scheduled day at least once per month. If any
recyclables are picked up, then all recyclables generated at the property
shall be made available to the Borough for collection. Commercial,
municipal, and institutional establishments and community activities shall
pulpy vines cut into three-foot lengths and bundled to a weight of less
than 50 pounds. [Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 2113]
B. No person other than the Borough shall collect or remove recyclables
from any other person's property.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to impair the ownership of
separated recyclable materials by the person who generated them
unless and until such materials are placed at curbside or similar
location for collection by the Borough.
A. For multifamily housing properties, all recyclables which are required
to be kept separate from municipal waste in residential properties
pursuant to § 308-12A above, shall either be delivered to a recycling
center, or shall be picked up by the Borough separately from municipal
waste, on a scheduled day at least once per month. Leaf waste shall be
collected as appropriate by the Act. This would include at a minimum
garden residues, shrubbery and tree trimmings and similar material be
collected curbside once in each the spring and fall. Additionally, leaves
will be collected curbside seasonally. The Borough's dropoff site will
complement the leaf program.
B. The landlord of every multifamily housing property shall require, by
clause in the lease or other enforceable rule or regulation, that the
tenants in such property comply with the requirements of this chapter
governing separation and placement for removal of recyclables in
multifamily housing properties. Every such landlord shall set up a
convenient and practical collection system on such properties for the
storage and placement for removal of recyclables and leaf waste
generated by the residents of such properties.
C. The collection system must include suitable containers for collecting
and sorting materials, easily accessible locations for the containers and
written instructions to the occupants concerning the use and
availability of the collection system.
§ 308-12 HANOVER CODE § 308-14
1:414
not place recyclables within the public right-of-way for curbside collection,
such curbside collection being intended solely for the placement of
recyclables generated in residential properties other than multifamily
housing properties. Leaf waste shall be collected as appropriate by the
Act. This would include, at a minimum, garden residues, shrubbery and
tree trimmings and similar material be collected curbside once in each the
spring and fall. Additionally, leaves will be collected curbside seasonally.
The Borough's dropoff site will complement the leaf waste program.
§ 308-15. Recycling reports.
§ 308-16. Collection by unauthorized person.
A. Every commercial, municipal and institutional establishment and
community activity sponsor shall complete a form to be designated
"recycling report," to be provided by the Borough, which shall indicate
where the property's recyclables were delivered. Such report shall
provide information on the type and amount of each material recycled,
along with such other information as may be required by resolution of
the Borough.
B. The recycling report and all weigh slips obtained from the facility or
facilities to which the recyclables were delivered shall be submitted
quarterly to the Borough. For purposes of submitting such weigh slips
and recycling reports quarterly to the Borough, the collector who
removed the recyclables from the property shall be the agent for any
person occupying a residential dwelling unit, any landlord and any
operator of a commercial, municipal and institutional establishment or
the sponsor of any community activity and shall be responsible for
completing and submitting such to the Borough. Each such quarterly
report shall be submitted on or before the last day of the first month of
each quarter, for the preceding quarter. Quarters shall run on a
calendar-year basis, thus: January through March; April through June;
July through September; and October through December.
A. From the time of placement for collection of residentially generated
recyclable items for collection in accordance with the terms of this
chapter, the items shall be and become the property of the Borough or
its authorized agent. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person
unauthorized by the Borough to collect or pick up or cause to be
collected or picked up any such items. Any and each such collection in
violation hereof from one or more locations shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
B. It shall be unlawful for a person to collect, remove or dispose of
municipal waste that contains recyclables required by that person to be
separated.
§ 308-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 308-16
1:415

ARTICLE III
Department of Public Works
§ 308-17. Authorization to collect.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than such persons as are duly
authorized by the Borough's Department of Public Works, to collect and
to transport municipal wastes of any nature or recyclables within or
from the Borough.
B. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit any person from donating or
selling any recyclables to individuals or organizations unless or until
such recyclables are placed at curbside or similar location for
collection.
§ 308-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 308-17
1:417

ARTICLE IV
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 308-18. Noninterference with existing contracts.
§ 308-19. Violations and penalties.
A. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere with or
in any way modify the provisions of any existing contracts which are in
force in the Borough of Hanover on the effective date of this chapter.
B. No renewal of any existing contract upon the expiration of the original
term thereof and no new contract for the collection, storage,
transportation, processing and disposal of recyclables shall be entered
into after the effective date of this chapter, unless such renewal or such
contract shall conform to the requirements of this chapter.
A. No person shall violate any portion of this chapter.
B. Prosecution under this chapter shall be instituted by any Borough
official and shall be filed in the name of the Borough of Hanover, York
County, Pennsylvania.
C. Enforcement shall be by an action brought before a Magisterial District
Judge in the same manner as provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, as
calculated under Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, as amended. The
Borough Solicitor may assume charge of the prosecution without the
consent of the District Attorney as required under Pa.R.Crim.P. No.
454(c) relating to trial in summary cases.
D. In addition to or in lieu of an enforcement action before a Magisterial
District Judge, the Borough may enforce this chapter in equity. In the
event an abatement notice has been issued, which is being violated, or
in any other appropriate circumstance, any Borough official is hereby
authorized on behalf of the Borough to institute an action in equity for
an injunction to enforce compliance herewith and/or to restrain
continuous violations of this chapter.
E. For purposes of this section, the doing of any act or thing prohibited by
any provision of this chapter, or the failure to do any act or thing as to
which any provision of this chapter created an affirmative duty, shall
constitute a violation of this chapter, punishable as herein stated.
F. In addition to all remedies at law or in equity provided by the
ordinances and Code of the Borough of Hanover and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Borough shall be authorized to
cease providing municipal waste and recyclables collection, removal
and disposal services to property owners who fail to pay for such
services at the rates and in the manner provided herein or by resolution
of the Borough Council or who are otherwise in violation of applicable
Borough ordinances, regulations, or resolutions. This subsection shall
§ 308-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 308-19
1:419
§ 308-20. Repealer.
This chapter repeals the previously enacted Ordinance No. 916 (Chapter
71) and any other ordinance or part thereof with which it may conflict.
§ 308-21. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective five days from the date of enactment.
§ 308-22. Amendments by resolution. [Added 12-28-2011 by Ord.
No. 2180]
not allow property owners to avoid participation in the Borough's
municipal waste collection program or avoid liability for the fees
established thereunder by ceasing to pay said fees or otherwise being
in violation of applicable Borough ordinances, regulations and/or
resolutions. [Added 12-28-2011 by Ord. No. 2180]
A. Beginning January 1, 2012, the fees imposed by the Borough of
Hanover for the collection, removal and disposal of municipal waste and
recyclables and the tipping fees imposed for the disposal of solid waste
at the Borough transfer station shall be in accordance with rates to be
established by resolution(s) adopted from time to time by the Council of
the Borough of Hanover. The fees imposed for special pickups at
individual properties shall be set and administered as set forth in
Subsections C through G below. [Amended 7-22-2015 by Ord. No.
2225]
B. The materials to be collected by the Borough under its recyclables
collection program shall be established by resolution(s) adopted from
time to time by the Council of the Borough of Hanover.
C. The Borough shall require payment in advance of cost recovery fees for
the cost of providing public works services for special pickups of
municipal waste at individual properties. The Borough's good faith
estimate of costs will be provided upon request of the property owner
or occupant of the property at which the special pickup is desired after
Borough staff consults with the Borough Department of Public Works. A
minimum disposal fee equal to the rate for one hour of special labor
shall be the minimum fee estimated/imposed. The Borough Council may
from time to time establish by resolution the appropriate minimum
disposal fee and the rate for special labor for a special pickup. Requests
for special pickups can be made at the Borough of Hanover Municipal
Building at 44 Frederick Street, Hanover, Pennsylvania, in person and
by phone at (717) 637-3877 or by calling the Borough Department of
Public Works at (717) 632-3939. [Added 7-22-2015 by Ord. No.
2225]
D. The Borough shall provide the good faith estimate of costs prior to the
property owner or occupant scheduling the special pickup of municipal
waste at an individual property. Upon scheduling a date and time for a
§ 308-19 HANOVER CODE § 308-22
1:420
special pickup of municipal waste, the property owner or occupant
shall be required to remit payment of the entire amount estimated and
requested by the Borough. No such special pickup of municipal waste
will be scheduled without remittance, in full, of the payment requested
by the Borough. [Added 7-22-2015 by Ord. No. 2225]
E. Within 15 days of the execution of the special pickup by Borough staff,
the Borough will provide a statement of the costs incurred by the
Borough as a direct result of the special pickup. The Borough's actual
costs shall be no less the minimum disposal fee set forth in Subsection
C hereof. [Added 7-22-2015 by Ord. No. 2225]
F. Should the actual costs of the special pickup exceed the costs estimated
by the Borough and payment remitted by the property owner or
occupant, the Borough shall issue an invoice to the property owner or
occupant for whom the special pickup was executed for the balance of
the costs, which invoice shall be paid within 30 days of the invoice date.
Failure of a property owner or occupant to pay said invoice within 30
days of the invoice date shall subject the property owner or occupant to
penalties as established in this chapter or as otherwise set forth in the
Code of the Borough of Hanover and/or the laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania. In addition, any invoice for a special pickup of
municipal waste which has not been paid within 30 days of the invoice
date shall accrue interest at the rate of 6% per annum. [Added
7-22-2015 by Ord. No. 2225]
G. Should the actual costs of the special pickup total an amount less than
that of the estimate provided by the Borough and payment remitted by
the property owner or occupant for whom the special pickup was
executed, the Borough shall issue a refund to the property owner or
occupant for the balance of the overpayment within 30 days of the date
of Borough statement of costs provided to the property owner or
occupant. [Added 7-22-2015 by Ord. No. 2225]
§ 308-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 308-22
1:421
Chapter 309
SPECIAL EVENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Commissioner; Fire Department — See
Ch. 43.
Police Department — See Ch. 75.
Noise — See Ch. 248.
Signs; street encroachments — See Ch. 298.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 316.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 346.
Zoning — See Ch. 370.
§ 309-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
APPLICANT — A person or group sponsoring or organizing an event who
has filed a written application for a permit and who assumes responsibility
for all duties and responsibilities under this chapter.
ASSEMBLAGE — A gathering of people, without vehicles, which interferes
with the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any street.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Hanover, York County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of Hanover,
York County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH ZONING OFFICER — The Zoning Officer of the Borough of
Hanover, York County, Pennsylvania.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Borough of Hanover, York
County, Pennsylvania.
COMMUNITY EVENT — A special event, as defined herein, that has longstanding
tradition in the Borough and attracts substantial participation/
attendance by Borough residents and/or is an event sponsored by the
Borough. Events under such definition shall include, at the time of this
chapter's enactment, the Memorial Day Parade to be held on Memorial
Day of each year, the Liberty Day Celebration to be held on the Fourth
of July of each year, Dutch Days held in July of each year, the Chili Cookoff
to be held during Labor Day weekend of each year, the YMCA Half
Marathon, the Halloween Parade to be held the Thursday prior to October
31 of each year, and the Christmas Parade and Tree Lighting to be held
the day following Thanksgiving of each year. These events will be afforded
priority in the issuance of special event permits should the applying entity
meet all of the necessary application requirements and follow all of the
regulations established in this chapter. The list of events classified under
this designation may be modified from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council.
§ 308-22 HANOVER CODE § 309-1
1:422
COST RECOVERY — Administrative and departmental costs charged by the
Borough to an applicant in conjunction with an event permitted under this
chapter.
EVENT — A special event, community event, parade, race (e.g., a 5K, 10K,
half marathon or other run), procession, assemblage, other similar event.
HALF MARATHON — An event that involves participants walking, running,
or athletically moving in some way for a distance similar to that of 22
kilometers or 13.1 miles.
PARADE — A march or procession of any kind, in or upon any street or
public park within the Borough.
PARTICIPANT — Those individuals, including but not limited to the
applicant/permittee, who take part in the activities of the event.
PERMIT — Written authorization from the Borough for a special event,
parade, procession, assemblage, race, etc., as required by this chapter.
PERMITTEE — A person/entity to which a permit required by this chapter
is issued.
PERSON — Any person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, society,
company, or organization of any kind.
PROCESSION — A group of individuals, vehicles, animals, and/or objects
moving along a street in a way that interferes with the normal movement of
traffic.
RACE/RUN — An event that involves participants walking, running, or
athletically moving in some way for a specific distance, no longer than 10
kilometers or 6.2 miles, for which time is usually kept.
SIGN — Posters, bills, banners, flyers, written advertisements or other
written messages of any kind.
SPECIAL EVENT —
A temporary event, gathering, or organized activity on a Borough
street, public property or private property, or in any Borough park,
building or other facility, when an organized activity is conducted
involving one or more of the following factors:
The closing of a public street, sidewalk, or alleyway or a portion
thereof.
(1)
(2) Blocking or restricting public property or a portion thereof.
(3) Blocking or restricting access to private property of others.
(4) Use of pyrotechnics or special effects.
Use of open flame, explosions, or other potentially dangerous
displays or actions.
(5)
A.
§ 309-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 309-1
1:423
SPECIAL EVENT VENUE — Area at which a special event will be conducted
and for which a permit has been issued.
STREET — The entire width between the boundary lines of every publicly
maintained right-of-way when any part thereof is open to use by the public
for the purpose of vehicular traffic.
VENDOR — A person or entity that promotes or exchanges goods or
services for money from a temporary stand, booth or location or from a
movable vehicle, cart or wagon while traveling on the public streets and
alleys of the Borough of Hanover.
§ 309-2. Permit required.
Use or display of animals, vehicles, aircraft, or watercraft only
when such use or display could create a disturbance or affect the
public safety of persons attending or in the immediate area of the
event.
(6)
Sale or service of merchandise, food, or nonalcoholic and/or
alcoholic beverages on public and private property where
otherwise prohibited by ordinances.
(7)
Installation of a stage, vehicle(s) of any kind, trailer, van, portable
building, booth, stand, grandstand, or bleachers on public property
or on private property where otherwise prohibited by ordinance.
(8)
Placement of portable toilets on public property or on private
property where otherwise prohibited by ordinance.
(9)
Placement of no-parking signs or barricades in a public right-ofway.
(10)
Amplification of music, voices, sounds, or activities in excess of that
permitted by ordinance.
(11)
The Borough determines that the event will result in substantial
impact on Borough resources, facilities, or public safety services in
response thereto.
(12)
Examples of special events include but are not limited to concerts;
dances; assemblages; processions; parades; circuses; amusement rides;
fairs; festivals; community events; half marathons, 10Ks, 5Ks and other
running events; bicycle races and tours; motorcycle rides; and other
organized activity conducted for the purpose of recreation, fund-raising
for profit, nonprofit fund-raising, community or organizational
promotion, or charity.
B.
A. Except as provided in this chapter, no person or entity shall conduct,
facilitate, promote, manage, aid, or solicit attendance at a parade,
assemblage, procession, community event, or special event, unless a
permit has been approved by Borough Council and issued by the
Borough Zoning Officer.
§ 309-1 HANOVER CODE § 309-2
1:424
§ 309-3. Permit application process.
B. No person or entity shall be required to obtain a special event permit
from the Borough to engage in the following:
(1) Funeral processions.
(2) Lawful exercise of First Amendment activity, such as free speech
and the right to assemble on sidewalks, streets, or other public
property, unless such activity will likely result in the obstruction of
Borough streets, sidewalks, or other public property or will likely
compromise the ability of the Borough to respond to a public safety
emergency or will block, obstruct or limit access to private
property.
(3) A governmental agency acting within the scope of its authority and
functions.
(4) House moving and construction activities.
(5) Students participating in school district-sanctioned educational
activities, provided that such conduct is under the immediate
direction and supervision of the proper school authorities and does
not obstruct, block or limit access to public or private property.
A. Application. A person seeking a special event permit as required by this
chapter shall obtain an application from the Borough Office or via the
Borough website and submit it to the Borough Zoning Officer.
B. Filing period. An application for a permit as required by this chapter
shall be submitted to the Borough at least 60 days and not more than
180 days prior to the date proposed for the event. In the event that the
permit involves the closing of a road under the jurisdiction of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the application must be submitted not
fewer than 75 days before the proposed date of occurrence of the event.
C. Late application. The Borough Zoning Officer, where good cause is
shown, may, but is not required to, consider an application filed less
than 60 days prior to the proposed event date, provided that all of the
requirements and review can be met.
D. Content. The application for a permit required under this chapter shall
be on a form provided by the Borough which shall include but not be
limited to:
(1) The name, address, telephone number, cell phone number, and email
address of the person or entity seeking to conduct such an
event.
(2) If the event is designed to be held by, on behalf of, or for any person
or entity who is not filing the application, the applicant for such
permit shall file with the Borough Zoning Officer a written
authorization from the person proposing to hold the event,
§ 309-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 309-3
1:425
authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his/her/its
behalf.
(3) The name, address, telephone number, cell phone number, and email
address of the person who will be responsible for conducting
the event.
(4) The date when the event is to be conducted.
(5) The route on public roads to be traveled by event participants, as
well as the starting and termination points or, if the event does not
involve moving participants, the location of the event.
(6) The approximate number of persons likely to attend or participate
in the event; the animals (if any) and vehicles (if any) which will be
involved in the event; and a specific description of the nature of the
event.
(7) The hours when the event will start and terminate.
(8) A statement as to whether the event will occupy all or only a
portion of the width of the streets, sidewalks, or other public rightsof-
way proposed to be traversed by pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
(9) The location by streets of any assembly areas for such event.
(10) The time at which units of the event will begin to assemble at any
such assembly area or areas.
(11) The setup, teardown, and cleanup dates and times.
(12) The purpose of the event.
(13) Maps detailing the proposed site locations and/or routes, along
with written descriptions of the following: amplification devices,
street closures and detours, electrical requirements, emergency
medical stations, equipment, fire lanes, fireworks or pyrotechnics,
litter control, portable toilets, signage, structures, and vendors.
(14) The cost of admission, if any, and whether the event is public or
private.
(15) A plan for disposal of wastewater, including capture and
containment, to be approved by the Borough.
(16) A plan for disposal of garbage and municipal waste to be approved
by the Borough.
(17) Proof of comprehensive general liability insurance in the amount of
$1,000,000, naming the Borough of Hanover as an additional
insured. In the event that the permit requires the closing of a road
under the jurisdiction of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the
applicant must also name the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation as an additional insured.
§ 309-3 HANOVER CODE § 309-3
1:426
(18) Any enticements, such as candy, balloons, toys, silly string,
fireworks, plastic horns and poppers, to be thrown or given away to
onlookers.
(19) The following statements:
(a) A statement indemnifying and holding the Borough harmless
executed by the applicant and the individuals or organization
conducting the event.
(b) A statement that information set forth in application is true and
correct to the best of the applicant's knowledge under penalty
of law.
(c) An agreement to comply with this chapter and any other
applicable ordinances, rules, regulations, or requirements for
event.
(20) Such additional information as the Borough Zoning Officer shall
find reasonably necessary to arrive at a fair determination as to
whether a permit should be issued.
E. Cost recovery. The Borough shall require payment of cost recovery fees
for the cost of providing the services of public safety and public works
for special events as set forth in written regulations enacted pursuant
hereto, but only if such costs reflect a good faith estimate of actual
expenses to be incurred and do not include costs associated with
protecting First Amendment activity from actual or threatened harm.
All sponsors of special events shall work in good faith with the Borough
to achieve the least expensive alternatives available consistent with the
purpose of the proposed special event. The Borough Zoning Officer
shall, upon receipt of the special event permit application, contact the
Police Chief,82 Fire Commissioner,83 Director of Public Works, and any
other relevant Borough department officials in order to establish an
accurate, good faith estimate of the event's cost of Borough resources.
(1) Pursuant to Borough Resolution No. 1051, enacted the 24th of July
2013, the minimum rate for rental of Borough equipment is set at a
rate of a minimum of four hours according to the rate established
from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.
(2) The hourly rate for special labor, special policeman, and other such
officials as may be necessary for the conduct of a special event is
set by resolution from time to time by the Borough Council.
(3) The Borough's good faith estimate of costs will be provided to the
applicant within 15 days following the first meeting of the Borough
82.Editor's Note: See Ch. 75, Police Department.
83.Editor's Note: Section 1 of Ord. No. 2216, adopted 4-22-2015, states that all references to
the title "Fire Commissioner" in Ch. 43 and other chapters and sections of the Code shall
include the title of "Fire Chief" or other position designated by the Borough Council as
the senior executive officer of the Borough Fire Department.
§ 309-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 309-3
1:427
§ 309-4. Standards for issuance.
The Borough Zoning Officer, with the approval of Borough Council, shall
issue a permit as provided for hereunder when, from a consideration of the
application and from such other information as may be otherwise obtained,
it is found that:
Council to occur after the applicant's submission of an application
for a special event permit.
(4) Upon issuance of a special event permit, the applicant/permittee
shall be required to remit payment, in the amount estimated and
requested by the Borough for the purposes of cost recovery, to the
Borough Office no less than 10 days prior to the date on which the
event is to occur. Failure to remit the necessary payment by this
deadline will result in a denial of the permit request or revocation
of an awarded permit.
(5) Within 30 days after the conclusion of the event, the Borough will
provide an accurate account of the costs incurred upon its
resources as a direct result of the event.
(a) Should the event's actual costs exceed the costs estimated by
the Borough and payment remitted by the applicant, the
Borough shall issue an invoice to the permittee for the balance
of the costs, to be paid within 30 days of the invoice date, or
face penalty herein established.
(b) Should the event's actual costs be less than that estimated by
the Borough and payment remitted by the applicant, the
Borough shall issue a refund to the permittee for the amount of
the overpayment within 30 days of the calculation of the actual
costs.
A. The conduct of the event will not unduly interfere with the safe and
orderly movement of traffic traveling on roads in the vicinity of the
event, nor shall the event have any adverse impact upon the access to
or use of public or private properties and/or traffic circulation in the
vicinity of the event.
B. The conduct of the event will not require the diversion of so great a
number of police officers of the Borough to properly police the event
and/or the movement of participant and spectators at the event and/or
in the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection
to the Borough.
C. The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at assembly points
of the event will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police
protection or ambulance service to areas contiguous to such assembly
areas.
§ 309-3 HANOVER CODE § 309-4
1:428
§ 309-5. Notice of decision.
The Borough Zoning Officer shall notify the applicant for a permit as to
whether the application has been approved or rejected and, if approved, a
good faith cost recovery fee, within 15 days following action by the Borough
Council. If the application is rejected, the notice shall be in writing and
communicate the basis therefor. Should the application be approved, a
permit shall be issued as set forth herein upon payment of the cost recovery
fee to be paid by the applicant and execution of an indemnification and hold
harmless agreement by the applicant.
D. The conduct of such event will not interfere with the movement of
firefighting equipment en route to a fire and/or emergency medical
vehicles.
E. The event is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of
termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delay.
F. The event is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any
products, goods, or event, and is not designed to be held purely for
private profit.
G. All sponsor(s), participants, and attendees at events are subject to
applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances, and regulations not
otherwise waived by the permit, including but not limited to laws,
ordinances and regulations regulating noise volume, disorderly
conduct, traffic and public intoxication. Police officers may order the
shutdown of an event that becomes disorderly and/or hazardous to
participants and/or the public.
H. The Borough shall abide by the following additional regulations when
issuing special event permits:
(1) Those events classified herein or subsequently by the Borough as
community events shall be afforded priority in the issuance of a
special event permit, provided that the applicant meet all of the
necessary application requirements and follow all of the
regulations established herein.
(2) In the issuance of special event permits, the Borough:
(a) Shall not permit more than two special events to occur within
one calendar month.
(b) Shall permit only one run to occur within one calendar month.
(c) Shall permit only one half marathon to occur within one
calendar year.
(d) Shall not permit two special events to occur within two weeks
or 14 days of one another.
§ 309-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 309-6
1:429
§ 309-6. Denial of application for permit.
An application for an event permit may be denied if the applicant fails to
satisfy or violates any of the requirements set forth in this chapter or:
§ 309-7. Appeal procedure.
Any person or entity aggrieved by the action of Borough Council shall have
the right to request Borough Council to reconsider its action at its next
regularly scheduled meeting by submitting a written request to Council
by registered or certified mail at the Borough Office. Borough Council
shall consider the request to reconsider its action at its next regularly
scheduled meeting after receipt of such request and shall render a decision
within 15 days following its meeting. Borough Council shall consider all
relevant information submitted by the applicant, Borough and other public
officials, neighbors of the property where the event is to be held and other
Borough residents and businesses and shall review all relevant documents
submitted. Borough Council shall mail its decision with regards to the
appeal to the address provided to Council by the applicant/appellee.
§ 309-8. Notice to Borough and other officials.
Immediately upon the issuance of an event permit, the Borough Zoning
Officer shall send a copy thereof to the following:
A. The applicant has made or permitted the making of a false or
misleading statement or omitted a material fact on the permit
application; or
B. The applicant has violated this chapter or has had an event permit
revoked within the preceding 12 months; or
C. The Borough believes that persons or property are at risk as a result of
the activities or conduct of persons at the event; or
D. The issuance of a special event permit would violate any of the
regulations included in § 309-4, Standards for issuance, Subsection H,
such as the priority afforded to community events or any of the calendar
restrictions.
E. The applicant does not remit the required payment as determined by
the Borough's cost recovery estimate process described in § 309-3E or
does not execute an indemnification and hold harmless agreement or
otherwise comply with the terms hereof.
A. The Borough Manager.
B. The Chief of Police.
C. The Fire Commissioner.
D. The Public Works Director.
§ 309-6 HANOVER CODE § 309-9
1:430
§ 309-9. Contents of permit.
Each event permit shall state the following information:
§ 309-10. Duties of permittee; possession of permit.
§ 309-11. Public conduct during event.
§ 309-12. Direct payments prohibited.
Special event organizers are prohibited from making direct payments to
Borough employees for public safety, public works, or other Borough
services. All Borough employees shall instead receive compensation
through the Borough payroll for any paid assistance with special events.
A. Date of the event.
B. Starting and termination times of the event.
C. The portions of the streets to be traversed or blocked that may be
occupied by the event.
D. The approximate number of persons, animals, and motor vehicles that
will be in the event.
E. A brief description of the event.
F. The statement of the applicant agreeing to indemnify and hold the
Borough harmless.
G. The signature of the event organizer and applicant.
A. Duties of permittee. A permittee shall comply with all permit directions
and conditions and with applicable federal, state and municipal laws,
ordinances and regulations.
B. Possession of permit. The event chairman or other person heading or
leading such activity shall carry the event permit upon his person
during the conduct of the event.
A. Interference. No person shall hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere
with any event or event assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal
participating or used in an event.
B. Driving through event. No driver of any vehicle shall drive between the
vehicles, person, or animals involved or participating in an event when
such vehicles, person, or animals are in motion.
C. Parking on event route. The Chief of Police shall have the authority,
when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of
vehicles along a street or highway or part thereof or in public parking
lots constituting a part of the route or in the vicinity of the site of an
event.
§ 309-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 309-13
1:431
§ 309-13. Revocation of permit.
The Borough Zoning Officer shall have the authority to revoke an event
permit issued hereunder upon violation of the standards for issuance of
a permit as herein set forth, upon learning that the applicant made or
permitted the making of a false or misleading statement or the omission of
a material fact on the event application or violated other applicable laws,
statutes, ordinances, rules, regulations, or policies.
§ 309-14. Temporary signs for events.
Pursuant to Ordinance No. 1639 (as amended by Ordinance Nos. 2050 and
2176), it is unlawful for any person to place, post, paint, erect, display,
secure or maintain any sign, banner, lighting or advertisement without the
prior written consent in the form of a sign permit issued by the Borough of
Hanover. All event signs, banners, flyers, or advertisements of any kind shall
be located within the boundaries of the event location and shall be removed
within three days of the completion of the event. An event sign not removed
in compliance with this section may be removed by the Borough at a fee of
$25 per sign. Said fee per sign shall be subject to modification from time to
time by resolution of the Borough Council. After removal by the Borough,
the Borough may store, dispose, destroy or otherwise handle the sign as it
deems appropriate and shall have no liability to the applicant/permittee or
the sign owner.
§ 309-15. Solicitation.
Pursuant to Chapter 240 entitled "Licensing for Public Entertainment,
Peddling and Soliciting" of the Code of the Borough of Hanover, it is
unlawful for any person, firm, entity, or corporation desiring to sell or
offer for sale to the consuming public, on any public highway or from
house to house within the Borough of Hanover, as a huckster, peddler,
hawker, street vendor, traveling merchant or agent, any goods or wares or
merchandise without having first procured from the proper officer of the
Borough a license to do so. Any such person desiring to engage in any of
the aforementioned activities in conjunction with, at, or around a special
event shall be required to procure the proper license as stated in Chapter
240 of the Code of the Borough of Hanover. Such regulations regarding
such permit and its associated fees, conditions, and regulations shall be
pursuant to those established in the Code and amendments, resolutions
and ordinances hereafter enacted by the Borough Council. A special event
permit as established herein in no way or manner exempts any person, firm,
entity, etc., from the rules and regulations of Chapter 240 of the Code of the
Borough of Hanover.
§ 309-16. Insurance required to conduct event.
An applicant for an event must provide proof of comprehensive general
liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000 to protect the Borough
against loss from liability imposed by law for damages on account of bodily
§ 309-13 HANOVER CODE § 309-16
1:432
injury and/or property damage arising from any aspect of the event. Such
insurance shall name the Borough of Hanover, its officers, employees,
agents and, if required, any other public entity involved in the event,
as an additional insured on a separate endorsement maintained for the
duration of the event. In the event that the permit requires the closing of
a road under the jurisdiction of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the
applicant must also name the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
as an additional insured. Notice of limitation, reduction, or cancellation of
insurance coverage shall be provided immediately to the Borough by the
carrier and the applicant.
§ 309-17. Indemnification.
The applicant for an event shall indemnify and hold harmless the Borough,
its officers, employees, agents and representatives against all claims of
liability and causes of action resulting from injury or damage to persons or
property arising out of the event.
§ 309-18. Condition of premises after event.
The applicant is required to return any public property upon which the
event is held to its condition prior to the conduct of the event. Failure
to do so may result in the applicant and sponsoring organization being
prohibited from being issued a special event permit for a future event or
being required to post a bond to insure compliance with the requirement to
clean up after the event. In addition, the applicant will be responsible for
any costs or expenses incurred by the Borough in restoring the premises to
their condition prior to the conduct of the event.
§ 309-19. Unlawful conduct.
It shall be unlawful for any person to organize, present or conduct, or
attempt to organize, present or conduct an event without first having
obtained a permit therefor as herein provided or to otherwise violate any of
the provisions of this chapter. It shall also be unlawful for any person to fail
to comply with all directions and conditions of an event permit.
§ 309-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof before a District Justice or other court of competent
jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a civil penalty not to exceed $600 for each
and every offense, plus the costs of prosecution and reasonable attorney
fees incurred by the Borough of Hanover in enforcement proceedings. Each
day in which a person is in violation of this chapter and each section of
this chapter violated by a person shall be considered a separate violation
hereunder.
§ 309-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 309-21
1:433
§ 309-21. Amendments to permit application and community
events.
The Borough of Hanover reserves the right, from time to time, to adopt
by resolution of the Borough Council modifications of, supplements to, or
amendments to the special event permit application and the list of those
events classified as community events.
§ 309-22. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting or inconsistent herewith
are hereby repealed. The enactment of this chapter specifically repeals
Subsections A and B of Chapter 240, entitled "Licensing for Public
Entertainment, Peddling and Soliciting," § 240-1, of the Code of the Borough
of Hanover.
§ 309-23. When effective; applicability.
This chapter and its provisions shall take effect immediately upon
enactment and approval. Special events approved prior to the enactment
of this chapter shall be exempt herefrom and shall not be subject the
provisions and regulations established herein. Any person, corporation,
entity, or organization seeking to hold a special event that has not gained
prior approval by the Borough Council at the time of this chapter's
enactment shall be subject to all of the rules, regulations, and provisions
hereby established.
Chapter 310
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain management — See Ch. 215.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 286.
Sewer use regulations — See Ch. 290.
Water — See Ch. 355.
Sewer agreements — See Ch. A404.
§ 309-21 HANOVER CODE § 309-23
1:434
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 310-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Hanover Borough
Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 310-2. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the Borough of Hanover, York County, Pennsylvania
(hereinafter referred to as "Borough"), finds that:
§ 310-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare within
the Borough and its watersheds by minimizing the harm and maximizing the
benefits described in § 310-2 of this chapter, through provisions designed
to:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the
carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the
cost of public facilities to carry and control stormwater, undermines
floodplain management and flood-control efforts in downstream
communities, reduces groundwater recharge, threatens public health
and safety, and increases non-point source pollution of water resources.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated runoff, is fundamental to the public health, safety, and
welfare and the protection of people of the commonwealth, their
resources, and the environment.
C. Stormwater is an important water resource, which provides
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
D. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES).
A. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore
the existing and designated uses of the waters of this commonwealth.
B. Preserve the natural drainage systems as much as possible.
C. Manage stormwater runoff close to the source.
§ 310-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-3
1:435
§ 310-4. Statutory authority.
§ 310-5. Applicability.
All regulated activities and all activities that may affect stormwater runoff,
including land development and earth disturbance activity, are subject to
regulation by this chapter.
§ 310-6. Repealer.
This chapter shall specifically repeal and replace in its entirety Ordinance
No. 2212, known as the Hanover Borough Stormwater Management
Ordinance, of December 23, 2014. Furthermore, any other ordinance
provision or regulation of the Borough inconsistent with any of the
provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed to give this chapter full force
and effect to the extent of the inconsistency only.
§ 310-7. Severability.
In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares any section,
clause or provision of this chapter invalid, such decision shall not affect
the validity of any of the remaining sections, clauses or provisions of this
chapter.
D. Provide procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
E. Maintain groundwater recharge to prevent degradation of surface
water and groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water
resources.
F. Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
G. Provide proper operation and maintenance of all SWM BMPs that are
implemented within the Borough.
H. Provide standards to meet NPDES permit requirements.
A. Primary authority. The Borough is empowered to regulate land use
activities that affect stormwater impacts by the authority of the
Borough Code Act of February 1, (1966) 1965, P.L. 1656, No. 581 Cl. 08
(Art. hdg. Reenacted May 17, 2012, P.L. 262, No. 43),84 and the Act of
October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as amended,
the Storm Water Management Act.
B. Secondary authority. The Borough is also empowered to regulate land
use activities that affect runoff by the authority of the Act of July 31,
1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
as amended.85
84.Editor's Note: For the Borough Code, see 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
85.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 310-3 HANOVER CODE § 310-8
1:436
§ 310-8. Compatibility with other requirements.
Approvals issued and actions taken under this chapter do not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for
activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation, or ordinance.
§ 310-9. Duty of persons engaged in development of land.
Notwithstanding any provision(s) of this chapter, including exemptions, any
landowner or any person engaged in the alteration or development of land
which may affect stormwater runoff characteristics shall implement such
measures as are reasonably necessary to prevent injury to health, safety, or
other property. Such measures include actions as are required to manage
the rate, volume, direction, and quality of resulting stormwater runoff in
a manner which otherwise adequately protects health, property, and water
quality.
§ 310-10. Interpretation.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the succeeding shall, for the purposes of
this chapter, be interpreted in the following manner:
§ 310-11. Erroneous permit.
Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading
or erroneous information provided by an applicant is void without the
necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use
established pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful.
No action may be taken by a board, agency or employee of the Borough
purporting to validate such a violation.
A. Words used in the present tense also imply the future tense.
B. Words used in the singular imply the plural, and vice versa.
C. Words of masculine gender include feminine gender, and vice versa.
D. The words and abbreviation "includes," "including," "shall include,"
"such as," and "e.g." are not limited to the specific example(s) given but
are intended to extend the word's or words' meaning(s) to all other
instances of like kind and character.
E. The words "person," "applicant," or "developer" include a partnership,
corporation, or other legal entity, as well as an individual.
F. The words "shall," "required," or "must" are mandatory; the words
"may" and "should" are permissive.
G. "Borough Engineer" shall be the Borough Engineer employed or
appointed by the Borough Council and any person designated by the
Borough Engineer or the Borough Council to act on behalf of the
Borough Engineer.
§ 310-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-11
1:437

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 310-12. Terms defined.
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of land through the
combined action of man's activities and natural processes at a rate greater
than would occur because of the natural process alone.
ACT 167 — Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), as amended, and
known as the "Storm Water Management Act."86
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities associated with agriculture, such
as, but not limited to, agricultural cultivation, agricultural operations, and
animal heavy-use areas. This includes the work of producing crops,
including tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting,
harvesting crops, or the pasturing and raising of livestock and installation
of conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious area
is not considered an agricultural activity.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer, or other person who has filed an
application to the Borough for approval to engage in any regulated activity
at a project site in the Borough.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Activities, facilities, designs,
measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from
regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote
groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes of this chapter.
Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one of two broad categories
or measures: "structural" or "nonstructural." In this chapter, nonstructural
BMPs or measures refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices
that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff,
whereas structural BMPs or measures are those that consist of a physical
device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff.
Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices
and devices, from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands,
to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter
strips, low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving,
grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins,
and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
BMP MANUAL — Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual, as amended and updated.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The York County Conservation District,
which district is as defined in Section 3(c) of the Conservation District
Law [3 P.S. § 851(c)], that has the authority under a delegation agreement
executed with DEP to administer and enforce all or a portion of the
regulations promulgated under 25 Pa. Code 102.
86.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 310-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-12
1:439
COUNTY — York County, Pennsylvania.
CULVERT — A structure which carries surface water through an
obstruction.
DAM — An impoundment structure regulated by the Pennsylvania DEP
Chapter 105 regulations.87
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence,
e.g., a five-year storm, and duration, e.g., 24 hours, used in the design and
evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see "return period."
DETENTION BASIN — A structure designed to retard stormwater runoff by
temporarily storing and releasing the runoff at a predetermined rate.
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
released into the waters of this commonwealth at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, corporation or other
entity, or any responsible person therein or agent thereof, that undertakes
any regulated activity.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) — See "project site."
DISCONNECTED IMPERVIOUS AREA (DIA) — An impervious or
impermeable surface that is disconnected from any stormwater drainage
or conveyance system and is redirected or directed to a pervious area,
which allows for infiltration, filtration, and increased time of concentration
as specified in Appendix B. Disconnected Impervious Area, of this chapter.88
DISTURBED AREA — An unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance
activity is occurring or has occurred.
E&S MANUAL — Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Manual, as
amended and updated.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human activity
which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to, clearing
and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road maintenance;
building construction; and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of
soil, rock, or earth materials.
EROSION — The natural process by which the surface of the land is worn
away by water, wind, or chemical action.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A site-specific plan
consisting of both drawings and a narrative that identifies BMPs to minimize
accelerated erosion and sedimentation before, during and after earth
disturbance activity.
87.Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105, Dam Safety and Waterway Management.
88.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 310-12 HANOVER CODE § 310-12
1:440
EXISTING CONDITION — The dominant land cover during the five-year
period immediately preceding a proposed regulated activity.
FEMA — The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any
natural source as delineated by applicable FEMA maps and studies as being
a special flood hazard area.
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and discharge
the one-hundred-year flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary of
the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies provided
by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the
boundary of the one-hundred-year floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence
to the contrary, that the floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet from
the top of the bank of the stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and activities
necessary for the management of forestland. These include conducting
a timber inventory, preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural
treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and construction, timber
harvesting, site preparation, and reforestation.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Infiltration rates of soils vary widely
and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface intake rates.
Soils are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C, and D) according to their
minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare soil after prolonged
wetting. The NRCS defines the four groups and provides a list of most of
the soils in the United States and their group classification. The soils in the
area of the development site may be identified from a soil survey report
that can be obtained from local NRCS offices or conservation district offices.
Soils become less pervious as the HSG varies from A to D (NOTE: NRCS,
§ 310-39C and D).
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — A surface that prevents
the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces and areas
shall include, but not be limited to, roofs, additional indoor living spaces,
patios, garages, storage sheds and similar structures, and any new streets
and sidewalks. However, any surface or area designed, constructed and
maintained to permit infiltration as specified herein shall be considered
pervious, not impervious. For the purposes of this chapter, a surface or area
shall not be considered impervious if such surface or area does not diminish
the capacity for infiltration of stormwater for storms up to, and including, a
two-year twenty-four-hour storm event.
INFILTRATION — The entrance of surface water into the soil, usually at the
soil-air interface.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURE — A structure designed to direct runoff into
the ground (e.g., french drains, seepage pits, seepage trench).
IWRP — The York County Integrated Water Resources Plan, which Plan
includes Act 167 Plan elements and requirements.
§ 310-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-12
1:441
KARST — A type of topography or landscape characterized by surface
depressions, sinkholes, rock pinnacles/uneven bedrock surface,
underground drainage, and caves. Karst landscapes are formed on
carbonate rocks, such as limestone or dolomite.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Includes any of the following activities:
MUNICIPALITY — Hanover Borough, York County, Pennsylvania.
NPDES — National Pollution Discharge Elimination System.
NRCS — USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously SCS).
O&M — Operation and maintenance.
O&M PLAN — Operation and maintenance plan.
PCSWMP — Post-construction stormwater management plan.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PERCOLATION — The downward movement, under the influence of gravity,
of water under hydrostatic pressure through interstices of the soil or rock.
PERVIOUS AREA — Any area not defined as impervious or semipervious.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated activities in
the Borough are planned, conducted, or maintained.
QUALIFIED PERSON — Any person licensed by the State of Pennsylvania
or otherwise qualified by law to perform the work required by this chapter.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner that
may affect stormwater runoff.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space between or among
two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of or for
the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups, or other features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.89
C.
89.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 310-12 HANOVER CODE § 310-12
1:442
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving earth
disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92,90 25 Pa.
Code Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.
RETENTION BASIN — An impoundment in which stormwater is stored and
not released during a storm event. Stored water may be released from the
basin at some time after the end of a storm.
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff that
is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of this
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a storm
event of a given magnitude can be expected to occur one time. For example,
the twenty-five-year-return-period rainfall would be expected to occur on
average once every 25 years, or stated in another way, the probability of
a twenty-five-year storm occurring in any one year is 0.04, that is, a fourpercent
chance.
RIPARIAN BUFFER — A best management practice that is an area of
permanent vegetation along surface waters. (Such areas serve as natural
vegetative filters between upland landscapes and waterways.)
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by surface water as a
product of erosion.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled with
loose stone or similar materials and into which surface water is directed for
infiltration into the ground.
SEMIPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface such as stone, rock concrete or
other materials which permits some vertical transmission of water.
SHEET FLOW — Water flow with a relatively thin and uniform depth.
SOIL GROUP, HYDROLOGIC — A classification of soils by the Natural
Resources Conservation Service, formerly the Soil Conservation Service,
into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from A soils, which are
very permeable and produce little runoff, to D soils, which are not very
permeable and produce much more runoff.
SPILLWAY — A depression in the embankment of a pond or basin which
is used to pass peak discharge greater than the maximum design storm
controlled by the pond or basin.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory requirements
to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Title 25 of the
Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.
STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm event
occurs on average in a stated period of years.
90.Editor's Note: Former 25 Pa. Code Ch. 92 was repealed effective 10-9-2010. See now 25 Pa.
Code Ch. 92a.
§ 310-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-12
1:443
STORM SEWER — A pipe or conduit, or a system of pipes or conduits, which
intercepts and carries surface stormwater runoff, but excludes sewage,
industrial wastes and similar discharges.
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting
from precipitation or snow- or icemelt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES —
Abbreviated as BMPs or SWM BMPs throughout this chapter.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or manmade,
that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores,
or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater management
facilities include, but are not limited to, detention and retention basins,
open channels, storm sewers, pipes, and infiltration facilities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — Parts and/or elements of the York
County Integrated Water Resources Plan which incorporate the
requirements of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), as amended,
and known as the "Storm Water Management Act."91
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by the
developer or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff will be
managed at the development site in accordance with this chapter.
Stormwater management site plan will be designated as SWM site plan
throughout this chapter. For all NPDES permitted sites, the stormwater
management site plan shall include and be consistent with the erosion and
sediment control plan as submitted to the York County Conservation District
(YCCD) and/or DEP.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts or parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SWM — Stormwater management.
TIME OF CONCENTRATION (TC) — The time for surface runoff to travel
from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a point of
interest within the watershed.
USDA — The United States Department of Agriculture.
WATERSHED — A region or area drained by a river, watercourse, or other
surface water of this commonwealth.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams,
creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels
91.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 310-12 HANOVER CODE § 310-12
1:444
of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether
natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
WETLAND — Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
YCCD — The York County Conservation District.
§ 310-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-12
1:445

ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management Standards
§ 310-13. General requirements.
A. For all regulated activities, unless preparation of a SWM site plan is
specifically exempted in § 310-14:
(1) Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required.
(2) No regulated activities shall commence until the Borough issues
written approval of a SWM site plan which demonstrates
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
B. SWM site plans approved by the Borough, in accordance with § 310-24,
shall be on site throughout the duration of the regulated activity.
C. The Borough may, after consultation with DEP, approve measures for
meeting the state water quality requirements other than those in this
chapter, provided that they meet the minimum requirements of, and do
not conflict with, state law, including, but not limited to, the Clean
Streams Law. The Borough shall maintain a record of consultations with
DEP pursuant to this subsection.
D. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities, that is,
during construction, to meet the purposes and requirements of this
chapter and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania
Code and the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and their design
standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual (E&S Manual) 2, No. 363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000),
as amended and updated.
E. For all regulated activities, implementation of the volume controls in
§ 310-15 is required, unless specifically exempted under § 310-13C or
§ 310-14 or exempted by an approved modification request as specified
in § 310-21B of this chapter.
F. Impervious areas: [Amended 8-22-2018 by Ord. No. 2273]
(1) For the purposes of this chapter, the term "new impervious area"
shall refer to any amount of impervious area that is in excess of the
pre-development impervious coverage.
(2) The term "altered impervious area" shall refer to any predevelopment
impervious areas that are demolished or significantly
altered through the course of development and are replaced or
rebuilt and remain impervious areas post-development.
§ 310-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-13
1:447
(3) The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development even if
development is to take place in phases.
(4) For development taking place in phases, the entire development
plan must be used in determining conformance with this chapter.
(5) For projects that add impervious area to a parcel or alter any
existing impervious area, the total impervious area on the parcel is
subject to the requirements of this chapter; except that the volume
controls in § 310-15 and the peak rate controls of § 310-16 do not
need to be retrofitted to impervious areas existing before
December 23, 2014 that are not being altered by the proposed
regulated activity.
G. Stormwater flows onto adjacent property shall not be created,
increased, decreased, relocated, or otherwise altered without written
notification of the adjacent property owner(s). Such stormwater flows
shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter.
H. All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:
(1) Protect health, safety, and property.
(2) Meet the water quality goals of this chapter, as stated in § 310-3,
Purpose, by implementing measures to:
(a) Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, wooded areas,
and existing vegetation.
(b) Maintain or extend riparian buffers.
(c) Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
(d) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of this commonwealth.
(e) Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious
areas, wherever possible.
(f) Minimize soil disturbance and compaction. Topsoil, if removed,
shall be replaced to a minimum depth equal to its depth prior
to removal or four inches, whichever is greater. (Additional
topsoil may be needed for vegetation other than sod.)
(3) To the maximum extent practicable, incorporate the techniques for
low-impact development practices described in the Pennsylvania
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual (BMP Manual).
I. The design of all facilities in areas of carbonate geology or karst
topography shall include an evaluation of measures to minimize
adverse effects, including hydrogeologic studies if required by the
Borough.
§ 310-13 HANOVER CODE § 310-13
1:448
J. Infiltration BMPs shall be spread out, made as shallow as practicable,
and located to maximize use of natural on-site infiltration features while
still meeting the other requirements of this chapter. In addition,
infiltration BMPs shall include pretreatment BMPs where appropriate.
The BMPs intended to receive runoff shall provide field test to
determine appropriate percolation rate and/or hydraulic conductivity
along with a probe hole excavation to provide a minimum depth of 12
inches between the bottom of the facility and the seasonal high water
table or bedrock limiting zone.
K. All natural streams, channels, swales, drainage systems, and/or areas of
surface water concentration shall be maintained in their existing
condition unless the Borough approves alteration. All encroachment
activities shall comply with the requirements of the PADEP 25 Code
Chapter 105 (Water Obstructions and Encroachments), Rules and
Regulations of PADEP.92 Any approvals or permits issued do not relieve
compliance as referenced in § 310-8, Compatibility with other
requirements.
L. Normally dry, open-top storage facilities, designed as such, shall
completely drain both the volume control and rate control capacities
over a period of time not less than 24 hours and not more than 96 hours
from the end of the design storm unless approved by the Borough
Engineer. However, any designed infiltration at such facilities is exempt
from the minimum twenty-four-hour standard, that is, may infiltrate in a
shorter period of time, so long as none of the stormwater flowing into
the infiltration facility is discharged directly into the surface waters of
the commonwealth. (Inordinately rapid infiltration rates may indicate
the presence of large fractures or other conditions for which an
additional soil buffer may be required.)
M. The design storm volumes and precipitation intensities to be used in the
analysis of discharge or runoff shall be obtained from the Precipitation-
Frequency Atlas of the United States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0,
U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA), National Weather Service,
Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland,
NOAA's Atlas 14 can be accessed at http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/
pfds/.
N. For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be designed,
implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes and
requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under Title
25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law, and the Storm
Water Management Act.
O. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the BMP Manual.
92.Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105, Dam Safety and Waterway Management.
§ 310-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-13
1:449
§ 310-14. Exemptions.
Any regulated activity that meets the following exemption criteria is exempt
from the part(s) of this chapter as specified herein. However, the
requirements of the Ordinance shall otherwise remain in effect. The criteria
for exemption in this section apply to the total development proposed,
including instances in which the development is proposed to take place in
phases. The date of enactment of this chapter shall be the starting point
from which future development and the respective proposed impervious
surface computations shall be cumulatively considered and regulated.
Exemption shall not relieve an applicant from implementing such measures
as necessary to meet the intent of this chapter or compliance with any
NPDES permit requirements.
P. All work shall be in accordance with the Borough's Standard
Construction Details and PennDOT Publications 408 and 72M.
A. Regulated activities that create equal to or less than 500 square feet of
new or altered impervious area are exempt from the volume and peak
rate controls and the SWM site plan preparation requirements of this
chapter. The developer/owner will still be required to provide a basic
property sketch and complete a stormwater management permit
application. [Amended 8-22-2018 by Ord. No. 2273]
B. Regulated activities that create DIAs greater than 500 square feet and
equal to or less than 5,000 square feet are exempt only from the peak
rate control requirement of this chapter. [Amended 8-22-2018 by
Ord. No. 2273]
C. Regulated activities that create DIAs greater than 1,000 square feet
and equal to or less than 5,000 square feet are exempt only from the
peak rate control requirement of this chapter.
D. Agricultural activity is exempt from the rate control and SWM site plan
preparation requirements of this chapter, provided that the activities
are performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter
102.
E. Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the rate
control and SWM site plan preparation requirements of this chapter,
provided that the activities are performed according to the
requirements of 25 Pa. Code 102.
F. Domestic gardening and landscaping with trees, shrubs, and flowers
are exempt from specific approval and permitting under this chapter so
long as those activities are associated with one, and only one, dwelling
unit and the activities comply with all other applicable ordinances and
statutes.
G. Exemptions from certain provisions of this chapter shall not relieve the
applicant from the requirements in § 310-13D through L of this chapter.
§ 310-13 HANOVER CODE § 310-14
1:450
§ 310-15. Volume controls.
The low-impact development practices provided in the BMP Manual shall be
utilized for all regulated activities to the maximum extent practicable. Water
volume controls shall be implemented using the Design Storm Method in
Subsection A or the Simplified Method in Subsection B below. For regulated
activity areas equal to or less than one acre that do not require hydrologic
routing to design the stormwater facilities, this chapter establishes no
preference for either methodology; therefore, the applicant may select
either methodology on the basis of economic considerations, the intrinsic
limitations on applicability of the analytical procedures associated with
each methodology, and other factors.
H. The Borough may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this
section at any time for any project that the Borough determines poses a
threat to public health, safety, property or the environment.
I. For all regulated activities that are exempt from the SWM site plan
preparation, the applicant shall submit a site plan in sufficient detail to
show the existing conditions and proposed improvements as well as
design calculations.
A. The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual) is applicable to
any size of regulated activity. This method requires detailed modeling
based on site conditions. [Amended 8-22-2018 by Ord. No. 2273]
(1) Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume for all
storms equal to or less than the two-year, twenty-four-hour
duration precipitation or 2.86 inches in 24 hours, whichever is
greater.
(2) For modeling purposes:
(a) Existing (pre-development) nonforested pervious areas must
be considered meadow.
(b) Twenty percent of the existing impervious area of a project
site, when present, shall be considered meadow in the model
for existing conditions.
B. The Simplified Method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual) provided below is
independent of site conditions and should be used if the Design Storm
Method is not followed. This method is not applicable to regulated
activities greater than one acre or for projects that require design of
stormwater storage facilities. For new or altered impervious surfaces:
[Amended 8-22-2018 by Ord. No. 2273]
(1) Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two inches of
runoff from all new or altered impervious surfaces.
(2) At least the first one inch of runoff from new or altered impervious
surfaces shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow, i.e., it
§ 310-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-15
1:451
shall not be released into the surface waters of this commonwealth.
Removal options for the first one inch of runoff include reuse,
evaporation, transpiration, and infiltration.
(3) Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to
accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed
runoff; however, in all cases at least the first 0.5 inch of the
permanently removed stormwater runoff shall be infiltrated.
(4) This method is exempt from the requirements of § 310-16, Rate
controls.
C. Infiltration alternative. Where infiltration is not possible due to soil
characteristics or is not desirable given other characteristics, water
quality control may be proposed as an alternative to strict adherence to
the volume control standards of § 310-15 of this chapter. Where water
quality control is proposed, the following standards shall be achieved:
(1) At a minimum, the following documentation shall be provided to
justify the proposal to reduce the infiltration requirements:
(a) Description of and justification for field infiltration/
permeability testing with respect to the type of test and test
locations.
(b) An interpretive narrative describing existing soils of the site
and their structure as these relate to the interaction between
soils and water characteristics of the site. In addition to
providing soil and soil profile descriptions, this narrative shall
identify depth to seasonal water tables and depth to bedrock
and provide a description of all subsurface elements
(restrictive layers, geology, etc.) that influence the direction
and rate of subsurface water movement.
(c) A qualitative assessment of the site's contribution to annual
aquifer recharge shall be made, along with the identification of
any restrictions or limitations associated with the use of
designed infiltration facilities.
(d) The provided documentation must be signed and sealed by a
qualified professional.
(2) Water quality BMPs shall be implemented on all permanent
stormwater discharges from the proposed project site to achieve
pollutant removal efficiencies in accordance with the following
table. (Efficiency removal rating shall be based on a testing
specification for particle size distribution as required per TARP Tier
1 and 2 protocol testing [should define where this can be obtained].
The minimum design flow shall be based on the peak flow produced
from one inch of rain as calculated.)
§ 310-15 HANOVER CODE § 310-15
1:452
§ 310-16. Rate controls.
§ 310-17. Department of Transportation and Turnpike Commission
roadways and associated facilities.
Required Pollutant Removal Efficiencies for Infiltration
Alternatives
Pollutant Load Units
Required Removal
Efficiency
(%)
Total suspended solids
(TSS)
Pounds 85%
Total phosphorus (TP) Pounds 85%
Total nitrate (NO3) Pounds 50%
(3) Design guidance from the most current version of the BMP Manual,
or equivalent resource as precoordinated with Hanover Borough,
shall be consulted when choosing design criteria for water quality
BMPs.
A. For computation of pre-development peak discharge rates, 20% of the
existing impervious area of a project site, when present, shall be
considered meadow.
B. Post-development discharge rates shall not exceed the pre-development
discharge rates for the one-, two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and
one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storms. If it is shown that the peak
rates of discharge indicated by the post-development analysis are less
than or equal to the peak rates of discharge indicated by the predevelopment
analysis for one-, two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and
one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storms, then the requirements of
this section have been met. Otherwise, the applicant shall provide
additional controls as necessary to satisfy the peak rate of discharge
requirement.
A. For the purposes of the Act 167 stormwater management (plan)
elements, contained within the York County Integrated Water
Resources Plan, and this chapter, design policy pertaining to
stormwater management facilities for Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PennDOT) and Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission
(PTC) roadways and associated facilities is provided in Section 13.7
(Antidegradation and Post Construction Stormwater Management
Policy) of PennDOT Publication No. 13M, Design Manual Part 2 (August
2009), as developed, updated, and amended in consultation with the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources (DEP). As stated
in DM-2.13.7.D (Act 167 and Municipal Ordinances), PennDOT and PTC
roadways and associated facilities shall be consistent with Act 167
plans. Dm-2.13.7.B (Policy on Antidegradation and Post Construction
§ 310-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-17
1:453
§ 310-18. Additional stormwater management design standards.
Stormwater Management) was developed as a cooperative effort
between PennDOT and DEP. DM-2.13.7.C (Project Categories)
discusses the anticipated impact on the quality, volume, and rate of
stormwater runoff.
B. Where standards in the Act 167 elements of the IWRP and this chapter
are impractical, PennDOT or the PTC may request assistance from DEP,
in consultation with the county, to develop an alternative strategy for
meeting state water quality requirements and the goals and objectives
of the Act 167 elements within the IWRP.
C. For the purposes of the Act 167 elements in the IWRP and this chapter,
road maintenance activities are regulated under 25 Pa. Code Chapter
102.
A. General SWM site plan requirements and standards.
(1) SWM site plan requirements shall comply with the guidance,
procedures and policies provided in the latest version of the BMP
Manual and PennDOT Publication No. 13M, Part 2, Chapter 10.
B. Detention and retention basins.
(1) Basin maximum water depth shall be less than eight feet for a onethrough
one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour post-development
storm event.
(2) Embankment top widths shall be at least eight feet.
(3) The maximum permitted side slopes shall be 4.0 horizontal to 1.0
vertical. In order to obtain a waiver for slopes steeper than 4:1, the
plan must include a planting schedule to stabilize the
embankments. The proposed vegetation shall be of the lowmaintenance
variety.
(4) Any open-top facility shall be subject to the following fencing
requirements:
(a) The facility must be completely surrounded by a chain-link
fence of not less than four feet in height. Alternative fences and
barriers may be permitted upon request to and approval by the
Borough.
(b) The fence shall not be installed on earth fill embankment tops,
on fill embankment downstream face slopes, across emergency
spillway weirs, or across emergency spillway downstream face
channel sections (above the toe of embankment slopes).
(c) All gate or door openings through such enclosure shall be
equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device for
§ 310-17 HANOVER CODE § 310-18
1:454
keeping the gate or door securely closed at all times when not
in actual use.
C. Stormwater collection and conveyance facilities and/or systems.
(1) All stormwater pipes, other than those for existing channels, which
discharge from residential lots to a street or from a street to
residential lots, shall extend from the street right-of-way a
minimum distance of 67% of the length of the longest adjacent lot
dimension.
(2) SWM collection and conveyance facilities not located within a
public right-of-way shall be centered in an easement. Said
easement shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide for subsurface
facilities or shall be of sufficient size to encompass the entire
facility and provide for 10 feet of easement on either side for open
swales or trenches. The SWM site plans shall clearly state to whom
the easement and all future maintenance and responsibility is to be
granted and shall include a space for the grantee to sign in
acknowledgment of the easement.
D. Miscellaneous SWM site plans and SWM BMP requirements and
Standards. [Amended 8-22-2018 by Ord. No. 2273]
(1) Roof drain(s) and sump pump(s) connections shall not discharge
into sanitary sewers, streets, gutters, roadside channels, or into the
legal street or road right-of-way, except with the express
permission of the Borough.
(2) Every person owning or leasing property through which a
watercourse passes shall maintain that part of the watercourse
within the property and keep it free from trash or debris;
substances that could contaminate or pollute the waters of this
commonwealth; any obstacles that could alter the bed slope, cross
section, or path of the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee
shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or
adjacent to a watercourse so that those structures will not become
a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the
watercourse.
§ 310-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-18
1:455

ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management (SWM) Site Plan Requirements
§ 310-19. Plan requirements.
A. Although not a requirement of this chapter, prior to proceeding with
SWM site plan preparation and submission, the applicant is encouraged
to request a preapplication meeting with the Borough's code
enforcement official, Borough Engineer and a staff member of the York
County Conservation District to discuss the plan concept and
responsibility for submission of required documents and information.
B. The following items shall be included in the SWM site plan:
(1) Appropriate sections of the Borough's Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance93 and other applicable ordinances of the
Borough regarding subdivision and land development plan
preparation and applicable plan requirements shall be followed in
preparing all SWM site plans, regardless of whether or not a SWM
site plan involves a subdivision and/or land development plan.
(2) The Borough shall not approve any SWM site plan that is deficient
in meeting the requirements of this chapter. At its sole discretion,
and in accordance with this article, when a SWM site plan is found
to be deficient, the Borough may either disapprove the submission,
or in the case of minor deficiencies, the Borough may accept the
submission of a revised SWM site plan as noted in § 310-22 of this
chapter.
(3) Provisions for permanent access or maintenance easements for all
physical SWM BMPs, such as ponds and infiltration structures, as
necessary to implement the operation and maintenance (O&M)
plan discussed in Subsection C(9) below.
(4) The following signature block for the Borough:
"______________, Municipal official or designee, on this date
______________, has reviewed and hereby certifies that the SWM
Site Plan meets all design standards and criteria of the Municipal
Ordinance No. _____."
(5) The signed and sealed stormwater plan accuracy certification by
the applicant pursuant to Appendix C.94
C. If not required by the Hanover Borough Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, as specified in § 310-19B(1) of this chapter,
the SWM site plan shall also provide the following information where
applicable:
93.Editor's Note: See Ch. 320, Subdivision and Land Development.
94.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 310-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-19
1:457
(1) The overall stormwater management concept for the project,
including any additional information required for a postconstruction
stormwater management plan (PCSWMP) as
applicable.
(2) A determination of site conditions in accordance with the BMP
Manual. A detailed site evaluation shall be completed for projects
proposed in areas of carbonate geology or karst topography, as well
as for other environmentally sensitive areas, whether natural or
man-made, including floodplains, streams, lakes, ponds, hydric
soils, wetlands, brownfields and wellhead protection zones.
(3) Stormwater runoff design computations and documentation as
specified in this chapter or as otherwise necessary to demonstrate
that the maximum practicable measures have been taken to meet
the requirements of this chapter, including the recommendations
and general requirements in § 310-13.
(4) Expected project time schedule.
(5) A soil erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable, as
prepared for, reviewed, and approved (if required) by the York
County Conservation District.
(6) The effect of the project in terms of runoff volumes, water quality,
and peak flows on surrounding properties and aquatic features and
on any existing stormwater conveyance system that may be
affected by the project.
(7) Plan and profile drawings of all SWM BMPs, including drainage
structures, pipes, open channels, and swales.
(8) The SWM site plan shall show the locations of existing and
proposed on-lot wastewater facilities and water supply wells.
(9) The SWM site plan shall include an operation and maintenance
(O&M) plan for all existing and proposed physical stormwater
management facilities. This plan shall address long-term ownership
and responsibilities for O&M as well as schedules and costs for
O&M activities.
(10) A description of permanent stormwater management techniques,
including the construction specifications of the materials to be used
for stormwater management facilities.
(11) A notarized signature of the owner of the parcel for which the SWM
site plan is proposed containing a statement acknowledging that
the stormwater management facilities and BMPs are to be
permanent fixtures that can be altered or removed only after
approval of a revised SWM site plan by the Borough.
(12) Existing and proposed land uses.
§ 310-19 HANOVER CODE § 310-19
1:458
(13) The location of the proposed regulated activity relative to streets,
municipal boundaries, and other significant man-made features.
(14) Significant physical features and associated boundary limits,
including flood hazard areas, sinkholes, existing drainagecourses,
and areas of natural vegetation.
(15) The location of existing and proposed utilities, stormwater
facilities, sanitary sewers, and water lines on the parcel and within
50 feet of property lines.
(16) Proposed changes to the land surface and vegetative cover, and the
type and amount of existing and proposed impervious area.
(17) Existing and proposed structures, buildings, streets, driveways,
access drives, and parking areas.
(18) Preferred contour intervals of two feet or less; dependent upon site
conditions, alternative contour intervals proposed by an applicant
or his designee may be accepted by the Borough.
(19) The name of the development, the name and address of the owner
of the property, and the name and address of the individual or firm
preparing the plan. Also to be included are the name, address,
signature and seal of any registered surveyor (attesting the
accuracy of the boundary survey), professional engineer, landscape
architect, or professional geologist (for geomorphological
assessments) contributing to and/or with a responsibility for any
aspect of the Plan where applicable.
(20) Preferred graphic and written scale of one inch equals no more
than 50 feet. Dependent upon site conditions, an alternative scale
proposed by the applicant or his designee may be accepted by the
Borough.
(21) North point (arrow).
(22) A map showing all existing man-made features beyond the subject
parcel's boundary lines that will be affected by the proposed
regulated activities.
(23) Horizontal and vertical profiles of all open channels, including
hydraulic capacity.
(24) A note on the plan indicating the location of, and responsibility for
maintenance of, SWM facilities and/or easements that would be
located on adjoining properties as a result of proposed regulated
activities, and the location of such facilities and/or easements.
(25) A hydrogeologic assessment of the effects of stormwater runoff on
sinkholes where present.
§ 310-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-19
1:459
§ 310-20. Plan submission.
§ 310-21. Plan review and approval procedure.
(26) The effect of the proposed regulated activity in terms of runoff
volumes and peak flows on adjacent properties and/or any existing
municipal stormwater collection system that may receive runoff
from the project site.
(27) Drainage flow pathways.
(28) Site evaluation and soil infiltration testing performed in
accordance with the BMP Manual shall be completed and the test
results provided for any proposed infiltration BMPs.
A. Five copies of the SWM site plan shall be submitted as follows:
(1) Two copies to the Borough.
(2) One copy to Borough Engineer.
(3) One copy to York County Conservation District (if required).
(4) One copy to the York County Planning Commission when a SWM
site plan accompanies a subdivision/land development plan
application.
B. Additional copies shall be submitted as requested by the Borough or
DEP.
C. The Borough may establish a fee schedule for review of SWM plans, the
amount of which shall be set by resolution of the Borough Council.
A. SWM site plans shall be reviewed by the Borough for consistency with
the provisions of this chapter.
B. Modification requests.
(1) When reviewing a SWM site plan, whether or not the SWM site
plan is included in a subdivision and/or land development plan
application, the municipality's governing body may, after
consulting with DEP as noted in § 310-13C of this chapter, grant a
modification of the requirements of one or more provisions of this
chapter if the literal enforcement will enact undue hardship
because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question,
provided that such modification will not be contrary to the public
interest and that the purpose and intent of the Ordinance is
observed.
(2) All requests for a modification from an applicant shall be in writing
and shall accompany and be a part of the application for approval
of a SWM site plan and/or a subdivision or land development plan
as applicable. The request shall state in full the grounds and facts
§ 310-19 HANOVER CODE § 310-21
1:460
of unreasonableness or hardship on which the request is based, the
provision or provisions of the ordinance involved and the minimum
modification necessary.
(3) The Borough shall keep a written record of all action on requests
for modifications. The response of any consultation and/or review
by DEP shall be included as an original report if available or
otherwise documented in the required written record.
C. SWM site plan review and approval procedure.
(1) If a SWM site plan does not involve a subdivision and/or land
development, the review of the SWM site, recommendations,
approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval, that is, the
review and decision period, shall occur within 45 days of
submission to the Borough of a complete SWM site plan. However,
the Borough, in its sole discretion, may extend the review and
decision period another 45 days due to the nature of the application
and/or site conditions. If an extension of another 45 days is imposed
or granted by the Borough beyond the first forty-five-day review
and decision period designated by this subsection, the Borough
shall notify the applicant in writing and deliver such notice to said
applicant within 15 days of the decision to extend the review and
decision period by the Borough. If no extension is imposed or
granted by the Borough beyond the first forty-five-day review and
decision period and no decision has been rendered by the Borough
within that period, the SWM site plan shall be deemed approved.
Similarly, if after a forty-five-day extension of the review and
decision period has been imposed or granted by the Borough and
no decision has been rendered by the Borough within that period,
the SWM site plan shall be deemed approved.
(2) If a SWM site plan involves a subdivision and/or land development
plan, the period of time from the submission to the Borough of the
subdivision and/or land development plan application which
includes the SWM plan and the approval, approval with conditions,
or disapproval, that is, review and decision period, shall be 90 days,
in accordance with the procedure for approval of plans in Section
508 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.95
(3) From the time an application for approval of a plan involving a
subdivision or land development plan, whether preliminary or final,
which includes a SWM site plan is duly filed with the Borough, no
change or amendment of this chapter or other governing ordinance
or plan shall affect the decision on such application in accordance
with the provisions of the governing ordinances or plans as they
stood at the time the application was duly filed, as specified in
Section 508(4)(i) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.96
95.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
§ 310-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-21
1:461
§ 310-22. Revision of plans.
A revision to a previously submitted SWM site plan that involves a change
in SWM BMPs, stormwater management facilities, or changes in analytical
techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of SWM BMPs, or
that is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the
SWM site plan, as determined by the Borough, shall require a resubmission
of the revised SWM site plan in accordance with this article, including
applicable fees. For NPDES permitted sites, any revised SWM site plan shall
also be resubmitted to the York County Conservation District for review. In
the case of a SWM site plan which contains minor deficiencies, such as a
missing label, omission of a required note or minor construction detail, as
determined by the Borough, the Borough may accept a resubmission of such
SWM site plan without the requirement of a review fee or for a lesser fee as
provided for in the Borough's fee schedule.
§ 310-23. Resubmission of disapproved SWM site plans.
A disapproved SWM site plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions
addressing the Borough's concerns as stated regarding the original
submission, to the Borough in accordance with this article. The applicable
review fee must accompany the submission of a revised SWM site plan,
unless such fee is waived by the Borough. (See § 310-22.)
§ 310-24. Authorization to construct; term of validity.
D. Decision notification procedure. In all cases, the decision of the
Borough to approve or disapprove the SWM site plan shall be in writing
and shall be delivered to the applicant no later than 15 days following
the decision. If the SWM site plan is disapproved, the written decision
by the Borough shall specify the defects in the application, describe the
requirements which were not met, and cite the provisions of the
ordinance relied upon. If the SWM site plan is approved with
conditions, the notification to the applicant shall state the acceptable
conditions for approval and the time limit for satisfying such conditions.
The time limit for satisfying conditions of approval shall be the time
limit prescribed for conditional approval of subdivision and land
development plans as stated in the Borough's Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.97
A. SWM site plans independent of subdivision and land development
plans. The Borough's approval of a SWM site plan, when such plan is
submitted independent of a subdivision and/or land development plan,
authorizes the regulated activities contained in the SWM site plan for a
maximum term of validity of five years following the date of approval.
The Borough may, in its sole discretion, specify a term of validity
shorter than five years in the approval for any specific SWM site plan,
96.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508(4)(i).
97.Editor's Note: See Ch. 320, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 310-21 HANOVER CODE § 310-24
1:462
§ 310-25. As-built plans, completion certificate, and final
inspection.
particularly if the nature of the proposed SWM facilities requires more
frequent maintenance and/or short-term replacement of certain
components. Terms of validity shall commence on the date the Borough
signs the approval for an SWM site plan. If an approved SWM site
plan is not completed according to § 310-25 within the term of validity,
then the Borough may consider the SWM site plan disapproved and
may revoke any and all permits. SWM site plans that are considered
disapproved by the Borough may be resubmitted in accordance with
§ 310-23 of this chapter.
B. SWM site plans included in a subdivision and/or land development plan.
The Borough's approval of a SWM site plan which is a part of a
subdivision and/or land development plan authorizes that plan and the
regulated activities therein so that no subsequent change or
amendment in this chapter or other governing ordinances or plans shall
be applied to affect adversely the right of the applicant to commence
and to complete any aspect of the approved development in accordance
with the terms of such approval within five years from such approval, as
specified in Section 508(4)(ii) through (vii) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.98
A. The developer shall be responsible for providing as-built plans of all
SWM BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan. The as-built plans
and an explanation of any discrepancies with the construction plans
shall be submitted to the Borough.
B. The as-built submission shall include a certification of completion
signed by a qualified person verifying that all permanent SWM BMPs
have been constructed according to the approved plans and
specifications. If any licensed qualified person contributed to the
construction plans, then a licensed qualified person must sign the
completion certificate.
C. After receipt of the completion certification by the Borough, the
Borough may conduct a final inspection to verify compliance with, and
accuracy of, the as-built plans.
D. The financial guarantee, as discussed under § 310-28, shall not be
released by the Borough until the items of this section are completed,
unless fees otherwise are waived.
98.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508(4)(ii) through (vii).
§ 310-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-25
1:463

ARTICLE V
Operation and Maintenance
§ 310-26. Responsibilities of developers and landowners.
§ 310-27. Operation and maintenance agreements.
A. The Borough shall make the final determination on the continuing
maintenance responsibilities prior to final approval of the SWM site
plan. The Borough may require a dedication of such facilities as part of
the requirements for approval of the SWM site plan. Such a
requirement is not an indication that the Borough will accept the
facilities. The Borough reserves the right to accept or reject the
ownership, maintenance, and operating responsibility for any portion of
the stormwater management facilities and controls.
B. Facilities, areas, or structures used as stormwater management BMPs
shall be enumerated as permanent real estate appurtenances and
recorded in the York County Recorder of Deeds Office as deed
restrictions/protective covenants or easements that run with the land.
C. The operation and maintenance (O&M) plan shall be recorded as a
restrictive deed covenant that runs with the land.
D. The Borough may take enforcement actions against an owner for any
failure to satisfy the provisions of this article.
A. Prior to final approval of the SWM site plan, the property owner shall
sign and record an operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement (see
Appendix A)99 covering all stormwater control facilities which are to be
privately owned.
(1) The owner, successor and assigns shall maintain all facilities in
accordance with the approved maintenance schedule in the O&M
plan.
(2) The owner shall convey to the Borough easements to assure access
for periodic inspections by the Borough and maintenance, as
necessary.
(3) The owner shall keep on file with the Borough the name, address,
and telephone number of the person or company responsible for
maintenance activities; in the event of a change, new information
shall be submitted by the owner to the Borough within 10 working
days of the change.
B. The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance (O&M) of the
SWM BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the O&M agreement, the
Borough may perform the services required and charge the owner
99.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 310-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-27
1:465
§ 310-28. Performance guarantee.
For SWM site plans that involve subdivision and land development, the
applicant shall provide a financial guarantee to the Borough for the timely
installation and proper construction of all stormwater management controls
as required by the approved SWM site plan and this chapter in accordance
with the provisions of Sections 509, 510, and 511 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.100
appropriate fees. Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the
property.
C. The Borough is exempt from the requirement to sign and record an
operation and maintenance agreement.
100. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10509, 10510, and 10511, respectively.
§ 310-27 HANOVER CODE § 310-28
1:466
ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses
§ 310-29. Review fees.
The Borough may include all costs incurred in the review fee charged to an
applicant. The review fee may include, but not be limited to, costs for the
following:
A. Administrative/clerical processing.
B. Review of the SWM site plan and related documents, including
operation plans and agreements, easements, declarations, or restrictive
covenants, by the Borough Engineer, qualified professional, designee of
the Borough, and/or solicitor of the Borough, as needed.
C. Attendance at meetings.
D. Necessary inspections during and post construction.
E. The Borough may establish a fee schedule for review of SWM plans, the
amount of which shall be set by resolution of the Borough Council.
F. Expenses incurred for inspections and review may be charged to the
applicant as they occur throughout the course of a project.
§ 310-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-29
1:467

ARTICLE VII
Prohibitions
§ 310-30. Prohibited discharges and connections.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows any non-stormwater discharge, including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water, to enter the waters of this commonwealth
is prohibited.
B. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into surface waters
of this commonwealth which are not composed entirely of stormwater,
except as provided in Subsection C below and discharges allowed under
a state or federal permit.
C. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution to the waters of this
commonwealth:
(1) Discharges from firefighting activities.
(2) Potable water sources, including water line flushing.
(3) Irrigation drainage.
(4) Air-conditioning condensate.
(5) Springs.
(6) Water from crawl space pumps.
(7) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
(8) Diverted stream flows.
(9) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(10) Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains.
(11) Lawn watering.
(12) Groundwater infiltration to storm drains.
(13) Uncontaminated groundwater.
(14)Water from individual residential car washing.
(15) Routine external building wash-down (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
(16)Water discharged in well testing for potable water supplies.
§ 310-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-30
1:469
§ 310-31. Roof drains, driveway drains, and all sump pump
discharges. [Amended 8-22-2018 by Ord. No. 2273]
Roof drains, driveway drains, and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration
or vegetative BMPs and to the maximum extent practicable satisfy the
criteria for DIAs, as determined by the Borough (See Appendix B).101In
cases where it is not practicable to discharge to vegetated areas or BMPs,
the Borough may permit roof drains, driveway drains, and sump pumps to
discharge to the road surface, alleys, or directly to the storm sewer system.
Such discharges shall be permitted at the sole discretion of the Borough
engineer or staff.
§ 310-32. Alteration of SWM BMPs.
No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any SWM BMPs,
facilities, areas, or structures in a manner without the written approval of
the Borough, with the exception of necessary maintenance activities such
as mowing.
D. Swimming pools shall be dechlorinated and discharged to vegetated
areas where available. Swimming pools may also be discharged to the
sanitary sewer with prior notice and permission from the Borough. For
further guidance, refer DEP's management of swimming pool, hot tub,
and spa water discharges fact sheet (available at the Borough Office
upon request). [Added 8-22-2018 by Ord. No. 2273]
E. In the event that the Borough or DEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection C significantly contribute to
pollution of the waters of this commonwealth, the Borough or DEP will
notify the responsible person(s) to cease the discharge. [Amended
8-22-2018 by Ord. No. 2273]
F. The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order
issued to the discharge is in full compliance with all requirements of the
permit, waiver, order and other applicable laws and regulations; and
provided, that written approval has been granted for any discharge to
the storm drain system and/or waters of this commonwealth.
[Amended 8-22-2018 by Ord. No. 2273]
101. Editor's Note: Appendix B in included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 310-30 HANOVER CODE § 310-32
1:470
ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement; Violations and Penalties
§ 310-33. Right of entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Borough, or any designee
thereof, may enter at reasonable times upon any property within the
Borough to inspect the condition of the stormwater structures and facilities
in regard to any aspect regulated by this chapter.
§ 310-34. Inspection.
SWM BMPs shall be inspected by the landowner, or the owner's designee,
including the Borough for dedicated and owned facilities, according to the
following list of minimum frequencies:
§ 310-35. Enforcement.
§ 310-36. Suspension and revocation.
A. Annually for the first five years.
B. Once every three years thereafter.
C. During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year or greater
storm, that is, a storm of an estimated frequency of recurrence of 10
years or greater interval of time delivering 4.3 inches of rain or greater
in a twenty-four-hour period.
D. A report of all inspections shall be submitted to the Borough by the end
of the calendar year in which the inspections were conducted.
E. All inspection records shall be maintained by the landowner or
successor for a period not less than five years from the date of the
inspection and shall be made available to the Borough within five
calendar days of receipt of written request by the Borough.
F. The Borough or its designee may inspect, at the expense of the
landowner, all phases of the construction, operation, maintenance and
any other implementation of SWM BMPs. A Borough inspection due to a
report or information of lack of maintenance, a defect, or failure of a
SWM BMP shall be paid for by the landowner.
A. It shall be unlawful for a person to undertake any regulated activity
except as provided in an approved SWM site plan, unless specifically
exempted in § 310-14.
B. It shall be unlawful to violate any section of this chapter.
C. Inspections regarding compliance with the SWM site plan or a report or
information of lack of maintenance will be performed by the Borough or
its designee. All ongoing maintenance inspections and reports are the
responsibility of the landowner.
§ 310-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-36
1:471
§ 310-37. Violations and penalties.
A. Any approval or permit issued by the Borough pursuant to this chapter
may be suspended or revoked for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approved SWM site plan or O&M agreement.
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule, or regulation relating to the regulated activity.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
the regulated activity which constitutes or creates a hazard,
nuisance, pollution, or endangers the life or property of others.
B. A suspended approval shall be reinstated by the Borough when:
(1) The Borough has inspected and approved the corrections to the
violations that caused the suspension.
(2) The Borough is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
C. An approval that has been revoked by the Borough cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the
provisions of this chapter.
D. If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health, or
property, at its sole discretion, the Borough may provide a limited time
period for the owner to correct the violation. In these cases, the
Borough will provide the owner, or the owner's designee, with a written
notice of the violation and the time period allowed for the owner to
correct the violation. If the owner does not correct the violation within
the allowed time period, the Borough may revoke or suspend any or all
applicable approvals and permits pertaining to any provision of this
chapter.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a
civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Borough, pay a
judgment of not more than $1,000 plus costs. No judgment shall
commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the
determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the defendant
neither pays nor makes a timely appeal to the judgment, the Borough
may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless the District Justice determining that there
has been a violation further determines that there has been a good faith
basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating the ordinance
to have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there
shall be deemed to have been only one such violation. The court of
common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay, upon cause
§ 310-36 HANOVER CODE § 310-37
1:472
§ 310-38. Appeals.
shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a final adjudication of
the violation and judgment.
B. The Borough may institute injunctive, mandamus, or any other
appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the
enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall
have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Borough or its designee,
relevant to the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to Borough
Council within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Borough, relevant to the
provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the York County Court of
Common Pleas within 30 days of the Borough Council's decision.
§ 310-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-38
1:473

ARTICLE IX
References
§ 310-39. References.
References are as follows:
A. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. Pennsylvania
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. No. 363-0300-002
(December 2006), as amended and updated. Harrisburg, PA.
B. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. Erosion and
Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual. No. 363-2134-008 (April
15, 2000), as amended and updated. Harrisburg, PA.
C. U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Resources Conservation
Service (NRCS). National Engineering Handbook. Part 630: Hydrology,
1969-2001. Originally published as the National Engineering
Handbook, Section 4: Hydrology. Available from the NRCS online at
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/.
D. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation
Service. 1986. Technical Release 55: Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, 2nd Edition. Washington, D.C.
E. U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, National Weather Service, Hydrometeorological Design
Studies Center. 2004-2006. Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United
States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0, Silver Spring, Maryland.
Internet address: http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
F. Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 85, No. 247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended.102
G. Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Publication 408/2011
(October 7, 2011), as amended and updated: Specifications for
Highways, Harrisburg, PA.
H. Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Publication 72M (June
2010), as amended and updated: Standards for Roadway Construction,
Harrisburg, PA.
I. Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Publication 13M, Chapter
10 (August 2009), as amended and updated: Design Manual Part 2:
Highway Design, Drainage Design and Related Procedures, Harrisburg,
PA.
102. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 310-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-39
1:475
Chapter 313
STREET OPENINGS AND EXCAVATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 170.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 316.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
320.
§ 310-39 HANOVER CODE § 310-39
1:476
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 313-1. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates otherwise:
APPLICANT — Any person who makes application for a permit.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Hanover, County of York, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
EMERGENCY — Any unforeseen circumstance which calls for immediate
action.
MANAGER — The Borough Manager of the Borough of Hanover, or his
authorized deputy, representative or inspector.
PERMITTEE — Any person who has been issued a permit and has agreed to
fulfill all the terms of this chapter.
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
utility or corporation.
STREET — Includes the entire right-of-way of a public street, public
highway, public alley, public way, public road or public easement within the
Borough.
§ 313-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-1
1:477

ARTICLE II
Street Openings
§ 313-2. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any tunnel, opening or
excavation of any kind in or under the surface of any street, except for
the erection of public utility poles, without first securing a permit from
the Borough of Hanover for each separate undertaking. Provided, however,
any person maintaining pipes, lines or underground conduits in or under
the surface of any street by virtue of any law, ordinance or franchise, may
proceed with an excavation or opening without a permit when emergency
circumstances demand the work to be done immediately for the
preservation of the public health, safety or welfare, provided the permit
could not reasonably and practically have been obtained beforehand. Such
person, however, shall thereafter apply for a permit on the first regular
business day on which the office of the Borough is open for business and
said permit shall be retroactive to the date when the work was begun.
§ 313-3. Street opening limited.
§ 313-4. Commencement of work.
Work for which a permit has been issued pursuant to this chapter shall
commence within 30 days after the issuance of the permit therefor. If not
so commenced, the permit shall be automatically terminated. Permits thus
terminated may be renewed upon the payment of an additional permit fee
in the same amount as the original fee.
§ 313-5. Permits nontransferable.
Permits issued under this chapter are not transferable from one person to
another, and the work shall be carried out only at the location specifically
designated in the permit.
A. No person to whom a permit has been granted under the provisions of
this chapter shall perform any of the work authorized by such permit in
any amount or quantity greater than that specified in the permit, except
that upon the approval by the Manager, additional work may be done
under the provisions of the permit in an amount not greater than 10% of
the amount specified in the permit. Any deposit and bond posted in
connection with the original permit shall be deemed to cover any such
additional work as may be approved pursuant to this section, within the
limit mentioned herein.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply whenever excavations of
an exploratory nature are made in order to determine the location of
underground facilities, provided that in such instances the permittee,
immediately upon completion of the excavation, shall specify on the
permit the proper amount or quantity of work and shall post the proper
deposit and bond.
§ 313-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-6
1:479
§ 313-6. Expiration of permits.
Every permit issued hereunder shall expire at the end of the period of time
specified in the permit. If the permittee shall be unable to complete the
work within the specified time, he shall, prior to expiration of the permit,
present in writing to the Manager a request for an extension of time, setting
forth therein the reasons for the requested extension. If in the opinion of
the Manager such an extension is necessary, the permittee may be granted
additional time for the completion of the work.
§ 313-7. Rights of street use.
Every permit issued hereunder shall be granted subject to the right of the
Borough or of any other person entitled thereto to use the street for any
purpose for which such street may lawfully be used.
§ 313-8. Revocation of permits.
A. Any permit issued under this chapter may be revoked by the Manager
after notice for:
(1) Violation of any condition of the permit.
(2) Violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
ordinance or law relating to the work.
(3) The existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting
or creating a nuisance or endangering the lives or property of
others.
B. Written notice of such violation shall be served upon the person to
whom the permit was granted, or his agent or employee engaged in the
work. Such notice shall also contain a brief statement of the reasons for
revoking such permit. Notice may be given either by personal delivery
thereof to the person or to be notified or by United States mail,
addressed to such person to be notified.
§ 313-6 HANOVER CODE § 313-8
1:480
ARTICLE III
Applications and Permits
§ 313-9. Duties and responsibilities of applicants.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of any person applying for a permit to:
§ 313-10. Duties and responsibilities of permittees.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of any person obtaining a permit to:
A. Make a written application for such permit with the Manager, on such
form as he shall prescribe. No work shall commence until the Manager
has approved the application and issued a permit and until the person
has paid and furnished all fees, deposits, certificates and bonds
required by this chapter; provided, however, that in accordance with
§ 313-2 of this chapter, work of an emergency nature may commence
before a permit has been issued when said permit cannot be practically
obtained beforehand. The application for a permit shall contain an
agreement on the part of the applicant that the work shall be done in
full compliance with the ordinances of the Borough and the laws of
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in relation thereto.
B. Furnish in duplicate when required by the Manager, plans showing the
extent of the proposed excavation work, the dimensions and elevations
of both the existing ground prior to said excavation and of proposed
excavated surfaces, the location of the excavation work, and such other
information as may be prescribed by the Manager.
C. Agree to save the Borough, its officers, employees and agents, from any
and all costs, damages and liabilities which may accrue or be claimed to
accrue by reason of said work to be done in said application. The
acceptance of any permit under this chapter shall constitute such an
agreement by the applicant, whether the same is expressed or not.
A. Pay a permit fee for the issuance of an excavation permit, which shall be
in addition to all other fees for permits or charges relative to any
proposed construction work. The minimum excavation permit fee shall
be in an amount varying with the type, amount, and age of surface to be
opened, dug or excavated under the permit issued as herein listed. Said
fees may hereafter be adjusted from time to time by resolution passed
by the Borough Council of the Borough of Hanover. [Amended
8-26-2015 by Ord. No. 2230]
(1) On streets constructed, reconstructed or resurfaced within one
year prior to the issuance of the excavation permit, $100 for every
100 lineal feet of opening or part thereof.
(2) On streets constructed, reconstructed or resurfaced between one
and two years prior to the issuance of the excavation permit, $80
for every 100 lineal feet of opening or part thereof.
§ 313-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-10
1:481
(3) On streets constructed, reconstructed or resurfaced between two
and three years prior to the issuance of the excavation permit, $60
for every 100 lineal feet of opening or part thereof.
(4) On streets constructed, reconstructed or resurfaced between three
and four years prior to the issuance of the excavation permit, $40
for every 100 lineal feet of opening or part thereof.
(5) On streets constructed, reconstructed or resurfaced between four
and five years prior to the issuance of the excavation permit, $20
for every 100 lineal feet of opening or part thereof.
(6) On all other streets and for all excavations deemed by the Manager
to be of an emergency nature, $10 for every 100 lineal feet of
opening or part thereof.
B. Pay an inspection fee based on the cost of inspection plus 15% or a fee
of $15, whichever is greater. The terms of said fee imposed for
inspection, including, but not limited to, both percentage or dollar
amount provisions, may be adjusted from time to time by resolution
passed by the Borough Council of the Borough of Hanover. [Amended
8-26-2015 by Ord. No. 2230]
C. Make a deposit as required by Article V of this chapter.
D. Furnish a certificate of insurance as required by Article VI of this
chapter.
E. Provide a faithful performance bond as required by Article VII of this
chapter.
F. Submit, when required by the Manager, a list of owners and tenants of
all property abutting the area where the work authorized by the permit
is to be performed.
G. Present evidence that all materials, labor and/or equipment which is
needed to complete such undertaking as authorized by the permit is
available.
H. Keep the original copy of the permit at all times while such work is in
progress, at the location for which said permit was granted, and show
such permit upon demand to any authorized representative of the
Borough.
§ 313-10 HANOVER CODE § 313-10
1:482
ARTICLE IV
Street Opening and Excavation Regulations
§ 313-11. Opening and excavation restrictions.
A. No openings or excavations in any street shall extend beyond the center
line of the street until the surface of the street is restored to a condition
safe and convenient for travel.
B. Unless authorized by the Manager, no more than 250 feet measured
longitudinally shall be opened in any street at any one time until the
surface of the street is restored to a condition safe and convenient for
travel.
C. The work of excavation shall be so conducted as not to interfere with
any utility lines or connections or other underground facilities, unless
permission of the proper authorities in connection with such facilities
shall have been obtained.
D. The permittee shall expose all utility facilities, including sewers, storm
drains, gas mains, water mains, telephone and electrical conduits and
other utility obstructions, sufficiently ahead of trench excavation work
to avoid damage to those facilities and to permit their relocation, if
necessary.
E. Where a pipe drain, pipe culvert or other structure or facility is
encountered, it shall be replaced, restored, straightened or protected
by the permittee.
F. If, in the process of his work, the permittee damages any public or
private utility property, the utility may make the necessary repairs and
file a claim against the permittee, with the Borough, for the cost
thereof. If the claim is not paid promptly by the permittee, the amount
may be withheld by the Manager from the deposit, or charged against
the permittee's performance bond.
G. Any monument of granite, concrete, iron, steel, brass or other lasting
material set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines of any
street or property subdivision or a precise survey reference point or a
permanent survey bench mark within the Borough shall not be removed
or disturbed or caused to be removed or disturbed without first
obtaining permission in writing from the Manager to do so. Permission
shall be granted only upon condition that the permittee shall pay all
expenses incidental to its proper replacement.
H. If any work performed under the permit interferes with the established
drainage system of any street, provision shall be made by the permittee
to provide proper drainage to the satisfaction of the Manager.
I. When any earth, sand, gravel, rock, stone or other excavated material is
caused to be deposited upon, or to roll, flow or wash upon, any street,
so as to create a nuisance or endanger life or property, the person
§ 313-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-11
1:483
responsible therefor shall cause the same to be removed immediately
from the street upon notification to do so by the Manager. In the event it
is not removed within eight hours after notification, the Manager shall
cause such removal, and the cost of such removal shall be paid by the
permittee or deducted from his deposit.
J. To protect the public, every permittee shall place around the project
such barriers, barricades, lights, warning flags and danger signs as
shall be determined by the Manager. All safety requirements and
precautionary measures prescribed by the Manager shall be based
upon and in conformance with, where applicable, the requirements set
forth in the United States Department of Army Corps of Engineers,
United States Army, publication: Safety Requirements (latest edition).
Copies of this publication are available in the office of the Manager for
inspection by any permittee. Whenever any person fails to provide or
maintain the safety devices required by the Manager, such device shall
be installed and maintained by the Borough. The amount of the cost
incurred shall be paid by the permittee or deducted from his deposit.
No unauthorized person shall willfully move, remove, injure, destroy or
extinguish any barrier, warning light, sign or notice erected, placed or
posted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
K. Every permittee shall maintain safe crossings for vehicle traffic at all
street intersections and safe crossings for pedestrians at intervals of
not more than 300 feet. Two lanes of traffic shall be held open at all
intersections, where possible, by the removal of dirt and the use of
covering plates. All plates must be firmly secured and the installation
must be inspected and approved by the Manager.
L. Access to the private driveways shall be provided except during
working hours when construction operations prohibit provision of such
access. Free access must be provided at all times to fire hydrants.
M. All materials excavated shall be laid compactly along the side of the
trench and kept trimmed up so as to cause as little inconvenience as
possible to public travel. Wherever necessary, in the opinion of the
Manager, in order to expedite the flow of traffic or to abate a dirt or
dust nuisance, toe boards or bins will be required to prevent the
spreading of dirt into traffic lanes; temporary wooden plank walks shall
be installed where the excavated area is muddy and causes
inconvenience to pedestrians. If the street is not wide enough to hold
the excavated material without using part of the adjacent sidewalk, the
permittee or his agent shall keep a passageway at least 1/2 the sidewalk
width open along such sidewalk line.
N. Work authorized to be done pursuant to a permit granted by this
chapter shall be performed between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00
p.m., Monday through Friday only, unless the permittee obtains written
consent from the Manager to do the work at other times.
§ 313-11 HANOVER CODE § 313-11
1:484
§ 313-12. Pavement cuts and backfilling and restoring openings.
O. In the ease of any leak, explosion or other accident in any subsurface
pipe, line or other facility, it shall be lawful for the person owning or
responsible for such facility to commence an excavation to remedy such
condition before securing a permit, provided that application for a
permit shall be made immediately and not later than the next business
day thereafter, and that all other provisions of this chapter are fully
complied with. If any such emergency condition shall not be
immediately attended to by the owner or person responsible for such
facility, the Manager, after such notice as he shall deem necessary
under the circumstances of the particular case, shall proceed to do the
work necessary and required by such emergency, and charge the same
on the basis of cost plus 15% to such person.
P. In granting any permit under this chapter, the Manager may attach
such other conditions thereto as may be reasonably necessary to
prevent danger to public or private property or to prevent the operation
from being conducted in a manner hazardous to life or property or in a
manner likely to create a nuisance. Such conditions may include but
shall not be limited to:
(1) Limitations on the period of the year in which the work may be
performed;
(2) Restrictions as to the size and type of equipment;
(3) Designation of routes upon which material may be transported;
(4) The place and manner of disposal of excavated materials;
(5) Requirements as to the laying of dust, cleaning of streets, the
prevention of noises, and other results offensive or injurious to the
neighborhood, the general public or any portion thereof; and
(6) Regulations as to the use of streets in the course of the work.
A. All pavement cuts, openings and excavations shall be properly made
and backfilled according to Borough specifications.
B. Unless otherwise determined by the Manager, all restorations of street
pavements shall be made by the Borough. Furthermore, at the option of
the Manager, the Borough may make the pavement cut. In all such
instances, the actual cost to the Borough, plus 15%, shall be charged to
the permittee, if necessary, being withheld from the deposit or charged
against the permittee's performance bond.
C. The Manager must be notified by the permittee, not more than 48 hours
prior to the beginning of work, of the date and approximate time at
which work will be begun.
§ 313-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-12
1:485
D. No work shall be performed by the permittee unless or until the
Manager shall be present or permission has been given by the Manager
to proceed in his absence.
E. Whenever it is necessary to break through existing pavement for
excavation purposes and where trenches are to be four feet or over in
depth, the pavement in the base shall be removed to at least six inches
beyond the outer limits of the subgrade that is to be disturbed in order
to prevent settlement, and a six-inch shoulder of undisturbed material
shall be provided in each side of the excavated trench. The face of the
remaining pavement shall be approximately vertical. A power-driven
concrete saw shall be used so as to permit complete breakage of
concrete pavement or base without ragged edges. Asphalt paving shall
be scored or otherwise cut in a straight line. No pile driver may be used
in breaking up the pavement.
F. No tunneling shall be allowed without the express approval of the
Manager and permission therefor endorsed upon the permit. The
backfilling of a tunnel excavation shall be made only in the presence of
the Borough Manager, and shall be done only in a method approved by
him.
G. The work of restoration when carried out by the permittee, including
both paving surface and paving base, shall be performed as follows:
(1) Every person who opens or excavates any street in the Borough
shall thoroughly and completely refill the opening or excavation;
the surface shall be restored to the same condition as it was before
the opening and such restoration shall be in accordance with the
requirements of the Borough or specifications of the Department of
Transportation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, which
specifications are hereby adopted as specifications of the Borough
for restoration of surfaces of public streets in the Borough; as
restored, the surface shall conform to the proper grade and be of
the same surface covering as the part of the street immediately
adjoining the opening. If, within two years after the restoration of
the surface as herein provided, defects shall appear therein
resulting from defective workmanship by the permittee, he shall
reimburse the Borough for the cost of all necessary repairs to the
permanent paving.
(2) Backfilling in any street opened or excavated pursuant to an
excavation permit issued hereunder shall be compacted to a degree
equivalent to that of the undisturbed ground in which the trench
was dug. Compacting shall be done by mechanical tappers or
vibrators, by rolling in layers, or by water settling, as required by
the soil in question, and sound engineering practices generally
recognized in the construction industry. The decision as to whether
a trench shall be backfilled by water settling shall be based upon
such engineering practices and shall be made by the Manager.
When water is taken from a fire hydrant, the permittee shall assign
§ 313-12 HANOVER CODE § 313-12
1:486
one man to operate the hydrant and shall make certain that said
man had been instructed by the municipal waterworks in the
operation of the hydrant. The waterworks shall likewise be notified
at both the beginning and end of the job so that the condition of the
fire hydrants can be checked on both occasions Any damage done
to the hydrant during the excavation shall be the responsibility of
the permittee. Water shall be paid for by the permittee on the terms
agreed upon with the waterworks.
(3) When backfilling is done by water settling, excavated materials
above utility installations shall be deposited uniformly in layers of
not more than five feet in thickness, and shall be thoroughly
flooded. During the flooding, the water shall be allowed to flow
slowly to the trench from high points and shall be worked down to
the full depth of the layer of backfill, with bars. All bars used shall
be long enough to extend entirely through the layer being filled and
shall be forced down through the loose backfill material. As the
bars are withdrawn, the water shall be allowed to flow downward
around the bar. The channel or hole formed by the bar shall be kept
open and the water kept running into it until the fill has settled. All
work shall be done in such manner as to obtain a relative
compaction through the entire depth of the backfill, of not less than
that existing adjacent to the excavation.
(4) Backfilling up to the first 18 inches above the top of the utility pipes
or similar installations shall be done with thin layers. Each layer is
to be tamped by manual or mechanical means. Layers that are hand
tamped shall not exceed two inches in thickness. Layers that are
power tamped shall not exceed four inches in thickness. The same
requirements shall apply to the remainder of the backfilling if
tamping is the method used for backfilling. Backfilling of all pipes
of over 24 inches in diameter shall be carried up to the spring line
of the pipe in three-inch layers, with each layer moistened and
thoroughly tamped with suitable mechanical equipment. The
backfill around all pipes 24 inches or less in diameter shall be
flooded or tamped as specified above to a depth of 18 inches above
the top of the pipe before any additional backfilling is placed
thereon.
(5) Whenever any excavation for the laying of pipe is made through
rock, the pipe shall be laid six inches above the rock bottom of the
trench, and the space under, around and six inches above the pipe
shall be backfilled with clean river sand, noncorrosive soil or onefourth
inch minus gravel. Broken pavement, large stones and
debris shall not be used in the backfill.
(6) Backfilling shall be completed by placing the backfill material well
up over the top of the trench. For dry backfilling, the material shall
be compacted with a roller of an approved type or with the rear of a
truck carrying at least five tons, until the surface is unyielding. The
surface shall then be graded as required.
§ 313-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-12
1:487
(7) On improved streets, a temporary paving of suitable materials,
thorough bound and compacted, shall be installed flush with the
surface of the adjoining paving.
H. In the event that any work performed by or for a permittee shall, in the
opinion of the Manager, be unsatisfactory and the same shall not be
corrected in accordance with his instructions within the time fixed by
him, or in the event that the work for which the permit was granted is
not completed within the time fixed by the Manager, the Borough may
proceed to correct such unsatisfactory work or complete any work not
completed, and charge the cost thereof, plus 15%, to the permittee or
his surety.
I. Where trenches are parallel to the street or where a number of cross
trenches are laid in close proximity to one another by the permittee, or
where the equipment used may damage adjacent paved surfaces, it
shall be the prerogative of the Manager to require a negotiated
contribution from the permittee for the resurfacing, in place of
patching, of such streets, if the total area of the proposed patch or
probable damaged area exceeds 15% of the total pavement surfacing
between curb faces or between concrete gutter edges in any block.
Such negotiations shall be carried on and contributions agreed upon
prior to issuance of a permit. The maximum contribution under this
section shall not exceed the cost of trench restoration, plus 15%.
J. After such excavation or opening is commenced, the work of making
and backfilling the same shall be prosecuted with due diligence and so
as not to obstruct the street more than is actually necessary. If the work
is not so prosecuted or if the work does not, in the judgment of the
Manager, comply with the terms of this chapter, he shall so notify the
person named in the permit and shall require such person, within three
days after the service of such notice, to proceed with the diligent
prosecution of such work or properly to complete the same, as the case
may be. If such notice is not complied with, the Borough shall do such
work as may be necessary to backfill such excavation, and to restore the
street or part thereof excavated to the same condition as before such
excavation was made. All expenses incurred by the Borough shall be
recovered from the permittee's deposit or surety. No further permit
shall be granted any person unless and until any opening or excavation
already made by him has met all requirements of this chapter. The
Manager shall be the sole judge of proper performance and his opinion
shall be final.
K. The Manager or his authorized agents shall make daily inspections of
all work authorized by permits issued pursuant to this chapter. The
Manager is empowered to employ an inspector if the Manager is of the
opinion that the work to be performed pursuant to a permit authorized
by this chapter is such that an inspector is necessary to insure
compliance with the various provisions of this chapter.
§ 313-12 HANOVER CODE § 313-12
1:488
L. Upon completion of all work accomplished under the provisions of the
permit, the permittee shall notify the Manager in writing, on a form
prescribed by him. A certificate of final inspection shall be issued by the
Manager to the permittee no sooner than two years after the permanent
restoration of the opening or excavation has been made, provided the
work authorized by the permit has been performed according to
Borough specifications. Prior to the issuance of a certificate, the
Manager shall make a final inspection of the restoration to determine
whether Borough specifications have been adhered to.
M. If any settlement in a restored area occurs within a period of two years
from the date of completion of the permanent restoration, it shall in
general be considered as conclusive evidence of defective backfilling.
Any expense which may be incurred by the Borough in correcting such
settlement shall be paid by the permittee or recovered from his bond.
N. Unless part of the work is being performed by the Borough, no opening
or excavation made by a permittee shall be considered in the charge or
care of the Borough, or of any office or person employed by the
Borough, and no officer or employee is authorized in any way to take or
assume any jurisdiction over any such opening or excavation, except in
the exercise of police power where and when it is necessary to protect
life and property.
O. If, in his judgment, traffic conditions, the safety or convenience of the
traveling public or the public interest require that the excavation work
be performed as an emergency work, the Manager shall have full power
to order, at the time the permit is granted, that a crew of men and
adequate facilities be employed by the permittee 24 hours a day, to the
end that such excavation work may be completed as soon as possible.
§ 313-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-12
1:489

ARTICLE V
Deposits
§ 313-13. Computation of deposit.
The Manager, upon receipt of the properly completed application, shall
determine the amount of the deposit to be made by the permittee; provided,
however, that it shall never be less than $10. Such deposits shall be
submitted to the Borough at the time the permit is granted. The purpose
of the deposit is to reimburse the Borough for the cost of any work and
materials furnished by it in connection with the work authorized by the
permit and to cover all necessary inspections of said work.
§ 313-14. Form of deposit.
The deposit may be in the form of cash, certified, treasurer's or cashier's
check or surety bond made payable to the Borough and meeting the
approval of the Manager. The surety bond must be written by a reputable
surety company licensed to do business in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, and the bond shall be conditioned upon the payment of all
charges required by this chapter. Such bond must be approved by the
Borough Solicitor as to form. The Manager shall have the right to require
the submission of the deposit in any of the above specified forms.
§ 313-15. Insufficient deposit.
If any deposit made is less than sufficient to pay all fees and costs, the
permittee shall, upon demand, pay to the Borough an amount equal to
the deficiency. If the permittee fails or refuses to pay such deficiency
upon demand, the Borough may recover the same by action in any court
of competent jurisdiction. Until such deficiency is paid in full, additional
permits shall not be issued to such permittee.
§ 313-16. Yearly deposit.
Whenever any public utility or municipal authority maintaining
underground facilities shall contemplate more than one street opening or
excavation per calendar year, it may post a surety bond for the calendar
year or part thereof to cover the estimated fees and cost of any and all
work. Said bond must be written by a reputable surety company licensed to
do business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and the bond shall be
conditioned upon the payment of all charges estimated to be required by
this chapter during the term of the bond. Such bond must be approved by
the Borough Solicitor as to form.
§ 313-17. Deposit schedules.
The Manager is authorized to establish a schedule of charges for
inspections, labor, materials and such other expenses as may be incurred
by the Borough in meeting the objectives and requirements of this chapter.
§ 313-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-17
1:491
The schedule shall be open to public inspection in the office of the Manager,
upon demand.
§ 313-18. Decision on costs final.
The decision of the Manager as to the cost of any work done or repairs made
by him or under his direction, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter,
shall be final and conclusive.
§ 313-19. Refund of deposit.
Upon notification by the permittee that all work authorized by the permit
has been completed and after inspection by the Manager, the Manager shall
refund to the permittee his deposit less all costs incurred by the Borough
in connection with the permit. However, in no event is the permit fee or
inspection fee to be refunded.
§ 313-17 HANOVER CODE § 313-19
1:492
ARTICLE VI
Liability Insurance
§ 313-20. Insurance requirements.
The certificate of insurance required of the applicant under § 313-10D of
this chapter shall indicate that he is insured against claims for damages for
personal injury as well as against claims for property damages which may
arise from or out of the performance of the work, whether such performance
be by himself, his subcontractor or anyone directly or indirectly employed
by him. Such insurance shall include protection against liability arising
from completed operations. Such insurance shall provide complete thirdparty
coverage for the Borough of Hanover. The amount of such insurance
shall be prescribed by the Manager in accordance with the nature of the
risks involved; provided, however, that the liability insurance for bodily
injury in effect shall be in an amount not less than $100,000 for each
person and $300,000 for each accident, and for property damages, an
amount not less than $50,000. Failure of applicant to file such certificate
shall be grounds for denying a permit. Provided, however, that Borough
departments, franchised public utilities and other governmental agencies
may be relieved of the obligation of submitting such a certificate if they do
the work contemplated under the permit with their own personnel or with
a contractor insured as required; however, such waiver shall not release
any such organization from any and all liability under any of the obligations
provided herein.
§ 313-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-20
1:493

ARTICLE VII
Faithful Performance Bond
§ 313-21. Requirements.
Each applicant, upon the receipt of a permit, shall provide the Borough with
a surety bond to guarantee the faithful performance of work authorized by
a permit granted pursuant to this chapter. The amount of the bond shall be
100% of the estimated cost of restoring the opening. However, in no event
shall the bond furnished be in an amount less than $1,000. If the permittee
contemplates requesting more than one permit per year as required by this
chapter, the Manager may require the permittee to furnish one bond, as
above, in such amount as the Manager deems necessary. Said bond must
be written by a reputable surety company licensed to do business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and must be approved by the Borough
Solicitor as to form.
§ 313-22. Default in performance.
Whenever the Manager shall find that a default has occurred in the
performance of any term or condition of any permit, written notice thereof
shall be given to the principal and to the surety of the bond. Such notice
shall state the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof and the period of
time deemed by the Manager to be reasonably necessary for the completion
of such work.
§ 313-23. Completion of work.
A. After receipt of such notice, the surety must, within the time therein
specified, either cause the required work to be performed or, failing
therein, pay over to the Manager the estimated cost of doing the work
as set forth in the notice. Upon the receipt of such moneys, the Manager
shall proceed by such mode as he deems convenient to cause the
required work to be performed and completed, but no liability shall be
incurred therein other than for the expenditure of the said sum in hand
therefor.
B. In the event of any default in the performance of any term or condition
of the permit for the work, the surety or any person employed or
engaged on its behalf, or the Manager or any person employed or
engaged on his behalf, shall have the right to go upon the premises to
complete the required work or make it safe.
C. No person shall interfere with or obstruct the ingress or egress to or
from any such premises by any authorized representative or agent of
any surety or of the Borough engaged in completing the work required
to be performed under the permit, or in complying with the terms of
conditions thereof.
§ 313-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-24
1:495
§ 313-24. Terms of bond.
The term of each bond posted shall begin upon the date of the posting
thereof and shall end upon the receipt by the permittee of a certificate of
final inspection from the Manager.
§ 313-24 HANOVER CODE § 313-24
1:496
ARTICLE VIII
Openings in New Streets
§ 313-25. Notices of improvements.
When the Borough shall improve or pave any street, the Manager shall first
give notice to all persons owning property abutting on the street about to
be paved or improved, and to all public utility companies operating in the
Borough, and all such persons and utility companies shall do all work which
would necessitate excavation of the street, within 30 days from the giving
of such notice. The time may be extended if permission has been requested
in writing and has been approved by the Manager.
§ 313-26. Restrictions upon opening new streets.
Except in the case of emergencies as defined by this chapter, the Manager
shall have the right to refuse to grant a permit which would allow an
excavation or opening to be cut into a street pavement less than five years
old. Any person so refused by the Manager shall have the right to appeal
to the Hanover Borough Council, and Council's decision shall be final. It
shall be the duty of any person requesting such opening to submit a formal
request in such form as the Manager shall prescribe. If the opening is
authorized by the Manager or Borough Council, such person shall pay to
the Borough of Hanover the fee as specified in § 313-10A(1) through (5),
inclusive. The Manager shall then issue in triplicate, formal authorization to
secure a street opening permit. One copy shall be retained by the person
requesting such authorization, one copy shall be given to the person making
the actual opening and one copy shall be retained by the Borough. It shall be
the duty of the person making the actual opening to then secure the street
opening permit and comply with all other requirements of this chapter. Such
fees as have been paid to secure such authorization shall be credited to
the minimum excavation permit fee as specified in § 313-10A(1) through (5),
inclusive.
§ 313-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-26
1:497

ARTICLE IX
Map Requirements
§ 313-27. Filing; affidavit.
§ 313-28. Abandoned facilities.
A. Every person owning, using, controlling or having an interest in pipes,
conduits, ducts, tunnels or other structures under the surface of any
street, used for the purpose of supplying or conveying gas, electricity,
communication impulses, water, sewage, steam, oil or any other
material to or from the Borough or to or from its inhabitants, or for any
other purposes, shall file with the Manager, within one year after the
adoption of this chapter, a map or set of maps showing the location, size
and description of all such installations. Maps or sets of maps in
existence at the time of passage of this chapter may be submitted for
record purposes. All installations subsequent to the passage of this
chapter shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one inch to 200 feet.
Map size shall be in some multiple of 8 1/2 by 11 inches, but in no case
shall be larger than 34 inches by 44 inches.
B. Within 30 days after the first day of January of each and every year,
such person shall file with the Manager a corrected map or set of maps,
each drawn to scale as above, showing such installations, including all
those made during the previous year, to and including the last day of
such year. Provided, however, that a person may at his own option elect
to provide corrected atlas sheets throughout the year, as they are
available, rather than proceed as above noted.
C. Each map herein required shall be accompanied by an affidavit
endorsed thereon, to the effect that the same correctly exhibits the
details required to be shown by this section.
A. Whenever any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel or other structure located
under the surface of any street, or the use thereof, is abandoned, the
person owning, using, controlling or having any interest therein shall,
within 30 days after such abandonment, file with the Manager a
statement in writing, giving in detail the location of the structure so
abandoned.
B. Each map or set of maps filed pursuant to the provisions of this article
shall show in detail the location of all such structures abandoned
subsequent to the filing of the last preceding map or set of maps.
C. When the Borough plans to pave or improve such streets with
abandoned facilities, the owner of such facilities shall be notified to
remove them. If the owner shall refuse to remove such facilities, the
Borough shall remove the abandoned facilities at the owner's expense.
When the owner removes such facilities, the only fee charged by the
Borough shall be for the cost of inspection, plus 15% as provided by
§ 313-10B of this chapter.
§ 313-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-29
1:499
§ 313-29. Notices to property owners and tenants.
If, in the opinion of the Manager, the work to be undertaken by the
permittee is such that it will affect the use of properties abutting or
adjoining the project, he shall require the permittee to submit a list of the
names and addresses of the owners and/or tenants of such properties. Upon
receipt of such list, the Borough shall notify the affected property owners or
tenants of the proposed work to be done.
§ 313-30. Notices to Police and Fire Departments.
The Manager shall notify, in writing, the Borough Police and Fire
Departments of any street opening or excavation permit he grants which
affects the flow of traffic in streets and alleys within the Borough. Such
notification shall state the nature of the work to be done and the location
of such project. He shall also notify the Police and Fire Departments when
any openings or excavations have been closed, permitting traffic to flow
thereon.
§ 313-31. Location of new lines.
Whenever feasible, new underground pipes, lines or conduits shall be laid
under sidewalks rather than under streets. The Manager shall have the
power to designate such location, subject to appeal to the Hanover Borough
Council. Council's decision shall be final.
§ 313-32. Enforcement.
The Borough Manager shall be responsible for enforcing all provisions of
this chapter.
§ 313-33. Liability of Borough.
This chapter shall not be construed as imposing upon the Borough or
any official or employee any liability or responsibility for damages to any
person injured by the performance of any excavation work for which an
excavation permit is issued hereunder; nor shall the Borough or any official
or employee thereof be deemed to have assumed any such liability or
responsibility by reason of inspections authorized hereunder, the issuance
of any permit or the approval of any excavation work.
§ 313-34. Hanover Municipal Waterworks.
The Hanover Municipal Waterworks, as an independently operated
department of the Borough, shall be required to obtain permits for all
street excavations, furnish the certificate of insurance and the faithful
performance bond, and conform to all other requirements and provisions
of this chapter; provided, that the waterworks shall be exempt from all
deposits and fees, except the permit fee for nonemergency openings of new
streets specified by § 313-10A(1) through (5), inclusive.
§ 313-29 HANOVER CODE § 313-34
1:500
ARTICLE X
Administration and Enforcement
§ 313-35. Violations and penalties.
Penalties for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
revocation of the permit and a fine or imprisonment in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, of the Code of the
Borough of Hanover, and any amendments thereto.
§ 313-36. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this chapter, and specifically Ordinance Nos. 747, approved January 17,
1951; 808, approved July 15, 1953; 834, approved July 21, 1954; and 911,
approved July 18, 1956, are hereby repealed.
§ 313-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-36
1:501
Chapter 316
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 147.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 170.
Snow emergencies — See Ch. 304.
Street openings and excavations — See Ch.
313.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 346.
§ 313-36 HANOVER CODE § 313-36
1:502
ARTICLE I
Throwing Missiles
[Adopted 6-10-1895 by Ord. No. 83]
§ 316-1. Unlawful actions.
From and after the passage of this article, it shall not be lawful for any
person or persons to throw stones, snowballs, play ball, or throw any other
missile on any public streets, squares or alleys of the Borough.
§ 316-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 316-1
1:503

ARTICLE II
Street Construction and Dedication
[Adopted 4-16-1952 by Ord. No. 781]
§ 316-2. Compliance required.
No person, firm or corporation shall hereafter construct, open or dedicate
any street, alley or other thoroughfare or any drainage facilities in
connection therewith for public use or travel in the Borough of Hanover
without first complying with the conditions, rules, regulations and
procedures hereinafter set forth in this article.
§ 316-3. Plans and specifications.
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to construct, open or dedicate any
street, alley or other thoroughfare (hereinafter referred to as highways) or
any drainage facilities in connection therewith for public use or travel in the
Borough of Hanover, shall, prior to the doing of any overt act in connection
with said construction, opening or dedication, prepare and submit to the
Borough Council for its approval plans and specifications thereof, setting
for the following:
§ 316-4. Necessary agreements.
In addition to the plans required to be submitted to the Borough Council
under the provisions of § 316-3 hereof and prior to the approval thereof,
A. The date when prepared, the name of the person, firm or corporation by
whom prepared, and the names and addresses of all persons owning
land to be dedicated or taken for such street, alley or thoroughfare, or
abutting thereon, or which will be affected by any drainage facilities in
connection therewith.
B. The details whereby the proposed highways shall connect to existing
highways of the Borough, the courses, distances and profiles thereof
and any and all conditions affecting grades, obstructions, streams and
drainage.
C. The details of existing public utility facilities, of proposed public utility
facilities, and the means and methods whereby the latter shall connect
to existing public utility facilities of the Borough and of public utilities
operating within the Borough.
D. The courses, structures and capacities of proposed and existing
drainage facilities and the means and method whereby the same shall
connect to existing drainage facilities.
E. The methods, materials and means whereby the vehicular portions of
the proposed highways shall be improved.
F. Such further and additional information as the Borough Council may
request.
§ 316-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 316-4
1:505
the person, firm or corporation submitting the same shall also submit to the
Borough Council an agreement or agreements, in form satisfactory to the
Borough Council and executed by all such persons, firms and corporations
as the Borough Council may require, providing:
§ 316-5. Gutters required on plans.
The Borough Council shall not approve the plans for any such proposed
highway unless the same shall provide for the construction therein from
gutter to gutter of a seven-inch-deep base of Number 4 stone filled with
Number 2 stone, on top of which shall be laid a bituminous penetration
surface course conforming strictly to all the requirements as to materials,
methods and workmanship of Section 175 of Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation Specifications, promulgated January 1941, which said
Section 175 is entitled "Bituminous Surface Course, CP-2"; provided,
however, that nothing herein shall prevent the Borough Council from
requiring construction of said proposed highways in a manner superior to
the kind of construction herein described.
§ 316-6. Conditions of agreement.
No highway or any drainage facilities in connection therewith shall be
approved by the Borough Council unless and until the agreement referred
to in § 316-4 of this article shall provide, inter alia:
A. That the highways and drainage facilities described in said plans, if and
as approved by the Borough Council, will be constructed, opened and
dedicated in strict conformity with such plans, as finally approved and
subject to such changes as the Borough Council may require therein
prior to approval.
B. That the Borough shall not be liable for any damages for or by reason of
the construction, opening and dedication of such highways and
drainage facilities, in accordance with said plans as finally approved by
the Borough Council.
C. That such persons, firms or corporations, at their sole expense and
without cost to the Borough, will construct the said highways, public
utility and drainage facilities in the manner set forth in § 316-6 of this
article.
A. That within 18 months after the approval thereof by the Borough
Council, said highways shall be improved in the manner required by
said plans as finally approved.
B. That prior to the performance of the work prescribed in § 316-6A, there
shall be laid in the bed of said highways main lines for all such public
utility facilities as shall be required by the plans of such highways, as
finally approved by the Borough Council, all such facilities to be
installed and all ditches and holes resulting therefrom backfilled and
tamped in such a manner as the Borough Manager, under applicable
§ 316-4 HANOVER CODE § 316-6
1:506
§ 316-7. Bond or security to be filed prior to approval of plans.
[Amended 4-18-1956 by Ord. No. 893]
Prior to the approval of any plans required to be filed under the provisions
of this article, the person, firm or corporation requesting such approval
shall file with the Borough Secretary his, their or its bond to the Borough,
with corporate surety, conditioned for the faithful performance of all
agreements and undertakings required to be made and entered into by
the provisions of this article, or shall deposit a certified check with the
Borough Secretary, payable to the Borough of Hanover, which said bond or
certified check shall be in an amount equal to the estimated cost of the work
required by the agreement referred to in § 316-4 of this article, as fixed and
determined by the Borough Manager; provided, however, that if the person,
firm or corporation requesting approval of such plans presents satisfactory
evidence that there has been deposited with the owner or operator of any
utility service an amount of money estimated by such owner or operator to
cover the cost of the necessary construction of such utility service required
by such plans, then the bond or certified check shall be reduced by the
amount so deposited with such owner or operator of such utility service.
§ 316-8. Public hearing.
Upon written application therefor by any person, firm or corporation
presenting plans pursuant to this article, the Borough Council will grant a
public hearing in reference thereto, after such public notice thereof as the
Borough Council may deem reasonable.
§ 316-9. Exceptions when required or desirable.
Nothing contained in this article shall prevent the Borough Council, on its
initiative, from opening or accepting any highway, nor the laying of trunk
sewers, drains, water or gas mains if required or deemed desirable for the
comfort, safety, health and convenience of the public.
§ 316-10. Violations and penalties.
Any persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
article shall be prosecuted in the manner and to the extent provided by
Section 48 of the Act of July 10, 1947, P.L. 1621.103
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and ordinances of this
Borough, shall require.
103. Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 45101 et seq.
§ 316-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 316-10
1:507

ARTICLE III
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 3-17-1954 by Ord. No. 824; amended in its entirety
12-5-1984 by Ord. No. 1791]
§ 316-11. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this article:
ROADWAY — Any portion of a street or highway improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street between the curblines or the lateral
lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of
pedestrians.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of
the public for purposes of vehicular travels.
§ 316-12. Responsibility for removal; time limit.
§ 316-13. Severe icing.
In the event that snow and ice on a sidewalk has become so hard that
it cannot be removed without likelihood of damage to the sidewalk, the
person or entity charged with its removal shall, within the times specified
in § 316-12 hereof, cause enough sand, salt or other abrasive to be put on
the sidewalk to make travel thereon reasonably safe and shall then, as soon
A. Every owner of any building or lot of land within the Borough of
Hanover fronting or abutting on a paved sidewalk shall remove and
clear away, or cause to be removed and cleared away, snow and ice from
a path at least three feet in width in all areas, except the Central
Business District as shown on the Borough Zoning Map,104 wherein at
least six feet in width shall be cleared from so much of said sidewalk as
is in front of or abuts on said building or lot of land.
B. Except as provided in § 316-13 hereof, snow and ice shall be removed
from sidewalks in the General Business District within the Borough of
Hanover within 10 hours following cessation of any fall, accumulation
or deposit of snow, sleet or freezing rain, except that, if said cessation
occurs between 5:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m., it shall be removed by the
following noon.
C. Except as provided in § 316-13 hereof, snow and ice shall be removed
from all other sidewalks within the Borough of Hanover within 24 hours
of cessation of any fall, accumulation or deposit of snow, sleet or
freezing rain.
104. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
§ 316-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 316-13
1:509
thereafter as weather permits, cause a path in said sidewalk of at least three
feet in width to be thoroughly cleaned in residential areas and six feet in
width in the General Business District to be thoroughly cleaned.
§ 316-14. Removal by Borough; cost.
§ 316-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-15-1990 by Ord. No.
1882]
Any owner who shall violate any provision of this article shall be subject to
the fines and penalties as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty,
of the Code of the Borough of Hanover.
A. In the event of the failure of any owner to clear away or treat with
abrasives and subsequently clear away any snow and ice from any
sidewalk as herein provided, or to cause this to be done, the Borough of
Hanover shall, as soon as practicable after such failure, cause such
work to be done.
B. The Borough of Hanover shall ascertain and keep a record of the cost of
the work to be done in accordance with this section.
C. Every owner whose act or omission makes it necessary that the
Borough of Hanover cause work to be done in accordance with this
section shall be liable to the Borough of Hanover for the cost of such
work, plus a penalty of 15% of such cost. Upon the neglect or failure to
pay the same, a municipal lien may be filed and collected against the
property.
§ 316-13 HANOVER CODE § 316-15
1:510
ARTICLE IV
Sidewalk, Curb and Gutter Construction
[Adopted 5-5-1958 by Ord. No. 954]
§ 316-16. Compliance required.
No sidewalk, curb or gutter shall be constructed or reconstructed within the
Borough of Hanover except upon the conditions of the materials and in the
manner hereinafter set forth in this article.
§ 316-17. Permit required; application; fees.
§ 316-18. Materials; specifications.
All sidewalks, curbs and gutters in the Borough of Hanover shall be
constructed or reconstructed of the following materials, in the following
manner and in strict accordance with the following specifications:
A. No sidewalk, curb or gutter shall be constructed or reconstructed
within the Borough of Hanover unless and until the owner or his
authorized representative of the property abutting thereon shall first
have secured from the Secretary of the Borough of Hanover a permit
for the construction or reconstruction thereof, and unless and until the
said owner or his authorized representative shall first have paid to the
said Borough Secretary a license fee as hereinafter provided.
B. Application for the permit hereinabove referred to shall be made upon a
form supplied by the Secretary of the Borough of Hanover, which said
application form may require the disclosure of any and all facts deemed
necessary by the Manager of the Borough of Hanover for the
enforcement of the provisions of this article.
C. For the purpose of partially defraying the costs of inspection arising
from the enforcement of this article, there is hereby imposed a
minimum permit fee of $30 for the first 100 lineal feet or fraction
thereof to be constructed or reconstructed under the issued permit. For
each additional 100 lineal feet or fraction thereof, there shall be an
additional permit fee of $15. Such permit fee shall be payable prior to
the issuance of the permit. The payment of said fee shall be included
with submission of the appropriate permit application and should be
paid in addition to any other fees required by this chapter of the Code of
Ordinances of the Borough of Hanover. Said fee schedule may be
adjusted from time to time by resolution passed by the Borough Council
of the Borough of Hanover. [Amended 12-29-1975 by Ord. No. 1654;
3-26-2003 by Ord. No. 2068; 8-26-2015 by Ord. No. 2234]
A. Materials.
(1) Cement. The type of cement to be used shall be as specified by the
Borough Engineer and shall conform to the American Society of
§ 316-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 316-18
1:511
Testing Material Specifications for Portland Cement; Designation
C-150 (Type 1) or Designation C-175 (Type 1A).
(2) Air-entraining agents. Air-entraining agents which are added to
concrete mixtures shall conform to the American Society of Testing
Material Specifications for Air-Entraining Admixtures for Concrete;
Designation C-260. This is already found in Type 1A cement.
(3) Aggregates. Fine and coarse aggregates shall conform to the
American Society of Testing Material Specifications for Concrete
Aggregates; Designation C-33.
(4) Subbase material. Durable material such as crushed stone, bankrun
gravel or slag shall be used in the preparation of unsuitable
subbases, as may be required by the Borough Engineer.
(5) Water. The water used in mixing concrete shall be clean, free from
acid, alkali, vegetable or other organic matter.
(6) Joint filler. The joint filler shall be of a nonextruding joint material
conforming to the American Society of Testing Material
Specification for preformed Expansion Joint fillers for Concrete
(nonextruding and resilient types); Designation D-544.
B. Specifications.
(1) Concrete proportions and consistency.
(a) The proportions of aggregate to cement for any concrete shall
be such as to produce a mixture which will work readily into
the corners and angles of the forms and around reinforcement,
with the method of placing employed on the work, but without
permitting the materials to segregate or excess free water to
collect on the surface. The combined aggregates shall be of
such composition of sizes that, when separated on the No. 4
standard sieve, the weight passing the sieve (fine aggregate),
shall not be less than 30% nor greater than 50% of the total,
unless otherwise required by the architect or engineer, and
with the exception that these proportions do not necessarily
apply to lightweight aggregates.
(b) The methods of measuring concrete materials shall be such
that the proportions can be accurately controlled and easily
checked at any time during the work. Measurement of
materials for ready-mixed concrete shall conform to Tentative
Specifications for Ready-Mixed Concrete (ASTM C94).
(c) The concrete shall be mixed in the proportions which, when the
proper amount of water is added, will produce a minimum
compressive strength of 1,800 pounds per square inch after
seven days, and a minimum compressive strength of 3,000
§ 316-18 HANOVER CODE § 316-18
1:512
pounds per square inch after 28 days, when cured under field
conditions.
(d) The amount of water used per bag of cement shall be the
minimum to obtain a satisfactory workable concrete, but in no
case shall it exceed six gallons, including the free water in the
aggregate. The maximum allowable slump shall be four inches.
(2) Air-entrained concrete. All concrete shall be air-entrained. The air
content shall not be less than 3% nor more than 6%.
(3) Methods.
(a) Curing. As soon as the final finishing has been completed, a
membrane curing agent of the resinwax base or its approved
equal, as approved by the Borough Engineer, must be applied
in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications. The
membrane curing agent must in all cases contain a fugitive
dye.
(b) The forms used shall preferably be of metal, but wood forms
may be used. All forms shall be smooth, straight, free from
warp, and of sufficient strength to resist the pressure of
concrete without springing. Sufficient stakes shall be used to
hold the forms firmly to line and grade. Satisfactory devices
shall be used to insure the proper spacing of the forms. Forms
shall extend the full depth of the sidewalks and gutters, and at
least 18 inches below the top of curbs. Forms may be required
to the full depth of the curb when uniform density of concrete
and proper cross section cannot otherwise be obtained. All
wood forms shall be thoroughly wetted and metal form soiled
or coated with soft soap before depositing any material against
them. All mortar or dirt shall be removed from forms
previously used.
(c) Excavation shall be made to the required depth, and the
material on which the sidewalk, curb or gutter is to be placed
shall be compacted to a uniformly firm, even surface.
(d) The concrete shall be placed in the forms in horizontal layers,
and spaded or vibrated sufficiently to eliminate all voids. The
top surface shall be finished true to line and grade, in an even,
neat manner, with sidewalk surfaces slightly roughened. Edges
of face of curb shall be rounded to a radius of 3/4 inch, all other
edges to a radius of 1/4 inch.
(e) Joints. The curb or curb and gutter shall be cut into lengths no
longer than 20 feet, unless otherwise specified by the Borough
Engineer, by the use of a one-fourth-inch preformed expansion
joint held in a true vertical position. A one-fourth-inch
expansion joint shall also be provided between all sidewalks,
and between the intersection of two sidewalks, and between
§ 316-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 316-18
1:513
sidewalks and adjoining driveways. Sidewalks shall be
separated from abutting buildings by a similar joint.
Contraction joints shall be provided to separate the sidewalk
and/or gutter slabs, and shall be cut to a depth equal to at
least 1/3 of the total slab thickness. Contraction joints shall be
spaced no more than five feet apart, and shall be so spaced as
to coincide with the expansion joints provided in the curb.
(f) At the end of curved curbs, there shall be imbedded in the
concrete two reinforcement bars 1/2 inch in diameter and 24
inches in length. The bars shall be placed three and nine
inches, respectively, below the top of the curb, and shall extend
12 inches on each side of the joint. One end of the bars shall be
coated with grease, and enclosed in a capped tube at least 1/2
inch longer than the bar.
(g) The forms shall not be removed until 24 hours after the
concrete has been placed. Any irregular surface shall be
corrected by rubbing with a carborundum stone. Brush
finishing or plastering will not be permitted.
(h) The concrete shall be protected from drying or freezing, by the
use of approved methods, for at least 72 hours after placing.
(i) After the concrete has set sufficiently, the spaces adjacent to
the concrete shall be backfilled to the required depth with
acceptable material placed in layers not more than four inches
in depth and thoroughly compacted.
(j) Sidewalks shall be a uniform depth of four inches, except
where crossed by driveways, where the thickness shall be at
least six inches for residential driveways and eight inches for
commercial driveways. The entire sidewalk and grass-plot area
shall have a slope of 1/4 inch per foot toward the curb. The
width shall be as established by general or specific ordinance.
(k) Curb construction.
[1] Curbs shall be 24 inches deep, six inches wide for the
lower 17 inches, with a vertical back and the upper seven
inches of the face battered 1/2 inch to a five-and-one-halfinch
top.
[2] Curbs may be constructed 18 inches deep, eight inches
wide for the lower 10 inches, with a vertical back and the
upper eight inches of the face battered one inch to a seveninch
top. This alternate specification may be used for new
curb construction, or, where installed adjacent to an old
curb, it must be blended in joint to joint to the old curb so
as to create no obstruction to pedestrians or cars, with a
minimum length of three feet between contraction joints. A
minimum strength of 3,500 pounds per square inch shall
§ 316-18 HANOVER CODE § 316-18
1:514
§ 316-19. Approval of forms and preparations; completion
certificate.
be required for this option. [Added 7-6-1988 by Ord. No.
1846]
(l) Gutters, where required, shall be six inches deep and two feet
wide. The edge adjoining the curb shall be seven inches below
the top of the curb, and the gutter shall have a slope of 3/4 inch
toward the curb. Gutters and curbs may be constructed as a
unit, but shall have the same cross section as when
constructed separately.
(m) At intersections of streets and alleys, curbs shall be built at a
radius fixed by the Borough Manager or his authorized
representative.
(n) No sidewalk, curb or gutter shall be constructed until the
grade has been given by the Borough Manager or his
authorized representative.
(o) Sidewalks adjacent to trees located in the public right-of-way
may be reduced in width around tree roots as approved by the
Borough Manager. Where tree roots create or could create a
sidewalk offset problem, one-half-inch-by-twelve-inch steel
dowels, each 12 inches center to center, shall be embedded in
the concrete extending six inches on each side of the expansion
joints of the changed section bedded on four inches of stone
and centered in four inches of concrete; one end of the bar
shall be coated with grease and enclosed in a copper tube at
least 1/2 inch longer than the bar. At each interior joint in the
changed section, a one-and-one-half-inch-deep control joint
shall be installed at least every five feet, a six-inch-by-six-inch
10/10 welded wire fabric shall be embedded in a minimum of
2 1/2 inches of concrete throughout the changed sidewalk
sections. [Added 7-6-1988 by Ord. No. 1846]
A. No concrete shall be poured until the forms and preparations have been
approved by the Inspector. The Inspector shall have the right to secure
a sample of the concrete being used to determine by standard tests if
the strength meets the requirements of § 316-18 of this article.
B. When the Inspector finds that any of the work or material is not in
compliance with the requirements of this article, he shall notify the
owner as soon as possible. Any sidewalk, curb or gutter not constructed
in accordance with this article shall be removed and replaced with a
properly constructed sidewalk, curb or gutter. In the event of the failure
of the owner to correct improper construction, the Borough shall have
the right to remove the defective portion and replace such portion with
a sidewalk, curb or gutter constructed in accordance with the
§ 316-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 316-19
1:515
§ 316-20. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this article, and specifically Ordinance No. 436, approved June 24, 1929,
Ordinance No. 723, approved April 19, 1950, Ordinance No. 828, approved
March 29, 1954, and Ordinance No. 831, approved June 23, 1954, are
hereby repealed.
§ 316-21. Curb construction; plan required; agreement. [Added
7-22-2015 by Ord. No. 2223]
No person, firm or corporation shall construct, reconstruct, disturb or
install curbing on a public street or alley in the Borough of Hanover without
complying with the terms and conditions set forth herein.
provisions of this article, the cost to the Borough, plus 15% for
overhead, to be recovered as by law provided.
C. When the construction is in accordance with the requirements of this
article, the Inspector shall furnish the owner with a certificate of
satisfactory completion.
D. The Borough Manager or his authorized representative shall perform
the duties of the Inspector as set forth in this article.105
A. Any person, firm or corporation desiring to construct, reconstruct,
disturb or install curbing on a public street or alley in the Borough of
Hanover shall, prior to doing any overt act in connection with said
work, obtain a permit therefor. Issuance of said permit shall require
remittance of a permit fee as provided for in § 316-17 of the Code of the
Borough of Hanover for the purpose of partially defraying the cost of
inspection. Any person desiring a permit for the actions herein
described shall obtain a permit by preparing and submitting to the
Borough for its approval plans and specifications for such work, setting
forth the following:
(1) The date when prepared; the name of the person, firm or
corporation by whom prepared; the name and address of the
owner(s) of the property; and the address of the property at which
the curbing is being constructed, reconstructed, disturbed or
installed, if different from the address of the property owner.
(2) The details of the work being performed, including the length of the
curbing being constructed, reconstructed, disturbed or installed.
(3) The details of existing and proposed public utility facilities that may
be affected by the curbing work, and the steps to be taken to avoid
any disturbance or disruption of public utility services.
105. Editor's Note: Original Section 5, Name Stamp, of Ord. No. 954, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 10-31-1968 by Ord. No. 1411.
§ 316-19 HANOVER CODE § 316-21
1:516
(4) The courses, structures and capacities of proposed and existing
stormwater drainage facilities, the proposed changes to any
existing facilities and the means and method whereby the same
shall connect to existing drainage facilities and properly drain
anticipated stormwater.
(5) The details regarding the portion of the public street or alley that
will be disturbed in order to accommodate the curbing to be
constructed, reconstructed, disturbed or installed.
(6) Such further and additional information as may be requested by the
Code Enforcement Officer or other staff member reviewing the
plans.
B. In addition to the plans required to be submitted to the Borough under
the provisions of Subsection A hereof and prior to the approval thereof,
the person, firm or corporation submitting the same shall also submit to
the Borough an agreement or agreements, in form provided by the
Borough and executed by the property owner, acknowledging:
(1) That the section of the public street or alley that will be disturbed
as a result of such work shall be reconstructed by the road
department of the Borough of Hanover after the curbing work has
been completed.
(2) Pursuant to the regulations of the Borough of Hanover, the person,
firm or corporation constructing, reconstructing, disturbing or
installing curbing on any public street or alley in the Borough of
Hanover shall make a straight and even pavement cut 18 inches
wide from the face of the curb and of a length equal to that of the
entire constructed, reconstructed, disturbed or installed curbing.
The person, firm, or corporation constructing, reconstructing,
disturbing, or installing curbing shall not disturb any portion of the
public street or alley beyond 18 inches from the face of the curb in
the direction of the public street or alley.
(3) Upon excavation and the completion of the curbing construction,
reconstruction, disturbance, or installation, the person, firm or
corporation completing the construction, reconstruction,
disturbance, or installation shall place stone within two inches of
the grade of the top of the street or alley in the excavated area
prior to the pavement reconstruction by the road department of the
Borough of Hanover.
(4) That the Borough shall bill the property owner for the work that the
Borough road crew will perform in reconstructing the disturbed
portion of the public street or alley at the rate of $5.50 per linear
foot of curbing that is constructed, reconstructed, disturbed or
installed. Said charge per linear foot may be modified from time to
time by resolution of the Borough Council. Payment in full of said
charge shall be made by the property owner prior to the property
owner being issued a permit to perform such curbing work. No
§ 316-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 316-21
1:517
permit shall be granted and no curbing work shall be done prior to
payment in full of said amount.
(5) That the Borough shall not be liable for any damages for or by
reason of the construction, reconstruction, disturbance or
installation of said curbing in accordance with the plans submitted
by the property owner.
(6) That the property owner or his/her/its designee shall, at his/her/its
sole expense and without cost to the Borough, construct said
curbing in accordance with the plans submitted and in accordance
with all Borough ordinances and regulations.
C. The requirements set forth in Subsection B(4) regarding payment for
reconstruction of the disturbed portion of the public street shall not be
applicable to instances in which property owners are required by the
Borough to construct, reconstruct, disturb or install curbing as a result
of a Borough street paving project. In such cases, any road
reconstruction work necessitated by the curbing work shall be
performed by the Borough road crew at no expense to the abutting
property owner.
D. Any persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
section shall be prosecuted in the manner and to the extent provided by
Section 48 of the Act of July 10, 1947, P.L. 1621.106
106. Editor's Note: See now 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 316-21 HANOVER CODE § 316-21
1:518
ARTICLE V
Sidewalk Eating Establishments
[Adopted 5-27-2015 by Ord. No. 2218]
§ 316-22. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
as indicated:
ABUTTING PROPERTY — Property contiguous to a public street right-ofway
on which is located a public sidewalk.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The official of the Borough of Hanover
charged with enforcing the terms of this article as directed by the Borough
Manager and Borough Council.
EATING ESTABLISHMENT — A restaurant, cafe, coffee shop or other
business which holds a valid, current health license to serve prepared food
to the public and engages in said business.
GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT — The zoning district described in the
Hanover Zoning Ordinance107 which encompasses the area including and
surrounding the Hanover center square, which is primarily occupied by
retail stores, eating establishments and offices.
OUTDOOR SEATING AREA — That area of the public sidewalk used by
an abutting property owner for the sale, service and display of food and
beverage.
OWNER — The owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant by the entirety
or other owner of an interest in property which is contiguous to a street
right-of-way.
PEDESTRIAN WALKWAY — That portion of a sidewalk that is to be kept
free of any obstruction, fixture, appurtenance, tree, shrubbery or planting
in order to provide for the passage of pedestrian traffic.
PERSON — Includes a natural person, as well as partnership, corporation,
limited liability company, association, charitable entity, trust, estate or other
legal entity.
SIDEWALK — Any paved area between the curbline and a structure located
on an abutting property which is part of the public right-of-way and is used
by the public for primarily pedestrian travel.
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY — The entire right-of-way of a public street,
highway, road or alley, including any sidewalk located therein.
§ 316-23. Permit required; application.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, serve or display any food or
beverage on a sidewalk anywhere in the Borough of Hanover
107. Editor's Note: See Ch. 370, Zoning.
§ 316-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 316-23
1:519
§ 316-24. Conditions to be met.
(hereinafter the "Borough") without applying for and obtaining a permit
from the Borough.
B. The Borough shall accept applications for permits to use a sidewalk for
the sale, service or display of food or beverage on a sidewalk located in
the General Business District in the Borough on an application form
provided by the Borough, which application shall be accompanied by a
fee established by resolution of the Borough Council.
C. Applications for such use of the public sidewalk shall be reviewed by
the Code Enforcement Officer and Borough staff to determine
compliance with the terms hereof. Permits shall be issued in instances
in which the applicants have complied with all of the terms hereof and
with the requirements of the application.
D. The applicant shall specifically identify in the application the location of
the abutting property and the area of the sidewalk desired to be used
for the sale, service and display of food and beverage and describe in
detail the items of personal property, including, but not limited to,
tables, chairs, umbrellas, stools, podiums, counters, bars, planters,
waste receptacles, fences, railings and/or other barriers proposed to be
located therein. The application shall be accompanied by pictures of the
area to be so used as requested in the application.
A. Any applicant desiring to obtain a permit and the permittee who obtains
such a permit to use the public sidewalk for the sale, service and display
of food must meet the following conditions:
(1) The sidewalk and the abutting property must be located in the
General Business District as defined in the Hanover Borough
Zoning Ordinance.
(2) The sale, service and display of food on a sidewalk shall be
accessory to a lawful, permitted public eating establishment.
(3) Outside sale, service and display of food on a sidewalk is permitted
only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
(4) Personal property and accessories placed in the outdoor seating
area must not be attached, even in a temporary manner, to the
sidewalk or other public property or to any building or structure.
[Amended 6-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2270]
(5) The outdoor seating area shall be separated from the pedestrian
walkway by a fence, railing or other barrier which distinguishes the
seating area from the walkway.
(6) All food and beverages served to customers seated in the outdoor
seating area must be prepared within and/or provided by the eating
establishment to which the outdoor seating permit has been
§ 316-23 HANOVER CODE § 316-24
1:520
granted. All food and beverages served to customers seated in
the outdoor seating area must be consumed within said seating
area and not in the adjoining pedestrian walkway or outside said
seating area, unless such food and beverages are purchased from
the eating establishment for consumption off the premises (i.e.,
"take out").
(7) The applicant must comply with all federal, state and municipal
laws, ordinances and regulations in the use of the outdoor seating
area, including, but not limited to, all such laws, ordinances and
regulations related to the serving of food products in a clean and
sanitary condition; the sale, service and consumption of alcoholic
beverages; the generation of noise; the creation of public
disturbances and nuisances; and the disposal of garbage, litter and
trash.
(8) Prior to the issuance of a permit by the Borough, the applicant must
provide proof that all applicable federal, state and municipal
licenses and permits have been obtained. The permittee shall be
required to maintain such licenses and permits while it is operating
the outdoor seating area.
(9) The permittee shall, both during and after operating hours, police
the outdoor seating area, the public sidewalk and right-of-way and
neighboring properties in order to keep said areas free of trash,
litter and debris generated from the outdoor seating activities. The
permittee shall maintain a sufficient number of covered, outdoor
trash receptacles to minimize improper disposal of trash, litter and
debris and to reduce the presence of rodents, vermin and insect
infestation. Such receptacles shall be emptied as necessary but, in
any event, at least once per day.
(10) The area of sidewalk used by a permittee for outdoor seating shall
allow for a minimum clear pedestrian walkway of four feet in width
between the outdoor seating area and interior curbline in which no
obstructions, including, but not limited to, personal property,
furniture, accessories or barriers, as well as existing trees, waste
receptacles, fire hydrants, mailboxes, bus stops, benches,
streetlights or other public service facilities, shall impinge upon the
free flow of pedestrian traffic.
(11) The permittee shall not allow any disorderly conduct, loud or
boisterous behavior, or offensive language to emanate from the
outdoor seating area such as would be disturbing to neighboring
businesses, residents, pedestrians or members of the general
public using the public rights-of-way.
(12)No outdoor seating area shall obstruct, redirect or impinge upon
the free flow of stormwater on the sidewalk or public right-of-way.
(13)No awning, roof, sign or other overhead barrier shall extend over
the clear pedestrian walkway unless same provides for a minimum
§ 316-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 316-24
1:521
§ 316-25. Inspection; insurance; fees; permit term and renewal;
enforcement.
seven feet of clearance between the sidewalk and the overhead
obstacle and unless such obstacle has been specifically approved
by Borough Council.
(14)No outdoor seating area shall be permanently located on a raised
deck or platform or enclosed by fixed walls. Any temporary walls or
raised deck or platform shall be portable and stored indoors with
the other personal property located in the outdoor seating area
when the eating establishment is not open for business.
(15)No outdoor seating area shall obstruct ingress and egress from
neighboring businesses or properties, including the driveways or
walkways thereto, nor shall such seating areas block access to fire
hydrants, mailboxes, bus stops, benches, streetlights or other
public service facilities.
(16) All signs for the eating establishment and outdoor seating area
shall comply with the Hanover Borough Sign Ordinance, as from
time to time amended.108
(17)No food or beverages shall be served in the outdoor seating area
except to patrons of the eating establishment seated in the seating
area.
(18) All outdoor seating areas shall comply with the applicable
requirements of the International Fire Code as adopted by the
Borough of Hanover.
(19) Seating in the outdoor seating area shall be limited to one seat for
every 15 square feet in the seating area. No standing room for the
consumption of food or beverage shall be permitted.
A. All proposed and operating outdoor seating areas shall be subject to
inspection by the Code Enforcement Officer and other Borough staff
both prior to and subsequent to the granting of a permit.
B. Acceptance of an outdoor seating permit shall be an express
acknowledgment of and agreement to comply with the terms and
restrictions hereof and as set forth in the application. The grant and
usage of a permit is a privilege, not a right, and is therefore subject to
reasonable restrictions as set forth herein, in the application and as
otherwise promulgated by applicable regulatory authority.
C. A permit shall be valid for a period of one year unless suspended or
revoked as provided herein or unless the eating establishment is no
longer in operation.
108. Editor's Note: See Ch. 298, Signs; Street Encroachments.
§ 316-24 HANOVER CODE § 316-25
1:522
D. The applicant shall pay an application fee set from time to time by
resolution of Borough Council. In addition, the permittee shall pay an
annual permit renewal fee as set from time to time by resolution of
Borough Council in order to address the continuing costs of inspection
and the policing of outdoor seating areas.
E. Included in the requirements for an applicant/permittee for the
issuance or renewal of an outdoor seating permit shall be proof of
liability insurance in an amount fixed by resolution of Borough Council.
In addition, the applicant shall execute a hold harmless and
indemnification agreement in favor of the Borough against loss,
including legal fees, costs and expenses, resulting from injury to
persons and damage to property as a result, direct or indirect, of the
operation of an outdoor seating area.
F. Prior to the issuance of an outdoor seating permit, the Borough shall
determine that the applicant has obtained all applicable federal, state
and municipal permits and licenses and that the applicant, the property
and the proposed use of the outdoor seating area are all in compliance
with the terms hereof and any requirements set forth in the application.
G. Outdoor seating permits are not assignable or transferable to any other
person or legal entity. Any proposed transferee shall apply for its own
permit by completing the proper application form, paying the
application fee and complying with the terms hereof.
H. Prior to obtaining a permit, an applicant must provide proof that the
property owner of the property in which the eating establishment is
located consents to the granting of a permit for the proposed outdoor
seating area.
I. Permit renewal.
(1) Upon application for renewal, an outdoor seating permit will be
reviewed, and its complaint history, if any, shall be provided by the
Code Enforcement Officer, Police Department, Department of
Public Works, and Fire Department. Each department shall provide
to the Code Enforcement Officer copies of any inspection results,
complaints filed and citations issued concerning the outdoor
seating permit under consideration.
(2) Before a permit is renewed, the eating establishment and property
upon which the outdoor seating area is located must be compliant
with all applicable federal, state and local codes, ordinances and
regulations. The permittee seeking renewal of a permit shall
provide proof of such compliance to the Code Enforcement Officer
prior to the grant of a renewal.
J. Written notice of violations; suspension of permit. Upon finding by
either the Code Enforcement Officer or Police Department that a
permittee has violated any provisions of this section, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall give written notice to the permittee to
§ 316-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 316-25
1:523
correct said violation. Upon failure to correct said violation within
the time frame specified, the Code Enforcement Officer may take
appropriate action, as necessary, to insure compliance. The Code
Enforcement Officer may suspend the permittee's permit issued
pursuant to this section, as well as pursue prosecution in accordance
with the requirements herein. The Code Enforcement Officer shall give
a violator reasonable time to correct any violation of any provision of
this article. An appeal before Borough Council shall be accorded if
requested in writing and within 15 days from the date of the Code
Enforcement Officer's written notice of violation.
K. Violations and penalties; effect on eligibility for permit.
(1) Whoever violates any provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, be fined the amount
fixed by the Code of the Borough of Hanover as from time to time
amended, to be collected as other fines and costs are by law
collectible or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both. Each
day during which violation occurs shall constitute a separate
offense. Any person who is convicted of a violation of any of the
provisions of this section may have his permit suspended for one
full year and may not be eligible for another license until the
expiration of one full year from the date of the license suspension.
(2) In the event of one or more infractions to the provisions herein or
other violations of Borough ordinances in the operation of an
outdoor seating area, the permit may be revoked by the Code
Enforcement Officer. Prior to such revocation, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall give 10 days' written notice to the
permittee of his violation. If the permittee requests a hearing in
writing prior to the expiration of the ten-day notice period, the
Borough Council shall hold a hearing to determine if the permit
should be revoked. The permittee may present evidence in his own
behalf if he so desires. The decision in regard to the revocation
shall be in writing issued by Borough Council within 15 days of the
above hearing. If the permittee fails to request such a hearing, the
revocation shall become effective upon the expiration of the tenday
notice period. If a permit granted under this section is revoked,
all tables, chairs, and other appurtenances used as a part of the
outdoor seating area shall be immediately removed from the
sidewalk and the outdoor seating area shall not be used for the
sale, offering for sale, service or display of food or beverages.
(3) This section and the foregoing penalties shall not be construed to
limit or deny the right of the Borough or any person to such
equitable or other remedies as may otherwise be available with or
without process of law.
(4) Should a permittee fail to remove furniture, accessories, barriers
and other personal property from the public sidewalk as required
hereby, the Borough may, at its discretion, remove said items and
§ 316-25 HANOVER CODE § 316-25
1:524
store same as it deems appropriate. In such instances, the
permittee, in addition to all requirements hereof, shall reimburse
the Borough for all costs incurred to remove, transport and store
such personal property. All such personal property shall remain in
the possession of the Borough until all fines, fees and costs have
been paid in full. Should a permittee fail to pay such fines, fees
and costs within 90 days of the Borough's removal of said personal
property, the Borough shall be at liberty to sell or otherwise dispose
of such property as it deems appropriate.
L. Reservation of rights. Neither the adoption of this article nor the
granting of any permit pursuant hereto shall be construed as a waiver
of any right, privilege or immunity of the Borough of Hanover with
respect to streets and sidewalks, whether express or implied.
§ 316-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 316-25
1:525
Chapter 320
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 70.
Building regulations — See Ch. 150.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 170.
Parks and other public areas — See Ch. 259.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 286.
Sewer use regulations — See Ch. 290.
Shade trees — See Ch. 294.
Street openings and excavations — See Ch.
313.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 316.
Zoning — See Ch. 370.
§ 316-25 HANOVER CODE § 316-25
1:526
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 320-1. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted for the purpose of creating conditions favorable
to health, safety, morals and general welfare of the inhabitants of the
Borough of Hanover by regulating the design and construction of proposed
subdivisions and land development so as to assure the creation of sites
suitable for building purposes and human habitation, the harmonious
development of the Borough, the coordination of existing streets with
proposed streets, parks or other features of the official street plan of the
Borough, the creation of adequate open space for traffic, recreation and
light and air and the proper distribution of population and the protection of
water resources and drainageways.
§ 320-2. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements
for the promotion of the above purposes. Where the provisions of this
chapter impose greater restrictions than those of any other ordinance or
regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling. Where the
provisions of any other ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions
than this chapter, the provisions of such other ordinance or regulation shall
be controlling.
§ 320-3. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Hanover Borough
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 1959."
§ 320-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-3
1:527

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 320-4. Word usage.
As used in this chapter, words expressed in the singular include their
plural meanings and words expressed in the plural include their singular
meanings. The word "person" includes a corporation, its responsible officers
and an unincorporated association and a copartnership, as well as an
individual. The word "building" and "street" shall be construed as if followed
by the phrase "or part thereof." The word "shall" is to be interpreted as
mandatory; the word "may" as directory and complied with unless waived.
§ 320-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENT — Any person, other than the developer, who, acting for the
developer, submits to the Hanover Borough Council land development plans
for the purpose of obtaining approval thereof.
ALLEY — A right-of-way, generally no wider than 22 feet, providing service
access to the side or rear of lots.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, including
his heirs, successors and assigns, who has filed an application for
development, including but not limited to an application for a building
permit, for the approval of a subdivision plot or plan or for the approval of
a development plan.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior
to start of construction or development, including but not limited to an
application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plot or
plan or for the approval of a development plan.
AVERAGE LOT PRICE — This amount is determined by taking the
arithmetic average of all open market residential lot sales in Hanover
Borough for the previous year. Open market sales shall not include multiple
property/single consideration, nominal consideration, family member,
forced sale or partial interest.
BLOCK — An area bounded by streets.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all mobile homes and trailers used
for human habitation.
CARTWAY — The portion of a street or alley intended for vehicular use.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by the streets and by a line of sight between points on
their center lines 75 feet or more from the intersection of the center lines.
§ 320-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-5
1:529
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The official public document prepared in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 170
of 1988,109 as amended, consisting of maps, charts and textual material,
that constitutes a policy guide to decisions about the physical and social
development of Hanover Borough, as amended from time to time.
CORNER LOT — A lot with two adjacent sides abutting on streets which
has an interior angle of less than 135° at the intersection of the two street
lines. A lot abutting on a curved street shall be considered a corner lot if the
tangents to the curve at the point of intersection of the side lot lines with
the street line intersect at an interior angle of less than 135°.
DESIGNATED FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS — Those floodplain districts
specifically designated in the Hanover Borough Zoning Ordinance110 as
being inundated by floods, primarily the one-hundred-year flood. Included
would be areas identified as the Floodway District (FW), the Flood Fringe
District (FF) and the General Floodplain District (FA).
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
the permission of such landowner who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DRAINAGE — The flow of water or liquid waste and the methods of
directing such flow, whether natural or artificial.
DRIVEWAY — A minor vehicular right-of-way providing access between a
street and a parking area or garage within a lot or property.
DWELLING — A building designed and constructed for residential purposes
in which people live.
EASEMENT — A right granted for the use of private land for certain public
or quasi-public purposes; also the land to which such a right pertains.
ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
FRONTAGE — The horizontal or curvilinear distance along the street line
upon which a lot abuts.
FRONT BUILDING LINE — The building line directly adjacent to the major
or principal street for the building in question.
FUTURE RIGHT-OF-WAY —
GRADE — The slope expressed in a percent which indicates the rate of
change of elevation in feet per hundred feet.
The right-of-way width required for the expansion of existing streets to
accommodate anticipated future traffic loads.
A.
A right-of-way established to provide future access to or through
undeveloped land.
B.
109. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
110. Editor's Note: See Ch. 370, Zoning.
§ 320-5 HANOVER CODE § 320-5
1:530
GUTTER — That portion of a right-of-way carrying surface drainage.
IMPROVEMENT — Grading, paving, curbing, streetlights and signs, fire
hydrants, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains, sidewalks,
crosswalks, street shade trees and other items required for the welfare of
the property owners and the public.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — The improvement of one lot or two or more
contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner or other person having a
proprietary interest in land.
LOCATION MAP — A map showing the site with relation to adjoining areas.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
LOT AREA — The area contained within a lot, including the area of any
easement, but excluding space within any street.
LOT WIDTH — The required distance between the side property lines
measured along the front setback line.
MOBILE HOME — Refers to a dwelling type which may be a single mobile
home, a double-wide or attached modular units.
MULTIPLE-DWELLING BUILDING — A building providing separate living
quarters for three or more families.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that, on average, is likely to occur
once every 100 years, (i.e. that has a one-percent chance of occurring each
year, although the flood may occur in any year).
OWNER — The owner of record of a parcel of land.
PERFORMANCE BOND — An agreement by and between a contractor and
a bonding company in favor of the developer and the Borough guaranteeing
the completion of physical improvements.
PLAN — The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether
sketch, preliminary or final.
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether
proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on
a lot or lots, regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or
A.
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or prospective
occupants by means of or for the purpose of streets, commons areas,
leaseholds, condominium, building groups or other features; or
B.
C. A subdivision of land.
§ 320-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-5
1:531
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year flood elevation
plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land set aside for use as a street, alley, crosswalk or
utilities.
SETBACK — The required horizontal distance between a setback line and a
property or street line.
SETBACK LINE — A line within a property and parallel to a property or
street line which delineates the required minimum distance between a
structure and that property or street line.
SIDEWALK — A concrete walkway, continuous for a reasonable distance
and an integral part of the roadway, with or without a grass strip between
the curb or cartway edge and right-of-way constructed solely for use by
pedestrians.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The length of a street, measured along the center line,
which is continuously visible from a point four feet above the center line.
PLAN, SKETCH — An informal land development, not necessarily to
scale, indicating salient existing features of a tract and its surroundings
and the general layout of the proposed land development for discussion
purposes only and not to be presented for approval.
A.
PLAN, PRELIMINARY — A tentative land development plan, in lesser
detail than a final plan, showing the salient existing features of a tract
and its surroundings and approximate proposed street and lot layout as
a basis for consideration prior to preparation of a final plan.
B.
PLAN, FINAL — A complete and exact land development plan, prepared
for official recording, to define property rights and proposed streets
and other improvements.
C.
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other
public areas;
A.
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly
owned or operated facilities; and
B.
C. Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
SETBACK, FRONT — The distance between the street line and the front
setback line projected the full width of the lot. Commonly called "front
yard".
A.
SETBACK, REAR — The distance between the rear lot line and the rear
setback line projected the full width of the lot. Commonly called the
"rear yard".
B.
SETBACK, SIDE — The distance between the side lot line and the side
setback line projected from the front yard to the rear yard. Commonly
called "side yard".
C.
§ 320-5 HANOVER CODE § 320-5
1:532
STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, alley, viaduct and any other ways used or intended to be
used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether public or private, which
may also be used as a space for sewers, public utilities, shade trees and
sidewalks. A half-street is a street of less than required right-of-way width
(prohibited under § 320-26M). Streets are further classified as follows:
STREET GRADE — The officially established grade of the street upon which
a lot fronts or in its absence the established grade of other streets upon
which the lot abuts at the midway of the frontage of the lot thereon. If there
is no officially established grade, the existing grade of the street at such
midpoint shall be taken as the street grade.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by
any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land,
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of lease, transfer of ownership or building or lot development;
provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural
purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres not involving any new street or
easement of access or residential dwellings shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — A subdivision or land development can
be considered "substantially completed" where, in the judgment of the
Borough Engineer, at least 90% (based on the cost of the required
improvements for which financial security was posted) of those
improvements required as a condition for final approval have been
completed in accordance with the approved plan, so that the project will be
able to be used, occupied or operated for its intended use.
UNDEVELOPED LAND — Land in parcels sufficiently large for future land
development which is presently in agriculture, woodland or lying fallow.
MAJOR ARTERIALS — Limited-access highways that are important in
the inter-regional transportation system, with a major portion of the
vehicular movements being through traffic. Major arterials in Hanover
Borough include but are not limited to Baltimore Street, Carlisle Street,
York Street and Frederick Street.
A.
MINOR ARTERIALS — Highways that are important in the regional
transportation system and, while carrying mostly regional traffic, serve
some local or Borough origins and destinations.
B.
COLLECTORS — Roadways serving local traffic and providing the
connection between the residential, commercial and industrial
developments and the minor arterial systems.
C.
LOCAL ROADS — Roadways serving local traffic and connects to
collectors or minor arterials.
D.
CUL-DE-SAC — A street with an end open for public vehicular and
pedestrian access and the other end terminating in a vehicular
turnaround.
E.
§ 320-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-5
1:533

ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 320-6. Compliance required.
No subdivision or land development shall be made within the Borough of
Hanover, no street, alley, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main, utility
line or other improvements in connection therewith shall be laid out,
constructed, opened or dedicated for public use or travel or for the common
use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon, except in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. The subdivider/developer shall submit true
copies of his plans as generally required by the Borough Planning
Commission. The subdivider/developer shall also grade, pave and make
other street improvements to his subdivision/land development, including,
when required, the installation of curbs, street signs, fire hydrants, water
mains and laterals, sanitary sewer mains and laterals, gas mains and
laterals and storm sewers, in accordance with Borough standards and
specifications.
§ 320-7. Plan approval; improvements required.
A. No lot in any proposed subdivision/land development may be sold and
no permit to erect or alter any building upon land in a proposed
subdivision/land development may be issued and no building may be
erected or altered in a proposed subdivision/land development unless
and until a subdivision/land development plan has been approved and
properly recorded, and before approving any subdivision/land
development plan the Borough shall require that all the necessary
improvements in connection therewith have either been constructed
and approved by the Borough or the completion thereof has been
assured by means of a written agreement specifying the time of
completion, together with a proper completion guaranty in the form of a
bond or the deposit of funds or securities in escrow sufficient to cover
the cost of the required improvements, as estimated by the Borough
Engineer in accordance with regulations set forth in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.111 When requested by the subdivider/
developer, in order to facilitate financing, the governing body shall
furnish the developer with a signed copy of a letter indicating approval
of the final plat/lot contingent upon the subdivider/developer obtaining
a satisfactory financial security. The final plat/lot or record plan shall
not be signed, dated nor recorded until the performance bond is
executed. The letter of contingent approval shall expire and be deemed
to be revoked if the financial security/performance bond is not executed
within 90 days unless a written extension is granted by the governing
body; such extension shall not be unreasonably withheld and shall be
placed in writing at the request of the subdivider/developer.
111. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 320-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-7
1:535
§ 320-8. Recording; ownership of improvements.
The recording of an approved final plan shall make the plan a part of
the Borough's official plan of streets, highways, sewers, parks and other
public improvements. However, all such improvements shall be deemed to
be in private ownership, whether or not noted on the plan as dedicated
for public use, until such time as such improvements shall have been
specifically accepted or condemned by the Borough Council according to
law. While under private ownership, said improvements shall not be served,
maintained or improved by the Borough of Hanover.
§ 320-9. Variances.
Where The Planning Commission finds that extraordinary hardships may
result from strict compliance with the regulations of this chapter, or
abnormal conditions exist, it may vary regulations in specific instances
and establish standards for abnormal conditions, provided that such
modifications will not be contrary to the public interest and that the purpose
and intent of this chapter is observed. All requests for such modifications
must be in writing and shall accompany and be a part of the application
for subdivision/land development. The request shall state in full the grounds
and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which the request is based,
the provisions of this chapter involved and the minimum modification
necessary. Such modifications, to be effective, must be approved at an
official meeting by at least four members of the Planning Commission. The
granting of variations shall be conditional and subject to the approval of the
Hanover Borough Council at an official meeting thereof; the governing body
shall keep a written record of all action on all requests for modifications.
§ 320-10. Approval of final plans; appeals.
B. In those instances where the purchase of a bond or the usual deposit of
funds or securities is not possible or works a financial hardship on the
subdivider/developer, he may request that he be permitted to come
under the following provisions. Upon the written request of the
subdivider/developer and the submission of proof that the purchase of a
bond or the usual deposit of funds or securities is not possible or
feasible, the governing body may permit the subdivider/developer to
pay the costs of the required improvements out of the funds deposited
in escrow. The first 10% of the required deposit shall be left in escrow
until the improvements have been completed and approved by the
Borough and the maintenance bond procured. The remaining funds
held in escrow may then be used to pay construction bills as they come
due. Under no circumstances shall any of these escrow funds be
withdrawn or used without the signed approval of the Borough
Engineer.
A. A subdivider/developer, desiring to subdivide lots abutting upon an
existing improved street of the Borough of Hanover, of sufficient width,
may, in lieu of the procedure hereinafter set forth, submit final plans for
§ 320-7 HANOVER CODE § 320-10
1:536
approval or rejection to the Hanover Borough Subdivision Committee,
composed of the Borough Engineer, two members of the Borough
Planning Commission and two members of the Borough Council
Planning Committee. Said Borough Subdivision Committee shall be
authorized to approve or reject said plans, and action taken by said
Borough Subdivision Committee shall be noted or stamped on the
face of the plan over the signatures of all members of said Borough
Subdivision Committee. In the event that such plan is disapproved, the
reasons therefor shall be set forth, in writing, and given or sent to the
applicant.
B. Any person aggrieved by a decision of said Borough Subdivision
Committee may appeal to the Borough Council within 10 days after
such decision shall have been made. Such appeal shall be considered by
the Council at its next regular meeting. The decision of Council shall be
final.
§ 320-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-10
1:537

ARTICLE IV
Plan Review
§ 320-11. Approval by Council; appeals.
The Borough Council shall approve or disapprove subdivision/land
development plans, whether preliminary or final, after the plans have been
reviewed and recommendations for approval or disapproval are forwarded
by the Borough Planning Commission. Action taken by the Commission and
the Council shall be noted or stamped on the face of the plans over the
signature of the presiding officer and appropriate secretary. In the event
that plans are disapproved by either the Commission or Council, reasons
therefor shall be given in writing and a copy therefor shall be supplied to
the subdivider/developer. Appeals from the decision of the Borough Council
shall be taken to the Court of Common Pleas of York County and shall be
filed within 30 days after the entry of the decision.
§ 320-12. Review of plans; reports.
The Borough Planning Commission shall review all subdivision/land
development plans and ascertain their compliance with the Comprehensive
Plan for the physical development of the Borough. The Borough Manager
and Engineer shall render advice on each plan. The Engineer and Manager
shall report on preliminary plans through the Planning Commission. The
Borough Planning Commission shall transmit all reports on a preliminary
plan and final plans to the Borough Council.
§ 320-13. Sketch plan review.
§ 320-14. Preliminary plan review; approval.
A. Where a land development plan includes improvements, or in the case
of a subdivision plan, the developer/subdivider shall submit a minimum
of five paper copies of a sketch plan to the Planning Commission.
B. Such sketch plan will be considered as submitted for informal review
and discussion and shall not constitute formal filing of the plan with the
Borough.
C. The Borough will informally advise the developer/subdivider as
promptly as possible of the extent to which the proposed plan conforms
to the design standards of these regulations and will discuss any plan
modifications necessary to secure conformance.
A. Upon submission for approval of preliminary plans for all proposed land
development and subdivision requests, the developer/subdivider shall
submit a minimum of five paper copies and one Mylar copy to the
Borough Manager. The Borough Manager shall have such plans
reviewed with respect to their general conformity or lack of conformity
with the zoning, building, sanitation and other pertinent ordinances and
regulations of the Borough. The development, of course, must also
§ 320-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-14
1:539
comply with state and federal regulations. The Borough Manager, when
required by state and federal regulations, will require that the following
agencies be notified for review and recommendations, in writing, noting
that the plan has been received and will be considered for review at its
next scheduled meeting.
(1) Copies of the plan, a copy of a feasibility report on water and sewer
facilities and a copy of the plan module transmitted to the local
office of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
for review and recommendations.
(2) One copy transmitted to the local office of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation for review and recommendations
where the land development will front on an existing or proposed
state highway or has a proposed street entering on such a highway.
(3) One copy transmitted to the York County Planning Commission for
review.
(4) One copy transmitted to the local office of the Natural Resources
Conservation Service of the United States Department of
Agriculture for review and recommendations concerning erosion,
sediment and drainage control.
B. The Borough Manager shall report his findings to the Borough Planning
Commission.
C. The Borough Engineer shall also review such plans and report on their
general feasibility in regards to storm and sanitary drainage, utility
connections and such other technical matters as may seem pertinent.
He shall report his findings to the Borough Planning Commission.
D. The Borough Planning Commission shall review such plans as regards
to their functional design, compliance with the regulations set forth by
this chapter and general layout with regard to nearby streets and
community facilities. The Commission shall consult with the Borough
Manager and the Borough Engineer on any modifications it may wish to
recommend in the design of the subdivisions/land developments. The
Planning Commission shall discuss the plan with the developer/
subdivider or give him reasonable opportunity to be heard. The
Borough Planning Commission shall report its findings and those of the
Engineer and the Manager to the Borough Council or to a committee
thereof. The Commission shall transmit to the Borough Council a copy
of the approved plan showing any modifications which it recommends.
E. The Borough Council shall approve the plans, disapprove them or
approve them subject to specified conditions. This decision shall be
communicated to the applicant not later than 90 days following the date
of the regular meeting of the governing body or Planning Commission
next following the date the application is filed, provided that, should the
next regular meeting occur more than 30 days following the filing of the
application, the said ninety-day period shall be measured from the 30
§ 320-14 HANOVER CODE § 320-14
1:540
§ 320-15. Final plan review; approval; filing of copies.
The developer/subdivider shall submit to the Hanover Borough five paper
copies and one Mylar copy of the subdivision/land development plans to the
Borough Manager. The Borough Manager shall transmit one copy of the
plans to the Borough Planning Commission and one copy of the plans with
street and utility plans and profiles and the statement of type of buildings
to be erected to the Engineer. The Manager shall transmit the remaining
copies of the plans to the Council along with the Engineer's and Planning
Commission's reports.
days following the day the application was filed. Such action shall
be filed with the Engineer, Borough Planning Commission, Borough
Council and one copy with the developer/subdivider.
F. Approval of the preliminary plan shall not constitute approval of the
final plan, nor does it authorize recording of the preliminary plan or the
sale of any lots. However, such approval does authorize the subdivider/
developer to proceed with the preparation of a final plan for submission
to the Borough.
A. The Borough Planning Commission shall review the final plans for
conformity with previously approved preliminary plan as to general
layout and design. If the plan is found to be in conformity with the
preliminary plans, it shall notify the Engineer to proceed with technical
review. The Commission shall notify the Borough Manager of its
findings and return to him its copy of the final plans. If the plans are
found not to be in conformity with the preliminary plans, the
Commission shall report this finding to the Engineer and the Borough
Manager, who shall advise the subdivider on the points of
nonconformity.
B. The Engineer shall review conforming plans for technical compliance
with pertinent Borough regulations and ordinances relating to
construction standards and specifications. He shall estimate the cost of
construction and installation of required public improvements and shall
report his findings to the Borough Manager. He shall review
nonconforming plans only when instructed to do so by the Borough
Planning Commission.
C. The Borough Manager shall ascertain whether a plan also conforms
with the details of Borough zoning, health, building and other pertinent
ordinances, codes and regulations and whether any necessary
exceptions or variances thereto have been officially authorized by the
various Boards and Commissions having jurisdiction thereon. The
Borough Manager shall verify that all final plans comply with the state
and federal regulations as outlined in standards set for submission of
preliminary plans. The Manager shall also obtain from the Borough
Solicitor certification that the financial guaranties required by the
Borough are in proper legal form and duly executed. The Manager shall
§ 320-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-15
1:541
§ 320-16. Recording.
The subdivider/developer shall record a copy of the approved final plan in
the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of York County, Pennsylvania, within 90
days after the date of approval as defined in § 320-22 hereof. If the plans
are not recorded within the ninety-day period, the Borough approval of the
plans shall lapse and become void.
then transmit the plans and report his findings to the Planning
Commission.
D. Council shall act on the plans, after approval by the Commission, either
to approve or disapprove them, and its action shall be noted on the face
of the plans over the signature of the presiding officer, attested by the
Borough Secretary. This decision shall be communicated to the
applicant not later than 90 days following the date of the regular
meeting of the governing body or Planning Commission next following
the date the application is filed, provided that, should the next regular
meeting occur more than 30 days following the filing of the application,
the said ninety-day period shall be measured from the 30 days following
the day the application was filed.
E. Adequate guaranty for construction and maintenance of required public
improvements shall consist of a bond or the deposit of funds or
securities in escrow guaranteeing the construction and installation of
the improvements and a bond providing a maintenance guaranty for the
improvements of one year after the acceptance of said improvements by
the Borough. Said construction and maintenance of public
improvements shall be deemed to include the restoration or alteration
of existing streets affected by the proposed construction. All such bonds
or other guaranties must be acceptable to the Borough Solicitor, and
the accounts shall be determined on the basis of the Borough
Engineer's estimate of the costs of construction and installation of the
required public improvements.
F. One copy of the approved plan shall be a Mylar original to be filed with
the Borough Engineer, and another copy of the plans as acted upon
shall be filed with the Planning Commission. Additional copies may be
returned to the subdivider.
G. When plans have been approved, copies thereof, including record
copies, may be certified from the minute book by the Borough Secretary
to have been duly approved by the Borough Council.
§ 320-15 HANOVER CODE § 320-16
1:542
ARTICLE V
Approval Procedure
§ 320-17. Sketch plans.
§ 320-18. Preliminary plans.
A. This step does not require formal application, fee or filing of plan with
the Planning Commission.
B. Previous to the filing of an application for conditional approval of the
preliminary plan (general subdivision plan), the subdivider/developer
shall submit to the Borough Manager plans and data as specified in
§ 320-20.
C. Within 15 days, the Planning Commission shall inform the subdivider/
developer that the plans and data as submitted or as modified do or do
not meet the objectives of these regulations. When the Planning
Commission finds that the plans and data do not meet the objectives of
these regulations, it shall express its reasons therefor.
D. The subdivider/developer who wishes to subdivide or alter a lot or
several lots within a block shall submit to the Borough Manager plans
and data as specified in § 320-20. When these plans have been approved
by the Planning Commission, the subdivider/developer may next submit
final plans which are to be prepared as specified by the Planning
Commission.
A. On reaching conclusions, informally as recommended in § 320-17
above, regarding his general program and objectives, the subdivider/
developer shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plan, together with
improvement plans and other supplementary material as specified in
§ 320-21.
B. Five paper and one Mylar copy of the preliminary plan and
supplementary material specified shall be submitted to the Borough
Manager with written application for conditional approval at least five
working days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered. On
receipt of the plans, the Borough Manager shall forward one copy to the
Engineer, one copy to York County and three copies to the Borough
Planning Commission. Copies of the supporting data shall be
transmitted to the Planning Commission and the Engineer.
C. Following review of the preliminary plan and other material submitted
for the conformity thereof to these regulations and negotiations with
the subdivider/developer on changes deemed advisable and the kind
and extent of improvements to be made by him, the Planning
Commission shall, within 40 days, act thereon as submitted or modified,
and, if approved, the Planning Commission shall express its approval as
conditional approval and state the conditions of such approval, if any, or
if disapproved, shall express its disapproval and its reasons therefor.
§ 320-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-18
1:543
§ 320-19. Final plans.
D. The action of the Planning Commission shall be noted on two copies of
the preliminary plan, referenced and attached to any conditions
determined. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider/developer
and the other retained by the Planning Commission.
E. Conditional approval of a preliminary plan shall not constitute approval
of the final plan (subdivision plan). Rather it shall be deemed an
expression of approval to the layout submitted on the preliminary plan
as a guide to the preparation of the final plan which will be submitted
for approval of the Planning Commission and for recording upon
fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations and the conditions
of the conditional approval, if any.
F. When application for approval of a preliminary plan has been approved
without conditions or approved by the applicant's acceptance of
conditions, no subsequent change or amendment in Chapter 370,
Zoning, this chapter or other governing ordinance or plan shall be
applied to affect adversely the right of the applicant to commence and
to complete any aspect of the approved development in accordance
with the terms of such approval within five years from such approval.
A. The final plan shall conform substantially to the preliminary plan as
approved, and, if desired by the subdivider/developer, it may constitute
only that portion of the approved preliminary plan which he proposes to
record and develop at the time; provided, however, that such portion
conforms to all requirements of these regulations.
B. Applications for approval of the final plan shall be submitted in writing
to the Planning Commission at least five working days prior to the
meeting at which it is to be considered.
C. Five paper and one Mylar copy of the final plan and other exhibits
required for approval shall be prepared as specified in Article VI and
shall be submitted to the Planning Commission within 24 months after
approval of the preliminary plan; otherwise, such approval shall
become null and void unless an extension of time is applied for and
granted by the Planning Commission.
D. When an application for approval of a final plan has been approved
without conditions or approved by the applicant's acceptance of any
conditions, no subsequent change or amendment in Chapter 370,
Zoning, this chapter or other governing ordinance or plan shall be
applied to affect adversely the right of the applicant to commence and
to complete any aspect of the approved development in accordance
with the terms of such approval within five years from such approval.
§ 320-18 HANOVER CODE § 320-19
1:544
ARTICLE VI
Submittal Requirements
§ 320-20. Sketch plans.
Sketch plan of proposed layout of streets and other pertinent features.
The sketch plan may be a freehand pencil sketch made directly on an
available print of the land in question. In any event, the sketch plan shall
include such data as the Planning Commission determines is necessary for
its consideration of the proposal and be accompanied by an application for
subdivision/land development review.
§ 320-21. Preliminary plans.
The subdivider/developer shall submit the materials described in this
section to the Borough Manager with his application for review and
approval of his preliminary plan.
A. Five paper and one Mylar copy of the subdivision/land development
plan in the form of a map or series of maps drawn on sheets 17 inches
by 22 inches or 34 inches by 44 inches to a scale of either 50 feet or 100
feet to the inch and showing the following:
(1) The limits and dimensions of the tract to be subdivided/developed,
the name of the subdivision/land development, scale and date.
(2) Existing and proposed streets, including the widths of the right-ofway
and cartway, names for proposed streets and proposed lot
layout.
(3) The name and address of the subdivider/developer and the name,
seal and signature of the engineer, architect or surveyor who
prepared the plan.
(4) A key map acceptable to the Borough Engineer drawn to
approximate scale, showing clearly the location of the proposed
subdivision/land development in relation to adjacent properties and
any remaining adjoining unsubdivided land owned by the
subdivider/developer, existing streets and any proposed
connections with existing sewer and water facilities.
B. Two copies of a sketch showing the proposed order of development of
parts of the subdivision and/or land development if the subdivider/
developer intends to complete the development in parts. The approval
of an order of development shall be a condition to the approval of all
preliminary plans; and if a subdivider/developer decides, after his
preliminary plans have been approved, to proceed by submitting his
final plans a section at a time or to alter a previously approved order of
development, he shall submit his proposed order of development for
approval before proceeding with the submittal of final plans.
§ 320-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-21
1:545
§ 320-22. Final plans.
The subdivider/developer shall submit subdivision and/or land development
plans and supporting material to the Borough Manager with his application
for their approval. Final plans shall conform in all important details with
preliminary plans as approved. Any conditions specified in the approval of
preliminary plans shall be incorporated in the final plans. The following
materials shall be submitted by the subdivider:
(1) A map showing the proposed subdivision and/or land development
with respect to any designated floodplain district, including
information on the one-hundred-year flood elevations.
(2) Where the subdivision and/or land development lies partially or
completely within any designated floodplain district or where such
activities border on any designated floodplain district, the
preliminary plan map shall include the following information:
(a) The location and elevation of proposed roads, utilities and
building sites, fills, flood or erosion protection facilities.
(b) The one-hundred-year flood elevations and areas shown on
designated floodplain districts.
(c) Areas subject to special deed restrictions. All such maps shall
show contours at intervals of two feet or five feet depending
upon the slope of the land and identify accurately the
boundaries of the designated floodplain districts.
A. Five paper and one Mylar copy of the subdivision and/or land
development plan with key map, if any, on sheets either 17 inches by 22
inches or 34 inches by 44 inches in the form of a map or series of maps
drawn to a scale of either 50 feet or 100 feet to the inch. Such map or
maps shall be made of permanent materials. Two copies shall be clothprint
duplicates. The error of closure shall not be more than one part in
10,000. Such final subdivision/land development plans shall show:
(1) The limits and dimensions of the tract to be subdivided and/or
developed, the name of the subdivision/development, scale and
date.
(2) Existing and proposed streets, including the widths of the right-ofway
and cartway and names for proposed streets.
(3) The proposed lot layout with dimensions, building setback lines and
approved location of sidewalks.
(4) The location of existing buildings, easements, rights-of-way, public
lands, tree masses, streams and other such features and
monuments.
(5) The location and dimensions of proposed easements, rights-of-way
and land reserved for public purposes.
§ 320-21 HANOVER CODE § 320-22
1:546
(6) Lot lines defined by bearings and distances as they will be defined
by the deed for the individual lots.
(7) The area of each lot in square feet where it is not apparent it meets
requirements.
(8) The location of all physical structures within 75 feet of the tract to
be subdivided/developed.
(9) The location of permanent reference monuments (Article VII,
§ 320-33), or the plan shall indicate where such monuments will be
placed after street construction and grading of terrain have been
completed. The location, description and elevation of permanent
benchmarks required by the Borough Engineer shall be shown.
(10) Topographic map at vertical intervals of two feet for land with an
average slope of 4% or less and at vertical intervals of five feet for
more steeply sloping land. Final contours shall be shown separately
on a plan also showing proposed drainage facilities.
(11) The name and address of the subdivider/developer and the name,
seal and signature of the engineer, architect or surveyor who
prepared the plans.
(12) A key map acceptable to the Borough Engineer drawn to
approximate scale, showing clearly the location of the proposed
subdivision/land development in relation to adjacent properties and
any remaining adjoining unsubdivided and/or undeveloped land
owned by the subdivider/developer, existing streets and any
connections with existing sewer and water facilities.
(13) Certification of title.
(14) Location of description of property as recorded in the County
Recorder of Deeds Office, i.e., book, page and line number.
B. Five copies of a utility map or maps, showing tract boundaries, existing
and proposed streets, lot lines, sanitary and stormwater sewer
facilities, gas lines, water pipes, curbs, sidewalks, fire hydrants,
manholes and monuments or any other utilities underground or above.
The exact location and elevation of all proposed buildings, structures,
roads and public utilities to be constructed within any designated
floodplain district shall be shown.
C. One copy of any deed restrictions affecting the subdivision/
development of the property or a written statement by the subdivider/
developer that there are no such restrictions.
D. A statement of the type or types of structures to be erected, if any,
together with sketches of typical lot layouts, indicating front, side and
rear yards.
§ 320-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-22
1:547
E. The final plans shall specify that all streets, rights-of-way, utilities and
other properties designated for public use shall be dedicated to the
Borough of Hanover and shall state that the subdivider/developer shall
release the Borough from all damages in connection with said
dedication.
F. Submission of the final plan involving floodplains shall also be
accompanied by all required permits and related documentation from
the Department of Environmental Protection and any other
commonwealth agency or local municipality where any alteration or
relocation of a stream or watercourse is proposed. In addition,
documentation shall be submitted indicating that all affected adjacent
municipalities have been notified of the proposed alteration or
relocation. The Department of Community and Economic Development
and the Federal Insurance Administrator shall also be notified
whenever any such activity is proposed.
G. A final plat which required access to a highway under the jurisdiction of
the Department of Transportation shall not be finally approved unless
the plat contains a notice that a highway occupancy permit is required
pursuant to Section 420 of the Act of June 1, 1945 (P.L. 1242, No. 428)
known as the "State Highway Law,"112 before driveway access to a state
highway is permitted.
112. Editor's Note: See 36 P.S. § 670-101 et seq.
§ 320-22 HANOVER CODE § 320-22
1:548
ARTICLE VII
Design Standards
§ 320-23. General provisions.
In considering the adequacy of subdivision/land development plans, the
Borough government and its agents shall apply the standards contained in
this article.
§ 320-24. Conformance with other standards.
§ 320-25. Blocks and lots.
A. Land. Land shall be suited to the purpose for which it is to be
subdivided, and its proposed use shall be in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 370, Zoning. Land subject to hazards to life,
health or property shall not be subdivided for residential purposes until
all such hazards have been eliminated or unless adequate safeguards
against such hazards are provided by the subdivision/land development
plan.
B. Development. Proposed subdivision/land developments shall be
coordinated with existing nearby neighborhoods so that the community
as a whole may develop harmoniously in conformance with the
Comprehensive Plan.
A. Blocks.
(1) Block length. Blocks shall generally be not less than 500 feet long
nor more than 1,600 feet long. Where practicable, blocks along
arterial and secondary street shall not be less than 1,200 feet long
and 800 feet long, respectively. Crosswalks at least 12 feet wide
may be required in blocks more than 1,000 feet long or as may be
necessary to facilitate pedestrian circulation and give access to
community facilities.
(2) Block depth. Blocks shall be deep enough for two tiers of lots and
shall not be less than 200 feet deep, except where reverse frontage
lots are used or required.
B. Lots.
(1) Through lots. Double frontage lots are to be avoided and generally
will not be permitted unless the lots are a minimum of 200 feet
deep.
(2) Lot lines. Lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines or radial
thereto wherever practicable, and they shall follow municipal
boundaries rather than cross them.
§ 320-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-25
1:549
(3) House numbers and street names. House numbers shall be
assigned to each lot by the Borough Engineer and street names
reviewed by Borough Council and Emergency Services.
(4) Exceptions. Blocks in commercial and industrial districts may vary
from the elements of design contained in this section if the nature
of the use requires other treatment.
(5) Lot size. Lot dimensions and areas shall be of the sizes established
and provided in the "Hanover Zoning Ordinance of 1961,"
Ordinance No. 1110, and the amendments thereof, as may from
time to time be enacted and ordained.113
(6) Lot shape. Generally, the depth of lots shall be not less than equal
their width nor more than 2 1/2 times their width.
(7) Driveway access. In general, driveway access to arterial streets will
not be permitted; but where such access is permitted to an arterial
street, adequate turnaround space shall be provided on the lot.
Driveway access shall not be closer than 40 feet from the tangent
point of the curb radius to any street intersection.
(8) Building line. Adequate front and side yard areas shall be provided
as follows:
(a) The final plan shall specify building lines for all lots included
therein.
(b) Front, side and rear building lines shall be not less than the
distance established and provided in the "Hanover Zoning
Ordinance of 1961," Ordinance No. 1110, and the amendments
thereof, as may from time to time be enacted and ordained.114
C. Where not prohibited by this or any other laws or ordinances, land
located in any designated floodplain district may be platted for
development with the provision that the developer construct all
buildings and structures to preclude flood damage in accordance with
this and any other laws and ordinances regulating such development.
D. Building sites for residences or any other type of dwelling or
accommodations shall not be permitted in any designated floodway
district. Sites for these uses may be permitted outside the floodway
district if the sites or dwelling units are elevated up to the regulatory
flood elevation. If fill is used to raise the elevation of a site, the fill area
shall extend out laterally for a distance of at least 15 feet beyond the
limits of the proposed structures.
E. Building sites for structures or buildings other than for residential uses
shall also not be permitted in any designated floodway district. Also,
113. Editor's Note: See Ch. 370, Zoning.
114. Editor's Note: See Ch. 370, Zoning.
§ 320-25 HANOVER CODE § 320-25
1:550
§ 320-26. Streets.
such sites for structures or buildings outside the floodway shall be
protected as provided for in Subsection D above. However, the Borough
Council may allow the subdivision and/or development of areas or sites
for commercial and industrial uses at an elevation below the regulatory
flood elevation if the developer otherwise protects the area to that
height or assures that the buildings or structures will be floodproofed
at least up to that height.
F. If the Borough Council determines that only a part of a proposed plat
can be safely developed, it shall limit development to that part and shall
require that development proceed consistent with this determination.
G. When a developer does not intend to develop the plat himself and the
Borough Council determines that additional controls are required to
ensure safe development, it may require the developer to impose
appropriate deed restrictions on the land. Such deed restrictions shall
be inserted in every deed and noted on every recorded plat.
A. Arrangement. The proposed street pattern shall be integrated with
existing streets and the Borough plan of streets and shall be related to
topography so as to produce usable lots and reasonable street grades
throughout the subdivision. No remnants of land shall be left without
street frontage or access. Residential streets shall be laid out so as to
discourage their use as secondary streets and arterial streets.
B. Grading. The full width of the right-of-way shall be graded to conform to
the established curb elevations, and provisions shall be made for
reasonable slopes beyond the right-of-way.
C. Right-of-way and cartway width.
(1) Street. The minimum widths of the right-of-way and the cartway
shall not be less than those of an existing street of which the new
street is to be a continuation, nor less than the following:
Width
(in feet)
Type of Street Right-of-Way Cartway
Residential 50 34
Secondary 60 40
Arterial 80 40*
*NOTE: The Borough shall be responsible at its own expense or at
the expense of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation for
any additional cartway width.
(2) Culs-de-sac.
§ 320-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-26
1:551
(a) The minimum widths of the right-of-way and the cartway shall
not be less than the following:
Width
(in feet)
Number of Families
According to
Subdivision Plan Right-of-Way Cartway
5 or more 50 34
Under 5 50 26
(b) A cul-de-sac will not be approved when a through street is
needed to assure traffic circulation and to provide access to an
area or neighborhood. In general, culs-de-sac are desirable
residential streets; however, a cul-de-sac shall not be more
than 400 feet long nor less than 250 feet. A cul-de-sac shall
have a circular turnaround with a minimum right-of-way radius
of 50 feet and an outer paving radius of 40 feet.
D. Intersections.
(1) Right-of-way. Whenever practicable, right-of-way lines shall
intersect at right angles, and intersections of less than 70°
(measured at the center line of the streets) will not be permitted.
(2) Arterial streets. Whenever practicable, intersections with arterial
streets shall be kept to a minimum and shall be located at least
1,200 feet apart.
(3) No more than two streets shall cross at the same point.
(4) Intersecting streets shall not enter into the same side of secondary
traffic streets at intervals of less than 800 feet. Residential streets
which enter secondary traffic streets from opposite sides should be
directly opposite to each other; or, if necessary, they may be
separated by at least 200 feet between center lines measured along
the center line of the secondary traffic street.
(5) Maximum grade, within any intersection, shall not exceed 2%, and
approaches to any intersection shall follow a straight course within
100 feet of the intersection. A leveling area at least 50 feet long
(measured from the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting
street) shall be provided within which no grade shall exceed 4%.
(6) Intersections should be designed with a corner radius for pavement
that is adequate to accommodate the largest vehicles anticipated.
Usually, a minimum edge radius of 50 feet is acceptable except on
local access roads with few trucks where a radius of 35 feet may be
used. The street right-of-way line shall be parallel to the curbline.
In zones where buildings are permitted to abut the right-of-way
§ 320-26 HANOVER CODE § 320-26
1:552
line, a diagonal cutoff may be employed. The grade lines of the
curbs at intersections shall intersect if the tangents are extended.
The Planning Commission shall have the authority to require a
greater radius in specific cases.
(7) A seventy-five-foot drivers' eye height of 3 1/2 feet shall be
provided, in which no permanent structures, fences, hedges, walls,
plantings or other obstructions shall be placed except for utility
poles, light standards, street signs and fire hydrants at all
intersections.
(8) In designated floodplains, the finished elevation of street shall not
be more than one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
E. Alignment.
(1) Sight distance. A sight distance at the center line of at least 900
feet on arterial streets, 200 feet on secondary streets and 100 feet
on residential streets at drivers' eye height of 3 1/2 feet shall be
provided with respect to vertical and horizontal alignment.
(2) Horizontal curves. Changes in street direction shall be made by
horizontal curves. Horizontal curves shall have a minimum radius
on the center line of 1,000 feet on arterial streets, 500 feet on
secondary streets and 100 feet on residential streets. A long radius
curve shall be used rather than a series of curves connected by
short tangents. Reverse curves shall be separated by tangents of 50
feet or more on residential streets and 150 feet on secondary and
arterial streets. Proper superelevation and additional width shall
be provided for curves of less than 600 feet radius on secondary
streets and of less than 300 feet radius on residential streets.
Minimum-radius curves, at the end of long tangents, are to be
avoided.
(3) Vertical curves. Vertical curves are required for changes in grade
greater than 1%. The rate of change of grade on vertical curves
shall be no more than 4% per 100 feet of road, provided that the
clear sight distance specified in these regulations is maintained at
all points along the center line.
(4) Grades. There shall be a minimum center-line grade of 1/2% and a
maximum center line grade of 6% on all streets. For short
distances, grades exceeding the maximum limits may be permitted
on recommendation of the Borough Engineer.
F. Surface drainage. The slope of the crown on proposed streets shall be
more than 1/8 inch per foot and less than 1/2 inch per foot as directed
by the Borough Engineer. Adequate drainage shall be provided for at
low points along streets and where required to intercept runoff.
Facilities shall be designed to handle a five-minute storm duration at a
ten-year frequency. The standard and criteria for street drainage
systems shall be the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Design
§ 320-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-26
1:553
Manual Part 2, Chapter 10, Drainage Design and Related Procedures
(January 1990 Edition, as amended).115
G. Curbs. Curbs shall be constructed for the full length of all streets. The
difference in curb elevation on opposite sides of a street shall not be
greater than six inches. Alleys shall be provided with a lip curb.
H. Pavements of all streets. The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Specifications of 1990, as amended,
Publication 408, shall be used as a minimum standard unless otherwise
approved by the Borough Engineer.
(1) Subgrade. This work is preparation of the roadbed as specified in
Publication 408/210.
(2) Geotextiles. This work is the furnishing and installing of geotextiles
as determined by the Borough Engineers.
(3) Base courses. This work at the discretion of the Borough Engineer
as to necessity or thickness is the construction of plant-mixed
bituminous concrete base course specified in Publication 408/300.
(4) Subbase. On an approved subgrade there shall be constructed an
eight-inch (residential) or ten-inch (secondary) thickness, when
compacted, conforming to Section 350, 1990 Edition or, at the
request of the Engineer, Section 310, Crushed Aggregate Base
Course, 1976 Edition.
(5) Flexible rigid pavements. This work is the construction of plantmixed
bituminous concrete courses and normal- or high-strength
cement concrete pavement on a prepared surface. All flexible
pavement shall incorporate an aggregate blend to provide a skid
resistance level to match the projected ten-year average daily
traffic with Type G used as a minimum.
(6) Drainage. Subdrains shall be installed as determined by the
Borough Engineer to assure adequate soil-bearing value of the
subgrade of all pavements.
I. Street names and signs. All streets in the proposed subdivision must be
named on the preliminary and on the final plans, and the names
selected will be subject to the approval of the Planning Commission and
the Borough Council. No street name shall be used which will duplicate
or be confused with the name of an existing street in the Borough.
Existing street names shall be protected whenever possible. Signposts
and nameplates approved by the Borough authorities shall be placed at
street intersections.
115. Editor's Note: Said manual is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 320-26 HANOVER CODE § 320-26
1:554
§ 320-27. Sidewalks.
Sidewalks shall be required, and the location of said sidewalks shall be
shown on the final plan. Such sidewalks shall be installed in accordance
with Chapter 316, Article IV, Sidewalk, Curb and Gutter Construction, of
the Code of the Borough of Hanover and its amendments.
§ 320-28. Alleys.
The following standards shall apply to the design and location of alleys:
J. Obstructions. No fences, hedges, walls, plantings or other obstructions
shall be located within the right-of-way unless approved by the
jurisdicting authority.
K. Adjacent access. Street layout shall make reasonable provisions for
access to adjacent undeveloped areas, and the subdivider/developer
shall improve these access streets to the limits of the subdivision. Such
access streets need not be provided with turnarounds unless specially
required.
L. Reserve strips. Reserve strips or land remnants controlling access to
the subdivision or to adjacent areas are prohibited.
M. Half-streets. Provision of half-streets, except to complete existing halfstreets,
is prohibited.
N. Railroad influence. Where a subdivision abuts a railroad or trolley line,
streets crossing the rail line shall be kept to a minimum and placed to
facilitate grade separation.
O. Dedication of required street width. The required width of a street shall
be dedicated on the subdivision side of an existing boundary street or
road.
A. Public alleys shall be permitted in residential developments. Efforts to
create public and private alleys or driveways shall be encouraged to
permit parking at the rear of lots and eliminate the need for vehicles to
back into public streets in order to gain street access and provide
service access to the side or rear of lots. Alleys shall be 20 feet wide and
paved as required by the Borough Engineer for full width. [Amended
11-25-2003 by Ord. No. 2073]
B. Alleys serving commercial and industrial establishments are required
unless other provisions for service are approved. Alleys serving such
establishments shall have a paved cartway of at least 22 feet.
C. If it is impossible for an alley to go through a block, the alley shall be
provided with an adequate turnaround at its closed end. Alley
intersections shall be avoided; but, where necessary, corners shall be
rounded or cut back sufficiently to permit safe vehicular circulation
with an unobstructed sight triangle.
§ 320-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-28
1:555
§ 320-29. Construction standards.
Materials and construction standards for streets, curbs and gutters and
sidewalks shall conform to regulations and standards of the Borough
Engineer; and construction and installation of all facilities shall be subject
to inspection by appropriate Borough officials.
§ 320-30. Stormwater and drainage.
Storm drainage shall be designed in accordance with the PennDOT Design
Manual Part 2, Chapter 10, Drainage Design and Related Procedures, as
amended.
D. Surface drainage. Alleys shall be constructed with a depressed center,
and the slope of the depression shall not be less than 1/8 inch per foot
nor more than 1/2 inch per foot as directed by the Borough Engineer.
Adequate drainage shall be provided for at low points along alleys and
where required to intercept runoff. Facilities shall be designed to
handle a maximum runoff as required by surface drainage of streets
under § 320-26.
A. Location. When installed within the right-of-way, storm sewers shall be
located behind the curb.
B. Size and grade. Storm sewers shall have a minimum diameter of 15
inches and a minimum flow velocity of three feet per second.
C. Manholes. Manholes shall not be more than 300 feet apart where pipe
sizes of 24 inches or less are used and not more than 450 feet apart
where larger sizes are installed. When approved by the Borough
Engineer, inlets may be substituted for manholes.
D. Change in direction. All change in alignment of pipe shall require a
junction box with access or standard manhole.
E. Inlets. Where required by the Borough Engineer, open-mouth inlets
approximately four feet eight inches wide shall be used on streets with
grades of 5% or less. A double open-mouth inlet shall be used on streets
with grades of more than 5%. Inlets at street intersections shall be
placed on the tangent and not on the curved portions. In designated
flood areas, inlets shall be sufficient to discharge flood flows without
unduly increasing flood heights.
F. Castings. Manhole frames and covers shall be obtained from the
Borough at the applicant's expense unless otherwise specified.
G. Stormwater roof drains. Stormwater roof drains and pipes shall not
discharge water over a sidewalk but shall extend under the sidewalk to
the gutter. Where accessible, the roof drain shall be connected with the
storm sewers.
§ 320-28 HANOVER CODE § 320-30
1:556
§ 320-31. Utilities.
H. Lot drainage. Lots or land development shall be laid out and graded to
provide positive drainage away from new and existing buildings. The
rate and quantity of runoff shall not exceed the predevelopment
conditions.
I. Where an area being developed has a high groundwater table or a
continuous flowing spring, the Borough Engineer and the Planning
Commission may establish standards and regulations to properly
handle the problem, or they may require that all contiguous structures
be erected on a reinforced concrete slab approved by the Borough
Engineer and Planning Commission in accordance with Article III,
§ 320-9.
J. In designated floodplains, a primary underground system and a
secondary surface system to accommodate one-hundred-year flood
levels may be required. Such drainage plans shall be consistent with
local and regional plans. The facilities shall be designed to prevent
discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
A. Connections. All properties shall be connected to the municipal sanitary
sewer system, gas mains and the public water supply system if
accessible and determined by Borough Council. The subdivider/
developer shall install sewer lines and laterals, gas mains and laterals
and water mains and laterals. Where the sewer is not yet accessible but
planned for extension to the subdivision, the subdivider/developer shall
install sewer lines and laterals. The sewer lines shall be suitably capped
at the limits of the subdivision, and the laterals shall be capped at the
street right-of-way line if not extended to the houses. When capped
sewers are required, on-site disposal facilities shall also be provided. A
sewer shall be considered to be planned for extension to a given area
any time after preliminary engineering and related studies have been
initiated preparatory to the construction of facilities adequate to serve
the area containing the subdivision.
B. Installation. Installation of all sewer, water and other utilities shall be in
strict accordance with the engineering standards and specifications of
the Borough Engineer, municipal authority or other public utility
concerned. Where feasible, utilities shall be installed underground
between the curb and sidewalk or in easements in the rear of the lot
instead of in the street or overhead. All water lines, sanitary sewer
lines, gas lines, electrical lines and all other public and private utilities
and facilities located in any designated floodplain districts, whether
public or private utilities, shall be elevated or floodproofed up the
regulatory flood elevation.
C. Manholes. Manholes for sanitary sewers shall be not more than 300 feet
apart on straight runs, and there shall be a manhole at every point of
substantial change in course or grade and at intersections of sewer
lines. Manhole frames and covers may be obtained from the Borough at
§ 320-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-31
1:557
§ 320-32. Inspections.
§ 320-33. Monuments.
Permanent reference monuments of precast concrete or durable stone, at
least five inches in diameter and at least 36 inches in length, set flush with
the applicant's expense. The Borough of Hanover shall prohibit
installation of sewage disposal facilities requiring soil absorption
systems where such systems will not function due to high groundwater,
flooding or unsuitable soil characteristics or are proposed for location
in designated floodplain districts.
D. Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be located so that the distance from
any building frontage to a fire hydrant is not more than 600 feet
measured along the curb. On recommendation of the Fire
Commissioner,116 closer spacing of hydrants may be required.
E. Easements. Wherever necessary to facilitate the installation, operation
and maintenance of all utility lines, whether pipe, wire or cable,
easements shall be required. Where these easements are required by
the Planning Commission, they shall be at least six feet in width on the
side property lines at least 10 feet in width on rear property lines of lots
so restricted. Under no circumstances shall a permanent structure
other than a utility pole or similar equipment be located on an easement
(driveways, parking areas, walkways, etc. excepted). The subdivider/
developer shall provide for these easements on the respective deeds for
any lot or tract in his subdivision/land development so restricted.
Electric and telephone lines shall normally be carried along the rear of
lots. They shall coincide with property lines wherever practical. The
location of each underground utility shall be coordinated with the
location of all other underground utilities and subject to the approval of
the Borough Engineer.
F. Underground utilities shall be installed before the streets are
constructed, and streets shall be graded to within six inches of finished
subgrade before work is started on the buildings to be served by them.
G. The finished elevation of proposed streets in flood districts shall not be
more than the one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
A. Notice. The Borough Manager shall be notified 24 hours in advance of
the commencement of any construction operation, in order that
provision may be made for inspection by the Borough.
B. Samples of materials. Samples of materials shall be furnished to the
Borough, if required by the Borough Manager.
116. Editor's Note: Section 1 of Ord. No. 2216, adopted 4-22-2015, states that all references to
the title "Fire Commissioner" in Ch. 43 and other chapters and sections of the Code shall
include the title of "Fire Chief" or other position designated by the Borough Council as
the senior executive officer of the Borough Fire Department.
§ 320-31 HANOVER CODE § 320-33
1:558
the finished grade, shall be set at such points as will be designated by the
Borough Engineer, and the location and elevation of each monument shall
be shown on the final plan, and survey work involved in the placement of
these monuments shall be directed out by the Borough Engineer. All lot
corners shall be marked with a piece of galvanized pipe or other suitable
material acceptable to the Borough Engineer. Also, the Borough Engineer
shall specify the size and length of material to be used.
§ 320-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-33
1:559

ARTICLE VIII
Acceptance of Improvements
§ 320-34. Sanitary sewers.
§ 320-35. Streets and other improvements.
§ 320-36. Improvements in floodplain districts.
The approval of a plan for any proposed subdivision and/or land
development to be located within any designated floodplain district shall
not constitute a representation, guaranty or warranty of any kind by the
municipality or by any official or employee thereof of the practicability
or safety of the proposed use and shall create no liability upon the
municipality, its officials or employees.
A. Dedication. Upon completion of construction of a sanitary sewer in
accordance with approved plans, a deed of dedication for the sewer,
which has been approved by the Borough Solicitor, shall be submitted
to the Council, together with a certificate from the subdivider/
developer evidencing payment of all labor and material costs and a
receipt for inspection charges, if any, and a bond shall be furnished
providing a maintenance guaranty for the improvements for one year
after acceptance of said improvements by the Borough.
B. Acceptance. Passage by the Council of a resolution accepting the
dedication and directing that it be recorded, wherever necessary, will
constitute acceptance of the sewer by the Borough.
A. Conditions. The Borough shall have no obligations to take over and
make public any street or other improvements unless the required
improvement, utility mains and laterals and monuments, shown on an
approved plan or plans, have been constructed and conform to Borough
standards and specifications.
B. Acceptance. The Borough shall have no responsibility with respect to
any street or other improvement, notwithstanding the use of the same
by the public, unless the street or other improvement is accepted by
ordinance or resolution of the Borough Council by the description
furnished by the developer. Prior to such acceptance by the Borough, a
bond shall be furnished providing a maintenance guaranty for the
improvements for one year after acceptance of said improvements by
the Borough.
§ 320-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-36
1:561

ARTICLE IX
Appeals
§ 320-37. Time period.
Any appeal from a ruling of any Borough agency shall be made in writing to
the Borough Council within 15 days of the ruling. No appeal shall be made
to a court until all local administrative procedure has been exhausted.
§ 320-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-37
1:563

ARTICLE X
Fees; Enforcement
§ 320-38. Fees.
At the time that the subdivider/developer submits a preliminary or final plan
to the Borough for review, he shall pay to the Borough of Hanover a fee as
outlined by Borough Council:
§ 320-39. Enforcement.
§ 320-40. Violations and penalties.
A. Such review fees shall be based upon a schedule established by
ordinance or resolution.
B. This fee is to be used to defray the costs of examining and processing
the plan.
C. In cases where a York County Planning Commission review is required,
the fee charged by the county will be collected by the Borough of
Hanover and transmitted with the plans for county review.
A. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer, Code Enforcement Officer or
other such duly authorized representative of the Hanover Borough
Council, and who is hereby given the power and authority, to enforce
the provisions of this chapter. The Enforcement Officer shall require
that the application for a building permit contain all information
necessary to enable him to ascertain whether the proposed building,
alteration or use is located in an approved land development. No
building permit shall be issued until the Enforcement Officer has
certified that the site for the proposed building, alteration or use
complies with all the provisions of this chapter and conforms to the site
description as indicated on the approved final plan.
B. Remedies to effect completion of improvements. In the event that any
improvements which may be required have not been installed as
provided in this chapter in accord with the approved final plat, the
Borough Manager is hereby granted the power to enforce any
corporate bond or other security by appropriate legal and equitable
remedies.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a
civil enforcement proceeding commended by Hanover Borough, pay a
judgment of not more than $500, plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorney fees, incurred by the Borough as a result thereof.
No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the
date of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial District
Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals to the judgment,
the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules
§ 320-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-40
1:565
of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute
a separate violation, unless the Magisterial District Judge determining
that there has been a violation further determines that there was a
good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating
this chapter to have believed that there was no such violation, in which
event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until
the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by
the Magisterial District Judge, and thereafter each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation.
B. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order to stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Borough the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
§ 320-40 HANOVER CODE § 320-40
1:566
Chapter 325
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tax Collector — See Ch. 105.
§ 320-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-40
1:567

ARTICLE I
Per Capita Tax
[Adopted 12-29-1969 by Ord. No. 1462]
§ 325-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words, terms and phrases,
when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section:
ADULT — Every natural person of the age of 18 years and
older.117[Amended 2-21-1973 by Ord. No. 1567]
§ 325-2. (Reserved)118
§ 325-3. Per capita tax.
A tax of $5 per capita for general Borough purposes is hereby levied and
assessed for the calendar year on each adult person residing in the said
Borough of Hanover.
§ 325-4. (Reserved)119
§ 325-5. (Reserved)120
§ 325-6. (Reserved)121
§ 325-7. Penalty payment.
If any tax levied in pursuance of this article shall not be paid when due, a
penalty of 10% of the amount of tax due and unpaid shall be added thereto.
§ 325-8. Use of tax.
The tax hereby assessed, levied and imposed shall be available for
expenditure in the adopted budget or its supplements for the fiscal year.
§ 325-9. (Reserved)122
117. Editor's Note: The former definitions of "coin-operated amusement devices," "jukebox,"
and "person," which immediately followed this definition, were repealed 4-22-2015 by Ord.
No. 2217.
118. Editor's Note: Former § 325-2, Benefits excluded, was repealed 4-22-2015 by Ord. No.
2217.
119. Editor's Note: Former § 325-4, Amusement device and jukebox tax, as amended 4-15-1981
by Ord. No. 1728, was repealed 4-22-2015 by Ord. No. 2217.
120. Editor's Note: Former § 325-5, Report and statement required, was repealed 4-22-2015 by
Ord. No. 2217.
121. Editor's Note: Former § 325-6, Right of accessibility and entry, was repealed 4-22-2015 by
Ord. No. 2217.
122. Editor's Note: Former § 325-9, Confidential information, was repealed 4-22-2015 by Ord.
No. 2217.
§ 325-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-10
1:569
§ 325-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-22-2015 by Ord. No.
2217]
Any person convicted before the Mayor or any Magisterial District Judge
of the Borough of violating or failing to carry out any of the provisions or
requirements of this article; or to pay over any tax levied by this article
at the time required; or of knowingly making any incomplete, false or
fraudulent returns; or of attempting to do anything whatever to avoid the
payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed under this article shall
be liable to a fine or penalty not exceeding $50 for each and every offense,
and the costs of prosecution thereof, and in default thereof, to undergo
imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days, provided
that such fine or penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed
by any other section of this article.
§ 325-11. Continuance without annual reenactment.
This article shall continue in force on a calendar- or fiscal-year basis, as the
case may be, without annual reenactment unless the rate of the taxes are
subsequently changed.
§ 325-10 HANOVER CODE § 325-11
1:570
ARTICLE II
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 1-21-1987 by Ord. No. 1823]
§ 325-12. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of the
Borough of Hanover."
§ 325-13. Statutory authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within the
Borough of Hanover, regardless of where the documents making the
transfer are made, executed or delivered, or where the actual settlements
on such transfer took place as authorized by Article XI-C, Realty Transfer
Tax, 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq.
§ 325-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Hanover, York County, Pennsylvania.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
COUNCIL — The Council of Hanover Borough, York County, Pennsylvania.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include
a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 325-19 or prior § 84-17 of this article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
§ 325-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-14
1:571
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendents of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both, the term "person," as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof, and as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
Recreational activities, such as but not limited to hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
A.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities.
B.
C. Fur farming.
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within this, the Borough of
Hanover, including without limitation buildings, structures, fixtures,
mines, minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or
lower boundaries, trees and other improvements, immovables or
interests which by custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance or
land, but excluding permanently attached machinery and equipment in
an industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
§ 325-14 HANOVER CODE § 325-14
1:572
SECRETARY — The Secretary of the Borough of Hanover, York County,
Pennsylvania.
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including without limitation an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold; or
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or
possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of
30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate, provided that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the "value" thereof shall be determined from the price
set forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations;
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interest; or
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
D.
§ 325-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-14
1:573
§ 325-15. Imposition of tax; interest.
§ 325-16. Exemptions.
The United States, the commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 325-17. Excluded transactions.
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principle of the grantor of a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording shall be
subject to pay, for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof,
a tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by
such document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the recorder whereon the date
of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the signature of the
collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.,123 so that if any other political
subdivision shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same
person or transfer, then the tax levied by the Borough of Hanover under
the authority of that Act shall, during the time such duplication of the
tax exists, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate,
and such 1/2 rate shall become effective without any action on the part
of the Borough; provided, however, that the Borough and any other
political subdivision which impose such tax on the same person or
transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their respective rates to 1/2
of the rate herein provided, they will impose respectively different
rates, the total of which shall not exceed the maximum rate permitted
under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
D. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due shall be added and collected.
123. Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 325-14 HANOVER CODE § 325-17
1:574
A. The tax imposed by § 325-15 shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation, which reconveyance may include property fine
adjustments, provided that said reconveyance is made within one
year from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the Borough is prohibited from taxing under the
Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school
district or county of a tax-delinquent property at a Sheriff's sale or
Tax Claim Bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided that the property or interest therein subject to such
transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife
prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent
and child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister or the spouse of a
brother or sister and between a grandparent and grandchild or the
spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the
grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor
were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the recorder of deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
§ 325-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-17
1:575
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party; or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would
be imposed under this article. Where the document by which title is
acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that
the property was acquired by the grantee from or for the benefit of
his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the property is
the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if the grantee
claims an exemption from taxation under this clause.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the Department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt or the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
(a) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding,
processing, publishing, research and development,
transportation, energy conversion, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture; and
(b) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
§ 325-17 HANOVER CODE § 325-17
1:576
§ 325-18. Taxable documents.
Except as otherwise provided in § 325-17, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 325-19. Acquired company.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax-exempt status
pursuant to § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 [68A
Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its primary purpose
preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic, agricultural
or open space opportunities.
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
(21) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(22) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of value
may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation of the
reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company and, of itself or together
with prior changes, has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
§ 325-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-19
1:577
§ 325-20. Credits against tax.
§ 325-21. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 325-22. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax declaration of acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
§ 325-19 HANOVER CODE § 325-22
1:578
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made except the state realty transfer tax, and the sheriff or other
officer conducting said sale shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the first
moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are
insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
§ 325-23. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
§ 325-24. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of
value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983, P.L.
40, No. 21, the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to the Borough
based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax,
without compensation from the Borough.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the tenth of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to the
Borough all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for use of the
county, together with a report containing the information as is required
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting collections of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The two-percent commission shall be
paid to the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed
or record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the
state and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee have been
tendered.
§ 325-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-25
1:579
§ 325-25. Civil penalties.
§ 325-26. Lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments or any interest therein lying or being situated,
wholly or in part, within the boundaries of the Borough, which lands,
tenements, hereditaments or interest therein are described in or conveyed
by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax imposed, and
levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time when the tax under this
article is due and payable and continue until discharge by payment or in
accordance with the law, and the solicitor is authorized to file a municipal
or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of York County in accordance
with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act of 1923, 53
P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and amendments.
§ 325-27. Enforcement.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 325-28. Enforcement and collection regulations.
The Secretary of the Borough is charged with enforcement and collection
of tax and is empowered to promulgate and enforce reasonable regulations
for enforcement and collection of the tax. The regulations which have been
promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue under 72 P.S.
§ 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into and made a part of this article.
§ 325-29. When effective.
This article shall be effective on February 20, 1987, and shall continue in
force on a calendar-year basis without annual reenactment unless the rate
of the tax is subsequently changed.
§ 325-30. Repealer.
The Real Estate Transfer Tax Ordinance No. 1427, enacted by the Borough
February 19, 1969, is hereby repealed upon the effective date of this article.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 325-25 HANOVER CODE § 325-30
1:580
ARTICLE III
Business Privilege Tax
[Adopted 12-30-1976 by Ord. No. 1675]
§ 325-31. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Business Privilege Tax
Ordinance."
§ 325-32. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section unless the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
GROSS RECEIPTS — Includes both cash and credit transactions and shall
include payment received for gross charges made by the taxpayer for
services rendered, including both labor and any materials entering into or
becoming component parts of the services performed.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, association or
corporation, but shall not include a wage earner, a nonprofit corporation
organized for religious, charitable or educational purposes, an association
for such purposes, any agency of the Government of the United States or of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any public utility.
PRIVILEGE YEAR — The calendar year.
SERVICE — Any act or instance of helping or benefiting another for a
consideration.
TAX RECEIVER — The person or agency designated by the Borough Council
for the collection of this tax.
TEMPORARY, SEASONAL OR ITINERANT BUSINESS — Any business that
is conducted at one location for less than 60 consecutive days.
§ 325-33. Authority to levy and collect tax.
The Borough of Hanover hereby imposes a business privilege tax for the
license year 1977 in the manner and at the rate hereinafter set forth. Except
as hereinafter provided, such tax shall be in addition to any other tax levied
and collected under any existing ordinance. This article is enacted under
the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act of 1965, approved December 31,
1965 (P.L. 1257), as amended.124
§ 325-34. Imposition and rate of tax. [Amended 12-18-1985 by Ord.
No. 1812]
A. Every person engaging in a business, trade, occupation or profession
hereinafter listed in the Borough of Hanover and maintaining a place,
124. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 325-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-34
1:581
§ 325-35. Determination of gross receipts.
office or establishment within the Borough of Hanover for the conduct
of said business, trade, occupation or profession shall pay a business
privilege tax at the rate of two mills on his gross receipts derived from
all services rendered to clients, patients and customers.
B. Every person engaging in a business, trade, occupation or profession
hereinafter listed in the Borough of Hanover and maintaining no place,
office or establishment within the Borough of Hanover for the conduct
of said business, trade, occupation or profession shall pay a business
privilege tax at the rate of two mills on his gross receipts derived from
all services rendered within the Borough of Hanover to clients, patients
and customers.
C. The businesses, trades, occupations and professions above referred to
are as follows: printers; lithographers, processors; laundry operators;
launderette operators; warehousemen; upholsterers; doctors; lawyers;
dentists; engineers; architects; chemists; chiropractors; chiropodists;
certified public accountants; public accountants; real estate brokers;
cleaning, pressing and dyeing establishment operators; shoe repair
shop operators; tailors; dressmakers; electrical, plastering, bricklaying,
carpentry, heating, ventilating, plumbing and painting contractors;
repairers of electrical, electronic or automotive machinery or
equipment or other machinery and equipment, and other wares and
merchandise; and all other businesses, trades, occupations and
professions in which there is offered any service or services to the
general public or a limited number thereof.
A. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed, who
has commenced his business at least one full year prior to the beginning
of the license year, shall determine his gross receipts for the license
year from his actual gross receipts for the preceding calendar year.
However, for the license year 1977 the gross receipts shall be computed
for the eleven-month period immediately preceding the year 1977.
B. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed, who
has commenced his business less than one full year prior to the
beginning of the license year, shall determine his gross receipts for the
license year by multiplying by 12 (for the license year 1977, multiplying
by 11) the monthly average of the actual gross amount of business
transacted by him during the months he was engaged in business prior
to the be of the license year.
C. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed, who
commences his business subsequent to the beginning of the license
year, shall determine his gross receipts for the license year by
multiplying his actual gross receipts for the first month he engages in
business by the number of months remaining in the license year.
§ 325-34 HANOVER CODE § 325-35
1:582
§ 325-36. Registration.
Any person subject to the tax hereby imposed shall, on or before the first
day of January prior to commencing business in such license year, register
with the Tax Receiver, and having once registered with the Tax Receiver,
registration annually thereafter is not required.
§ 325-37. Returns. [Amended 7-27-2016 by Ord. No. 2247]
D. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed, who
engages in a business temporary, seasonal or itinerant in its nature,
shall determine his gross receipts for the license year from his actual
gross receipts for the license year.
A. Every return shall be made upon a form furnished by the Tax Collector.
Every person making a return shall certify the correctness thereof by
affidavit.
B. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who commenced
his business at least 13 full months prior to the beginning of any license
year shall, on or before the 15th day of April, file with the Tax Collector
a return setting forth his name, his business and business address, and
such other information as may be necessary in arriving at the actual
gross amount of business transacted by him during the preceding
calendar year, and the amount of the tax due.
C. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who has
commenced his business less than 13 full months prior to the beginning
of any license year shall on or before the 15th day of April, file with the
Tax Collector a return setting forth his name, his business and business
address, and such other information as may be necessary in arriving at
the monthly average of the actual gross amount of business transacted
by him during the months in the preceding calendar year he was
engaged in business and the amount of the tax due.
D. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who commences
business less than one full month prior to the end of the preceding
calendar year or prior to the beginning of any license year shall within
40 days from the date of commencing such business file a return with
the Tax Collector setting forth his name, his business and business
address, and such information as may be necessary in arriving at the
actual gross amount of business transacted by him during his first full
month of business and the amount of the tax due.
E. Every person subject to the payment of tax imposed in this article who
engages in a business temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its nature,
shall within seven days from the day he completes such business file a
return with the Tax Collector setting forth his name, the business and
business address, and such information as may be necessary in arriving
at the actual gross amount of business transacted by him during such
period and the amount of tax due.
§ 325-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-38
1:583
§ 325-38. Payment.
§ 325-39. Refunds. [Amended 12-30-1978 by Ord. No. 1700]
If the taxpayer for the license year shall have paid at the time of filing his
estimate an amount in excess of the actual tax due at the end of the license
year, the Tax Receiver shall refund to the taxpayer the amount of excess tax
paid for such year. If the final return of a taxpayer shows an overpayment
of the tax by reason of the fact that the gross volume of business as stated
in the estimated computation was less than the actual volume of business
for the year or by reason of the fact that the taxpayer did not continue to
engage in business throughout the year, the Tax Receiver shall refund to
the taxpayer the amount of such overpayment, which shall be the difference
between the amount of tax paid upon the filing of the first return and the
amount of the tax finally shown to be due. No refund shall be made if the
amount is $1 or less, unless a specific request is submitted.
§ 325-40. Powers and duties of Tax Receiver.
A. At the time of filing the first return, the person making the same shall
pay the amount of the tax estimated to be due.
B. At the time of the filing of the final return, if the full amount of the tax
due by the taxpayer for the license year has not been paid, the taxpayer
shall pay the remaining balance of the tax, which will be the difference
between the amount of the tax paid at the time of making the first
return on the estimated computation and the amount of the tax finally
shown to be due. No payment of less than $1 shall be required.
[Amended 12-30-1978 by Ord. No. 1700]
A. General powers. The Tax Receiver is hereby authorized and directed to
make and keep such records, prepare such forms and take such other
measures as may be necessary or convenient to carry this article into
effect.
B. Collection; records; receipts. It shall be the duty of the Tax Receiver to
collect and receive the fees, taxes, fines and penalties imposed by this
article. It shall also be his duty to keep a record showing the amount of
the tax received by him and the date of payment. A receipt shall be
given to the person paying the tax.
C. Investigatory and determinative powers. If the Tax Receiver is not
satisfied with the return and payment of the tax made by any taxpayer
or supposed taxpayer under the provisions of this article, he is hereby
authorized and empowered to make a determination of the tax due by
such person, based upon the facts contained in the return or upon any
information within his possession or that shall come into his possession.
For this purpose the Tax Receiver, his deputy or his authorized agent is
authorized to examine the books, papers and records of any such
person to verify the accuracy of any return or payment made under the
provisions thereof, to ascertain whether the taxes imposed by this
§ 325-38 HANOVER CODE § 325-40
1:584
§ 325-41. Proof of exemptions.
The burden is hereby imposed upon any person claiming an exemption from
the payment of the tax hereby imposed to convince the Tax Receiver of his
legal right to such exemption.
§ 325-42. Recovery of unpaid taxes.
All taxes due and unpaid under this article shall be recoverable by the
Borough as other debts due the Borough are now by law recoverable.
§ 325-43. Interest; penalty amount.
All taxes due under this article shall bear interest at the rate of 6% per
annum or fractional part of a month, from the day they are due and payable
until paid. If any taxpayer shall neglect or refuse to make any return or
payment required by this article, an additional 10% of the amount of the tax
shall be added by the Tax Receiver and collected.
§ 325-44. Disposition of collections.
All taxes, interest and penalties received, collected or recovered under the
provisions of this article shall be paid into the treasury of the Borough for
the use and benefit of the Borough.
§ 325-45. Returns for year 1977.
For the year 1977, returns as enumerated hereinbefore shall be filed and
the tax paid no later than September 30, 1977. Said returns and tax shall
be based on an eleven-month period from February 1 to December 31,
inclusive.
§ 325-46. When effective; duration.
This article shall be effective immediately after the passage and
advertisement subject to the time limitations of the Local Tax Enabling
Act.125 The tax imposed by this article shall continue in force on a calendararticle
have been paid. If any taxpayer or supposed taxpayer shall
neglect or refuse to make any return and payment of tax required by
this article or if as a result of an investigation by the Tax Receiver a
return is found to be incorrect, the Tax Receiver shall estimate the tax
due by such person and determine the amount due by him for taxes,
penalties and interest thereon.
D. Deposits. The Tax Receiver may, in his discretion, require reasonable
deposits to be made by taxpayers who engage in a business temporary,
seasonal or itinerant by its nature.
125. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 325-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-46
1:585
year basis without annual reenactment, unless the rate of the tax is
subsequently changed.
§ 325-47. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, for
each violation, be subject to a fine of not less than $10 and not more than
$500, and costs, and upon failure to pay said fine and costs, said person
shall be subject to imprisonment for not more than 30 days after a hearing
before a Magistrate of the Borough of Hanover.
§ 325-48. Confidentiality of returns.
Any information gained by the Tax Receiver or any other officer, official
agent or employee of the Borough as a result of any returns, investigations,
hearings or verifications, required or authorized by this article, shall be
confidential except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise
provided by law; and divulgence of any information so gained is hereby
declared to be a violation of this article, which may be punishable by
dismissal from office or employment.
§ 325-46 HANOVER CODE § 325-48
1:586
ARTICLE IV
Tax Certification Notices
[Adopted 9-18-1991 by Res. No. 575]
§ 325-49. Issuance by Tax Collector; fee.
The Hanover Borough Tax Collector is designated as the official to issue
tax certification notices and can collect and retain a certificate fee of $5 as
compensation for providing such certifications.
§ 325-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-49
1:587

ARTICLE V
Taxpayers Bill of Rights
[Adopted 2-10-1999 by Ord. No. 2020]
§ 325-50. Statutory authority; applicability; general provisions.
A. This article is adopted in compliance with Act 50 of 1998 as it relates to
the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8421 et seq.
B. It shall apply to all eligible taxes, including interest and penalty, which
are levied by the Borough of Hanover, hereinafter referred to as the
"Borough." They shall include all per capita, occupation privilege,
business privilege, amusement, mechanical device and earned income
taxes and any other tax authorized by the Act of December 31, 1965
(P.L. 1257, No. 511).126
C. This article adopts a Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights which includes the
following:
(1) Taxpayer rights and the Borough's obligation during an audit or
administrative review of the taxpayer's books or records.
(2) Administrative and judicial procedures for a taxpayer to appeal or
seek review of a tax decision.
(3) Procedures for filing and processing refund claims and taxpayer
complaints.
(4) Enforcement procedures.
D. Taxpayers will be notified of the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights
whenever they are contacted regarding an assessment, audit,
determination, review and collection of any tax covered by the Bill of
Rights.
E. It shall be the responsibility of the Borough Manager to develop
procedures to implement this policy, which shall include and which are
incorporated herein by reference:
(1) Preparation and distribution of the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights
Notification, which notification shall contain substantially the same
information set forth in Parts 2 through 8 of this article.
(2) Preparation of the notice of underpayment form.
(3) Preparation of a form to request information from a taxpayer.
(4) Establishment of an administrative appeals form.
(5) Development of the form for taxpayers to file a tax appeal petition.
(6) Formulation of rules of practice and procedure for hearings.
126. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 325-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-50
1:589
§ 325-51. Filing, audits and refund procedures.
F. Copies of the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights will be available at the
Hanover Borough Municipal Building, 44 Frederick Street, or mailed,
upon request, at no expense to the taxpayer.
G. The Appeals Board shall consist of the members of the Hanover
Borough Finance Committee, as constituted and appointed by the
Hanover Borough Council.
A. Taxpayer obligations.
(1) It is the obligation of all taxpayers to file all tax returns and pay all
taxes to which they are subject. However, when the Borough
determines that a required return has not been filed or that a
liability has not been paid, it has certain rights prescribed by law
that set forth how it may enforce a taxpayer's obligation. In
conjunction with these rights, the Borough must now comply with a
Taxpayers Bill of Rights which provides certain legal rights on
behalf of the taxpayer and creates obligations for the Borough so
that equity and fairness control how these requirements are
enforced.
(2) Eligible taxes include any per capita; occupation privilege; earned
income; deed transfer; mechanical devices; business gross receipt;
amusement; and any other tax authorized by the Local Tax
Enabling Act (Act 511 of 1965127) and levied by the Borough.
(3) The following taxes are levied by the Borough:
(a) Per capita.
(b) Earned income.
(c) Local services.
(d) Mechanical device.
(e) Business privilege.
B. Minimum time period for taxpayer response.
(1) Taxpayers shall have a minimum of 30 calendar days from the
mailing date to respond to requests for information from the
Borough.
(2) Upon a written application for a reasonable extension of time to
respond to a request for information, the Borough shall grant an
extension for good cause.
(3) No action will be taken for the tax year in question until expiration
of the response period, including any extension of time.
127. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 325-50 HANOVER CODE § 325-51
1:590
C. Request for prior year's returns.
(1) When making an initial inquiry about an eligible tax, the Borough
may include taxes required to be paid or tax returns required to be
filed no more than three years prior to the mailing date of the
notice.
(2) A subsequent request for supporting information may be made if
the Borough determines that the taxpayer failed to file a return,
under reported income or failed to pay for one or more of the tax
periods covered by the initial request.
D. Federal tax information. A taxpayer may be required to provide copies
of his/her federal individual income tax return when the Borough can
show that the federal tax information is reasonably necessary for the
enforcement or collection of an eligible tax and the information is not
available from other sources or the Department of Revenue of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
E. Refund of overpayments.
(1) A taxpayer may file a written request for a refund or credit of an
eligible tax with the Borough. The request shall be filed within
three years of the due date of filing the report (as extended) or one
year after actual payment of the eligible tax, whichever is later.
(2) If no report is required, the written request shall be made within
three years after the due date for payment of the eligible tax or
within one year after actual payment of the eligible tax, whichever
is later.
(3) A tax return filed with the Borough showing an overpayment of tax
shall be deemed to be a written request for a cash refund unless
otherwise indicated on the tax return.
(4) Such a request is not to be considered a petition for an
administrative appeal nor to preclude a taxpayer from filing a
petition for an administrative appeal.
(5) Where a taxpayer has been notified of an overpayment of an
eligible tax, a written request for refund shall be filed with the
Borough within one year of the date of the payment.
(6) This refund process is separate and apart from the petition for
administrative appeal process.
(7) With certain exceptions, interest on overpayments will bear simple
interest from the date of overpayment until the date of resolution.
The interest rate will be determined in accordance with state law.
F. Notice of basis of underpayment. The Borough shall notify the taxpayer
in writing of the basis for any underpayment of tax. This notice will
include:
§ 325-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-51
1:591
§ 325-52. Administrative appeals.
(1) The tax period for which the underpayment is asserted.
(2) The amount of the underpayment by tax period.
(3) Legal basis for the underpayment.
(4) All itemization of the revisions made by the Borough to a return or
report filed that results in the determination of an underpayment.
A. Taxpayer's appeal petitions.
(1) To appeal an assessment determination or refund of an eligible tax,
the taxpayer must file a petition for administrative appeal with the
Appeals Board.
(2) Delivery of petitions.
(a) All petitions shall be mailed to or delivered to:
Borough Manager
Hanover Borough
44 Frederick Street
Hanover, PA 17331
(b) Appeals relating to the earned income tax shall be made to the
Hanover Area Earned Income Tax Bureau.
(3) Procedures as to the form and content of petitions, as well as
practice and procedure for tax appeals, may be obtained in person,
or by mailing a request to the above address, or by calling Hanover
Borough at 717-638-3877 during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday through Friday.
(4) Deadline for filing petitions:
(a) Refund petitions are to be filed within three years after the due
date for filing the report (as extended) or one year after actual
payment of an eligible tax, whichever is later. If no report is
required, the petition shall be filed within three years after the
due date for payment of an eligible tax or one year after actual
payment, whichever is later.
(b) Petitions for reassessment of an eligible tax shall be filed
within 90 days of the date of the assessment notice.
(5) A petition for administrative appeal must be in writing and shall
include:
(a) The name and address of the taxpayer.
§ 325-51 HANOVER CODE § 325-52
1:592
(b) The tax for which a refund is being requested or which is being
appealed. (A separate form should be filed for each tax.)
(c) Reasons for a refund or any objections to the notice of an
assessment or underpayment.
(d) Any facts supporting the reasons for a refund or objections to
an assessment or overpayment.
(e) An affidavit of the taxpayer that he/she/they "affirm that the
information is true and correct to the best of my/our
knowledge, information and belief and I/we further understand
that false statements are made subject to the penalties of 18
Pa.C.S.A. § 4904, relating to unsworn falsification to
authorities."
B. Administrative appeals process.
(1) This process shall not be governed by the Local Agency Law (2
Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 5, Subchapter B, relating to practice and
procedures of local agencies, and Chapter 7, Subchapter B,
relating to judicial review of local agency action).128
(2) All forms will be used as required by this article and in accordance
with the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights and other applicable
statutes.
(3) All filings are due when required by this article and in accordance
with the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights and other applicable
statutes.
(4) A petition for administrative appeal will be considered timely filed
if the letter transmitting the petition is postmarked by the United
States Postal Service on or before the final day on which the
petition is required to be filed. Otherwise, a petition for
administrative appeal will be deemed to be filed on the date
received in the offices of the Borough of Hanover.
(5) All appropriate documentation shall be submitted with the relevant
form and all forms set forth information that the taxpayers must
provide.
(6) In the absence of agreement of the Appeals Board and the taxpayer,
no information will be considered that was not presented either
with the petition or at the hearing.
(7) The administrative appeals process shall be as follows:
(a) All hearings will be informal in nature and technical rules of
evidence will not be applicable, nor will the Local Agency Law.
128. Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 551 et seq. and § 751 et seq.
§ 325-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-52
1:593
The Appeals Board may take testimony under an oath of
affirmation.
(b) All information provided by the taxpayer shall be provided to
the Appeals Board.
(c) All hearings will be scheduled by and through the Appeals
Board.
(d) All hearings will be held at the offices of the Borough unless
noted otherwise.
(e) A hearing may be continued upon the request of the taxpayer.
If a hearing is continued at the request of a taxpayer, the
taxpayer must first agree that the sixty-day period for deciding
the petition will not begin to run until the date of the hearing.
Should the taxpayer seek a continuance and not agree to an
extension of the sixty-day time period, then the request for the
continuance shall be denied.
(f) A hearing notice will be sent to the taxpayer as soon as
possible after receipt of the petition.
(g) No stenographic record of a hearing will be made unless a
party so requesting agrees to pay for the cost of a
stenographer and the party's copy of the record.
(h) The taxpayer may represent himself/herself or may be
represented by another person. A taxpayer may be represented
only by a person possessing appropriate education, training or
experience to represent taxpayers in tax appeals. A
representative need not be an attorney or a certified
accountant. A taxpayer must authorize a representative in
writing.
(i) Any information to be sent to the taxpayer may be sent to the
authorized representative of the taxpayer, and any information
or notice shall have the same effect as if given to the taxpayer.
Any action taken by the authorized representative shall have
the same force and effect as if taken by the taxpayer.
(j) At the hearing, the taxpayer may present any reasonable
evidence of a relatively probative value and shall provide one
or more copies of all documentation to the Appeals Board. The
burden of proof on all issues is on the taxpayer.
(k) A taxpayer may present witnesses, as can the township. All
witnesses shall be subject to cross-examination.
(l) A petition will not be considered as filed for purposes of
commencing the sixty-day period within which the Borough
must act until a complete and accurate petition has been
received by the Borough.
§ 325-52 HANOVER CODE § 325-52
1:594
§ 325-53. Rights and obligations during an audit or administrative
review.
When reviewing a taxpayer's books and records to determine if the
appropriate tax liability has been paid, the rights of a taxpayer and the
obligation of the Borough during an audit or administrative review are as
follow:
(m) All decisions shall be in writing and dated.
(n) The Appeals Board may use any relevant information provided
at the hearing or for use at a hearing deemed necessary to
make a decision. Where a hearing is not held, a decision will be
based on the information provided.
(o) All decisions by the Appeals Board will be issued within 60
days of receipt [unless waived as noted in Subsection B(5)] of a
complete and accurate petition. Failure to issue a decision
within this time period shall result in the petition being
approved.
(p) All decisions by the Appeals Board will contain a written
explanation for the granting, in whole or in part, or the denial
of an appeal.
(q) All decisions will be mailed/sent to the last known address of
the taxpayer.
(r) All information obtained by the Appeals Board or its
representative shall be treated as confidential information.
(s) Any appeal taken from the decision of the Appeals Board shall
be filed in the appropriate County Court of Common Pleas
within 30 days of receipt of the decision.
C. Appeals Board decision.
(1) The Appeals Board shall set a hearing date for an appeal which
shall not be sooner than 10 days after receipt of the petition nor
later than 30 days after receipt of the petition.
(2) Decisions on petitions will be issued within 60 days of the date a
complete and accurate petition is received. Failure to act within 60
days shall result in the petition being approved.
D. Appeals to court. A person aggrieved by an appeals decision who has a
direct interest in the decision has a right to appeal to the appropriate
County Court of Common Pleas within 30 days of the date of the
adverse decision of the Appeals Board.
A. The Borough will provide the taxpayer with a complete explanation of
the audit/review process as it relates to that taxpayer and its rights
during the process.
§ 325-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-53
1:595
§ 325-54. Taxpayer complaints.
If a taxpayer has complaints about any of the eligible taxes covered by this
Bill of Rights, the taxpayer may contact:
Borough Manager
Hanover Borough
44 Frederick Street
Hanover, PA 17331
717-637-3877
§ 325-55. Confidentiality of tax information.
Information gained by the Borough as a result of any audit, return, report,
investigation, hearing or verification shall be confidential tax information.
It is unlawful, except for official purposes or as provided by law, for the
Borough to divulge or make known in any manner any information gained
in any return, investigation, hearing or verification to any person: to permit
any confidential tax information or any book containing any abstract or
particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person; or, to print, to
publish or to make known in any manner confidential tax information.
§ 325-56. Borough enforcement methods.
If a taxpayer has not paid a tax liability determined to be due and the
taxpayer has not filed a timely appeal of the liability, the Borough may take
any of the following actions:
B. The Borough will prepare a written basis of the assessment of any tax
liability determined during the audit/review.
C. The Borough will explain a taxpayer's right to appeal the assessment of
any tax liability determined during the audit/review.
D. The Borough will conduct a post audit conference at which a
representative will explain the audit/review findings and make
recommendations on how to correct any areas of noncompliance.
E. The Borough will timely process the audit/review.
A. The Borough may contact a delinquent taxpayer and attempt to resolve
the liability through payment in full, payment plan or compromise.
B. The Borough may employ private collection agencies to collect
delinquent taxes.
C. The Borough may audit the delinquent taxpayer.
§ 325-53 HANOVER CODE § 325-56
1:596
§ 325-57. Obtaining of information.
Information pertaining to the local Taxpayer Bill of Rights can be obtained
during the business hours of Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
or by contacting:
Borough Manager
Hanover Borough
44 Frederick Street
Hanover, PA 17331
717-637-3877
D. The Borough may file a lien against the taxpayer and, in some cases, the
person responsible for payment of the delinquent tax (such as an
employer).
E. The Borough may file suit against the delinquent taxpayer in the
appropriate County Court of Common Pleas or Magisterial District
Judge.
F. The Borough may execute and sell taxpayer real estate or personal
property, based on a lien or judgment obtained through appropriate
legal proceedings, and attach wages in accordance with law.
G. The Borough may investigate and advance or have advanced through
appropriate Court of Common Pleas actions against a delinquent
taxpayer violating criminal statutes.
§ 325-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-57
1:597

ARTICLE VI
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 12-11-2007 by Ord. No. 2129]
§ 325-58. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Local Services Tax
Ordinance."
§ 325-59. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
BOROUGH — The area within the corporate limits of the Borough of
Hanover.
CALENDAR YEAR — The twelve-month period beginning January 1 and
ending December 31 of each year.
COUNCIL — The Council of the Borough under whose direction this tax
shall be enforced.
CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, corporation,
governmental body, agency or other entity employing one or more persons
on salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis, including sellemployed
person.
HE, HIS, or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number as well as male
or female gender.
INDIVIDUAL — Any natural person, male or female, engaged in any
occupation, trade or profession within the corporate limits of the Borough
of Hanover.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business, or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, carried on or
performed within the corporate limits of the Borough of Hanover for which
compensation is charged or received whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
TAX — The local services tax in the amount of $52 levied by this
article.[Amended 9-28-2011 by Ord. No. 2174]
TAX RECEIVER — The person or agency designated by the Borough Council
for the collection of the local services tax.
§ 325-60. Levy of tax; exemption.
The Borough hereby levies and assesses on each individual engaged in
an occupation within its corporate limits during the calendar year a local
§ 325-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-60
1:599
services tax; provided, however, that persons earning less than $12,000 per
year shall be exempt from this levy.
§ 325-61. Amount of tax. [Amended 9-28-2011 by Ord. No. 2174]
Beginning on the first day of January of the year 2012 and continuing each
year thereafter, unless and until this article is subsequently amended or
revoked, each individual engaged in an occupation, as defined in § 325-59
of this article, within the corporate limits of the Borough shall be required
to pay a local services tax at the flat rate of $52 per year.
§ 325-62. Duties of employers. [Amended 9-28-2011 by Ord. No.
2174; 5-25-2016 by Ord. No. 2244]
A. Each employer within the Borough and each employer situate outside
the Borough who engages in business within the Borough is hereby
charged with the duty of collecting the tax from each of the employees
engaged by the employer and performing work for the employer within
the Borough. Each person subject to the tax shall be assessed a pro rata
share of tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging in
an occupation.
B. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person for a payroll period
shall be determined by dividing the combined rate of the local services
tax levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest 1/100[??]
dollar.
C. Employer collection of the local services tax shall be made on a payroll
period basis for each payroll period, beginning with the first payroll
period in which the person is engaging in an occupation.
D. It shall be the duty of each employer located within the Borough and
each employer situate outside the Borough who engages in business
within the Borough to comply with the requirements set forth herein
and as provided in 53 P.S. § 6924.301, et seq., as from time to time
amended, regarding the levy, assessment and collection of the local
services tax; provided, however, that no employer shall be held liable
for failure to withhold the local services tax or for the payment of the
withheld tax money to the Borough if the failure to withhold taxes arises
from incorrect information submitted by the employee as to the
employee's place or places of employment, the employee's principal
office or where the employee is principally employed. In addition, an
employer shall not be responsible for investigating exemption
certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or exempting any
employee from the local services tax.
§ 325-60 HANOVER CODE § 325-63
1:600
§ 325-63. Returns. [Amended 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2141]
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms supplied by the Tax Receiver of the Borough. If the employer
fails to file said return and pay said tax, whether or not he makes collection
thereof from the salary, wages, or commission paid by him to said employee,
the employer shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full, as
though the tax had originally been levied against him.
§ 325-64. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
[Amended 9-28-2011 by Ord. No. 2174; 5-25-2016 by Ord. No. 2244]
§ 325-65. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation.
A. Each employer shall use his employment and payroll records from the
first day of January to March 31 each year for determining the number
of employees from whom said tax shall be deducted and paid over to the
collector on or before May 1 of the same calendar year. Supplemental
reports shall be made by each employer on or before August 1 and
November 1 of the current year and January 31 of the following year for
new employees as reflected on his employment and payroll records
from April 1 to June 30, July 1 to September 30, and October 1 to
December 31, and payments on these supplemental reports shall be
made on or before August 1 and November 1 of the current year and
January 31 of the following year, respectively.
B. Any employer who discontinues business or ceases operation before
December 31 of any tax year shall, within 15 days after discontinuing
business or ceasing operation, file the return hereinabove required and
pay the tax to the Receiver of Taxes.
A. Each individual who shall have more than one occupation within the
Borough shall be subject to the payment of this tax on his principal
occupation and his principal employer shall deduct this tax and deliver
to him evidence of deductions on a form to be furnished to the employer
by the Tax Receiver, which form shall be evidence of deduction having
been made and when presented to any other employer shall be
authority for such employer to not deduct this tax from the employee's
wages, but to include such employee on his return by setting forth his
name, address and the name and account number of the employer who
deducted this tax.
B. In the event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, or an
occupation which requires his working in more than one political
subdivision during the calendar year, the priority of claim to collect
such local services tax shall be in the following order: [Amended
9-28-2011 by Ord. No. 2174]
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his
principal office or is principally employed;
§ 325-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-65
1:601
§ 325-66. Self-employed individuals. [Amended 12-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 2141]
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engaging in any occupation or profession within a primary place of
employment within the political subdivision shall be required to comply with
this section and pay the prorated portion of the tax due to the tax collector
on or before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.
§ 325-67. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their place
of business outside of the Borough, but who perform services of any type
or kind, or engage in any occupation or profession within the Borough,
do by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject themselves to the
provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under this article with
the same force and effect as though they were residents of the Borough.
Further, any individual engaged in an occupation within the Borough and an
employee of a nonresident employer may, for the purpose of this article, be
considered a self-employed person, and in the event this tax is not paid, the
Borough shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or
employee for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 325-68. Administration and enforcement of tax.
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works, if such a tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
C. The place of employment shall be determined as of the day the taxpayer
first becomes subject to the tax during the calendar year. [Amended
9-28-2011 by Ord. No. 2174]
D. It is the intent of this provision that no person shall pay more than $52
in any calendar year as a local services tax, irrespective of the number
of political subdivisions within which such person may be employed
within any given calendar year. In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the
taxing authority for that calendar year declaring that the taxpayer has
made prior payment constitutes prima facie certification of payment to
all other political subdivisions. [Amended 9-28-2011 by Ord. No.
2174]
E. Deduction or nondeduction and reporting by employers shall be in
accordance with Subsection A. [Amended 9-28-2011 by Ord. No.
2174]
A. It shall be the duty of the Tax Receiver, as selected by the Borough
Council, to accept and receive payments of this tax and to keep a record
§ 325-65 HANOVER CODE § 325-68
1:602
§ 325-69. Suits for collection; interest and penalties on unpaid tax.
§ 325-70. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 2141]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article or any person
aiding or abetting in the violation of this article shall, upon summary
conviction thereof, for every such violation, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not less than $1 nor more than $600 and costs of prosecution, or shall be
sentenced to imprisonment for a period of not less than one day nor more
than 30 days, as now or hereafter provided by law.
§ 325-71. Duration of tax.
The tax imposed by this article shall continue in force on a calendar-year
basis without annual reenactment unless the rate of the tax is subsequently
changed.
thereof showing the amount received by him from each employer or
self-employed person, together with the date the tax was received.
B. The Tax Receiver is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered to
prescribe, adopt, promulgate rules and regulations relating to any
matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article,
including provisions for the examination of the payroll records of any
employer subject to this article, the examination and correction of any
return made in compliance with this article and any payment alleged or
found to be incorrect, or as to which overpayment is claimed or found to
have occurred. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Tax
Receiver shall have the right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of
the county as in other cases provided.
C. The Tax Receiver is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer, or if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the Tax
Receiver the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Tax Receiver may sue for
the recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together
with interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of said tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of said tax and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of
said tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery
of the tax, the individual liable therefor shall, in addition, be responsible
and liable for the costs of collection. [Amended 12-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 2141]
§ 325-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-72
1:603
§ 325-72. Savings clause.
§ 325-73. When effective.
This article shall be effective immediately after passage and advertisement,
subject to the time limitations of the "Local Tax Enabling Act."129
§ 325-74. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted under the authority of Act No. 511, the Act of
December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257), and amendments thereto, also known as the
"Local Tax Enabling Act."130
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
Borough of Hanover to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the Borough under the
Constitution of the United States and the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax, or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
129. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
130. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 325-72 HANOVER CODE § 325-74
1:604
ARTICLE VII
Earned Income and Net Profits Tax
[Adopted 10-26-2011 by Ord. No. 2177]
§ 325-75. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Borough of Hanover Earned Income and
Net Profits Tax Ordinance" (hereinafter referred to as the "article").
§ 325-76. Intent; administration and enforcement.
§ 325-77. Definitions.
All words and phrases shall have the meanings as set forth in Act 32, as
amended. The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them as follows:
BUSINESS — An enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking of
an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for
profit, whether by a person, partnership, association or any other entity.
BUSINESS ENTITY — A sole proprietorship, corporation, joint-stock
association or company, partnership, limited partnership, limited-liability
company, association, business trust, syndicate or other commercial or
professional activity organized under the laws of this commonwealth or any
other jurisdiction.
CORPORATION — A corporation or joint-stock association organized under
the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any
other state, territory, foreign country or dependency. This term shall include
an entity which is classified as a corporation for federal income tax
purposes.
CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Community and
Economic Development or successor agency charged with any duties under
Act 32, as may be amended and supplemented.
A. It is the intent and purpose of this article to include all of the applicable
language and provisions of 53 P.S. § 6924.501 et seq., the Act of General
Assembly of July 2, 2008 (P.L. 197), and known as "Act No. 32," as may
be amended and supplemented from time to time. In all enforcement of
the administration of this article, the language and intent of Act 32, as
amended, shall take precedence.
B. The tax imposed by this article shall be collected and administered in
accordance with all applicable laws and regulations and regulations,
policies and procedures adopted by the TCC or Tax Officer. This
includes any regulations, policies and procedures adopted in the future
to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
§ 325-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-77
1:605
DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his permanent home and
to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent. Actual
residence is not necessarily domicile, for domicile is the fixed place of abode
which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than transitory.
Domicile is the place in which a man has voluntarily fixed the habitation
of himself and his family, not for a mere special or limited purpose, but
with the present intention of making a permanent home, until some event
occurs to induce him to adopt some other permanent home. In the case
of businesses or associations, the domicile is that place considered as the
center of business affairs and the place where its functions are discharged.
EARNED INCOME — The compensation as required to be reported to or as
determined by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue under Section 303
of the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform Code of
1971,"131 and rules and regulations promulgated under that section. For the
purpose of earned income and net profits tax, employee business expenses
are allowable deductions as determined under Article III of the "Tax Reform
Code of 1971." The term does not include offsets for business losses. The
amount of any housing allowance provided to a member of the clergy shall
not be taxable as earned income.
EARNED INCOME AND NET PROFITS TAX — The tax levied herein by the
Borough of Hanover on earned income and net profits. Also referred to as
"tax" herein.
EMPLOYER — A person, business entity or other entity employing one
or more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation.
The term includes the commonwealth, a political subdivision and an
instrumentality or public authority of either. For purposes of penalties
hereunder, this term includes a corporate officer.
MUNICIPALITY — A city of the second class, city of the second class A, city
of the third class, borough, town, township of the first class or township
of the second class. For purposes of this article, such term shall mean the
Borough of Hanover, York County, Pennsylvania.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business, except
corporations, as required to be reported to or as determined by the
Department of Revenue under Section 303 of the Act of March 4, 1971
(P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform Code of 1971,"132 and rules and
regulations promulgated under such section. The term does not include
income which is not paid for services provided and which is in the nature
of earnings from an investment. For taxpayers engaged in the business,
profession or activity of farming, the term shall not include:
A. Any gain on the sale of farm machinery;
Any gain on the sale of livestock held twelve months or more for draft,
breeding or dairy purposes; and
B.
131. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
132. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 325-77 HANOVER CODE § 325-77
1:606
NONRESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled outside of the municipality.
PERSON or INDIVIDUAL — A natural person.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
RESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled
in the municipality.
SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
TAX BUREAU — A public nonprofit entity established by a tax collection
committee for the administration and collection of earned income and net
profits tax.
TAX COLLECTION COMMITTEE (hereinafter referred to as "TCC") — The
Committee established to govern each tax collection district for the purpose
of income tax collection. This term shall include a joint tax collection
committee.
TAX COLLECTION DISTRICT (hereinafter referred to as "TCD") — The York
Tax Collection District as established under Act 32. This term shall include
a joint tax collection district.
TAX OFFICER — A political subdivision, public employee, tax bureau,
county, excluding a county of the first class, or private agency which
administers and collects earned income and net profits for one or more
TCDs. Unless otherwise specifically provided, for purposes of an employer
and the obligations of an employer, the term shall mean the Tax Officer or
Tax Collector for the TCD within which the employer is located, or if an
employer maintains workplaces in more than one TCD, the Tax Officer for
each such TCD with respect to employees principally employed therein.
TAXPAYER — A person, partnership, association or any other business entity
required hereunder to file a return of earned income or net profits or to pay
a tax thereon.
§ 325-78. Imposition of tax; rate.
C. Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of the farm.
A. A tax of 1% for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed on earned
income and net profits earned by residents of the municipality.
B. A tax of 1% for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed on earned
income and net profits earned by nonresidents, exclusive of domestic
servants and Maryland residents.
C. The earned income and net profits tax levied under this article shall be
applicable to earned income received and to net profits earned during
the period beginning January 1 of the current year and ending
December 31 of the current year or for taxpayer fiscal years beginning
in the current year. The earned income and net profits tax shall
continue in force on a calendar-year or taxpayer-fiscal-year basis
without the need for annual enactment or reenactment, unless the rate
§ 325-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-78
1:607
§ 325-79. Applicability; partial domicile; declaration and payment
of tax.
of the tax is subsequently changed. For a taxpayer whose fiscal year is
not a calendar year, the Tax Officer shall establish deadlines for filing,
reporting and payment of taxes which provide time periods equivalent
to those provided for a calendar-year taxpayer.
A. Application.
(1) Income taxes shall be applicable to taxable income earned or
received based on the method of accounting used by the taxpayer
in the period beginning January 1 of the current year and ending
December 31 of the current year; except that taxes imposed for the
first time and changes to existing tax rates shall become effective
on January 1 or July 1, as specified in this article, and the tax shall
continue in force on a calendar-year or taxpayer-fiscal-year basis,
without annual reenactment, unless the rate of the tax is
subsequently changed.
(2) For a taxpayer whose fiscal year is not a calendar year, the Tax
Officer shall establish deadlines for filing, reporting and payment of
taxes which provide time periods equivalent to those provided for a
calendar-year taxpayer.
B. Partial domicile. The taxable income subject to tax of a taxpayer who is
domiciled in a political subdivision for only a portion of the tax year
shall be an amount equal to the taxpayer's taxable income multiplied by
a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of calendar months
during the tax year that the individual is domiciled in the political
subdivision, and the denominator of which is 12. A taxpayer shall
include in the numerator any calendar month during which the
taxpayer is domiciled for more than half the calendar month. A day that
a taxpayer's domicile changes shall be included as a day the individual
is in the new domicile and not the old domicile. If the number of days in
the calendar month in which the individual lived in the old and new
domiciles are equal, the calendar month shall be included in calculating
the number of months in the new domicile.
C. Declaration and payment. Except as provided in Subsection A(2),
taxpayers shall declare and pay income taxes as follows:
(1) Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding year,
make and file with the resident Tax Officer a final return showing
the amount of taxable income received during the period beginning
January 1 of the current year and ending December 31 of the
current year, the total amount of tax due on the taxable income, the
amount of tax paid, the amount of tax that has been withheld under
§ 325-81 below and the balance of tax due. All amounts reported
shall be rounded to the nearest whole dollar. At the time of filing
the final return, the taxpayer shall pay the Tax Officer the balance
§ 325-78 HANOVER CODE § 325-79
1:608
of the tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in the case
of overpayment.
(2) Net profits.
(a) Every taxpayer making net profits shall, by April 15 of the
current year, make and file with the Tax Officer a declaration of
the taxpayer's estimated net profits during the period
beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of the current
year and shall pay to the Tax Officer in four equal quarterly
installments the tax due on the estimated net profits. The first
installment shall be paid at the time of filing the declaration,
and the other installments shall be paid on or before June 15 of
the current year, September 15 of the current year and January
15 of the succeeding year, respectively.
(b) Any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profit after April 15
of the current year shall make and file the declaration required
on or before June 15 of the current year, September 15 of the
current year or December 31 of the current year, whichever
date next follows the date on which the taxpayer first
anticipates such net profit, and shall pay to the Tax Officer in
equal installments the tax due on or before the quarterly
payment dates that remain after the filing of the declaration.
(c) Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding
year, make and file with the Tax Officer a final return showing
the amount of net profits earned or received based on the
method of accounting used by the taxpayer during the period
beginning January 1 of the current year and ending December
31 of the current year, the total amount of tax due on the net
profits and the total amount of tax paid. At the time of filing the
final return, the taxpayer shall pay to the Tax Officer the
balance of tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in
the case of overpayment. Any taxpayer may, in lieu of paying
the fourth quarterly installment of the estimated tax, elect to
make and file with the Tax Officer, on or before January 31 of
the succeeding year, the final return.
(d) The Department, in consultation with the Department of
Revenue, shall provide by regulation for the filing of adjusted
declarations of estimated net profits and for the payments of
the estimated tax in cases where a taxpayer who has filed the
declaration required under this subsection anticipates
additional net profits not previously declared or has
overestimated anticipated net profits.
(e) Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December
31 of the current year shall, within 30 days after the
discontinuance of business, file a final return as required under
this article and pay the tax due.
§ 325-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-79
1:609
§ 325-80. Registration requirements.
§ 325-81. Filing and payment of tax by employer; withholding.
(3) Every taxpayer who receives any other taxable income not subject
to withholding under Section 512(3) of the Act133 shall make and
file with the resident Tax Officer a quarterly return on or before
April 15 of the current year, June 15 of the current year, September
15 of the current year, and January 15 of the succeeding year,
setting forth the aggregate amount of taxable income not subject to
withholding by the taxpayer during the three-month periods ending
March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the current year,
September 30 of the current year, and December 31 of the current
year, respectively, and subject to income tax, together with such
other information as the Department may require. Every taxpayer
filing a return shall, at the time of filing the return, pay to the Tax
Officer the amount of income tax due. The Department shall
establish criteria under which the Tax Officer may waive the
quarterly return and payment of the income tax and permit a
taxpayer to file the receipt of taxable income on the taxpayer's
annual return and pay the income tax due on or before April 15 of
the succeeding year.
A. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the municipality, having imposed a tax
on earned income or net profits within its municipal boundaries, who
employs one or more persons, other than domestic servants, for a
salary, wage, commission or other compensation who has not previously
registered shall, within 15 days after becoming an employer, register
with the Tax Officer or other designated tax officer, his/her or its name
and address and such other information as the Pennsylvania
Department of Economic and Community Development may require.
B. Every employer shall require each new employee to complete a
certificate of residency form, which form shall be an addendum to the
federal employee's withholding allowance certificate (Form W-4 or
successor form). An employer shall also require any employee who
changes their address or domicile to complete a certificate of residency
form, which forms are available from the Pennsylvania Department of
Economic and Community Development or the Tax Officer upon
request. The purpose of said form shall be to help identify the political
subdivision where an employee lives and works.
A. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the municipality imposing a tax on
earned income or net profits within the municipality who employs one
or more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation
shall deduct at the time of payment thereof the tax imposed by this
133. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.512(3).
§ 325-79 HANOVER CODE § 325-81
1:610
article on the earned income due to his employee or employees and
shall, on or before April 30 of the current year, July 31 of the current
year, October 31 of the current year and January 31 of the succeeding
year, file a quarterly return and pay to the Tax Officer the amount of
taxes deducted during the preceding quarterly periods ending March
31 of the current year, June 30 of the current year, September 30 of
the current year and December 31 of the current year, respectively.
Such return, unless otherwise agreed upon between the Tax Officer
and employer, shall show the name and social security number of
each such employee, the compensation of such employee during such
preceding three-month period, the tax deducted therefrom, the political
subdivisions imposing the tax upon such employee, the total
compensation of all such employees during such preceding quarterly
period and the total tax deducted therefrom and paid with the return,
as well as any other information prescribed by the Department.
B. Any employer who, for two of the preceding four quarterly periods, has
failed to deduct the proper tax or any part thereof or who has failed to
pay over the proper amount of tax to the Tax Officer may be required by
the Tax Officer to file his return and pay the tax monthly. In such cases,
payments of tax shall be made to the Tax Officer on or before the last
day of the month succeeding the month for which the tax was withheld.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A above, the provisions of
this Subsection C shall apply if any employer has more than one place of
employment in more than one tax collection district. Within 30 days
following the last day of each month, the employer may file the return
required by Subsection A above and pay the total amount of tax due
from employees in all work locations during the preceding month to the
Tax Officer for either the tax collection district in which the employer's
payroll operations are located or as determined by the Department. The
return and tax deducted shall be filed and paid electronically. The
employer must file a notice of intention to file combined returns and
make combined payments with the Tax Officer for each place of
employment at least one month prior to filing its first combined return
or making its first combined payment. This subsection shall not be
construed to change the location of an employee's place of employment
for purposes of nonresident tax liability.
D. Every employer shall deduct or withhold from employees, exclusive of
domestic servants and Maryland residents, at the following rates:
(1) For resident taxpayers, at the applicable rates imposed by the
Borough of Hanover and the Hanover Public School District for the
resident taxpayer's earned income and net profits.
(2) For nonresident taxpayers, at the rate of no less than 1% of the
nonresident taxpayer's earned income and net profits.
§ 325-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-81
1:611
§ 325-82. Powers and duties of Tax Officer.
E. On or before February 28 of the succeeding year, every employer shall
file with the Tax Officer or other designated tax officer to whom tax has
been deducted and remitted as required herein:
(1) An annual return showing the total amount of compensation paid,
the total amount of tax deducted, the total amount of tax paid to the
Tax Officer for the period beginning January 1 of the current year
and ending December 31 of the current year, and any other
information prescribed by the Department.
(2) An individual withholding statement, which may be integrated with
the federal wage and tax statement (Form W-2 or successor form),
for each employee employed during all or any part of the period
beginning January 1 of the current year and ending December 31 of
the current year, setting forth the employee's name, address and
social security number, the amount of compensation paid to the
employee during said period, the amount of tax deducted, the
numerical code prescribed by the Department representing the
TCD where payments required herein were remitted and any other
information required by the Department or the Tax Officer and the
amount of tax paid to the Tax Officer. Every employer shall furnish
two copies of the individual return to the employee for whom it is
filed.
F. Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the
current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business,
file the returns and withholding statements hereinabove required and
pay the tax due.
G. Except as otherwise provided for in this section, Section 511 of the
Act134 or by ordinance, every employer who willfully or negligently fails
or omits to make the deductions required by this section shall be liable
for payment of the taxes which the employer is required to withhold to
the extent that such taxes have not been recovered from the employee.
The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions
required by this section shall not relieve any employee from the
payment of the tax or from complying with the requirements of this
article relating to the filing of declarations and returns.
H. No employer shall be required to register, deduct or withhold taxes, file
returns or pay taxes with regard to residents of Maryland.
A. It shall be the duty of the Tax Officer to collect and receive the taxes,
fines and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be the Tax
Officer's duty to keep a record showing the amount of tax received from
each taxpayer paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
134. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.511.
§ 325-81 HANOVER CODE § 325-82
1:612
§ 325-83. Suit for collection of tax.
B. Each Tax Officer, before entering upon official duties, shall give and
acknowledge a bond to the TCC appointing such Tax Officer. The bond
provided shall be subject to the requirements set forth in the Act.
C. The Tax Officer shall comply with all resolutions, policies and
procedures adopted by the TCC and shall comply with all regulations
adopted by the Department under the Act.
D. The Tax Officer shall refund, on petition of and proof by the taxpayer,
earned income tax paid on the taxpayer's ordinary and necessary
business expenses to the extent that such expenses are not paid by the
taxpayer's employer.
E. The Tax Officer and agents designated by him/her/it are hereby
authorized to examine the books, papers and records of any employer
or of any taxpayer or of any person whom the Tax Officer reasonably
believes to be an employer or taxpayer in order to verify the accuracy of
any declaration or return or, if no declaration or return was filed, to
ascertain the tax due. Every employer and every taxpayer and every
person whom the Tax Officer reasonably believes to be an employer or
taxpayer is hereby directed and required to give to the Tax Officer or to
any agent designated by him any means, facilities and opportunity for
such examination and investigations as are hereby authorized. Such
examination or audits shall be conducted by the Tax Officer and/or any
agents designated by the Tax Officer and shall be conducted in
accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 84, Subchapter C135 (relating to
the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights).
F. Any information gained by the Tax Officer, his/her/its agents or
employees or by any other official or agent of the taxing district as a
result of any declarations, returns, investigations, hearings or
verifications required or authorized by this article shall be and remain
confidential, except for official purposes and except in accordance with
a proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law.
G. The Tax Officer is authorized to establish different filing, reporting and
payment dates for taxpayers whose fiscal years do not coincide with the
calendar year, provided that any filing, reporting or payment dates shall
provide time periods equivalent to those time periods set forth for
taxpayers whose fiscal year coincides with a calendar year.
A. The Tax Officer may sue in the name of the political subdivision within
the TCD for the recovery of taxes due and unpaid under this article.
B. Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by this article shall be
begun within three years after such tax is due or the declaration or
return has been filed or a redetermination of compensation or net
135. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8421 et seq.
§ 325-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-83
1:613
§ 325-84. Interest and penalties.
profits by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue, whichever date
is later; provided, however, that this limitation shall not prevent the
institution of a suit for the collection of any tax due or determined to be
due in the following cases:
(1) Where no declaration or return was filed by any person although a
declaration or return was required to be filed by him under
provisions of this article, there shall be no limitation.
(2) Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any
person or of other evidence relating to such declaration or return in
the possession of the Tax Officer reveals a fraudulent evasion of
taxes, there shall be no limitation.
(3) Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of this
article and has failed to pay the amounts so deducted to the Tax
Officer or where any person has willfully failed or omitted to make
the deductions required by this article, there shall be no limitation.
(4) Where an employer has intentionally failed to make deductions
required by this article.
(5) In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability of 25% or
more and no fraud, suit shall be begun within six years.
C. The Tax Officer may sue for recovery of an erroneous refund, provided
that such suit is begun two years after making such refund, except that
the suit may be brought within five years if it appears that any part of
the refund was induced by fraud or misrepresentation of material fact.
D. This section shall not be construed to limit the municipality from
recovering delinquent taxes by any other means provided by the Act.
Further, nothing set forth herein shall be construed to limit a Tax
Officer, a TCD or political subdivision from recovering delinquent taxes
by any other means provided by the Act.
A. Except as may be provided for in Subsection B below, in the event any
tax imposed in this article is not paid when due, interest shall accrue at
the same rate a taxpayer is required to pay to the commonwealth as
provided in Section 806 of the Act of April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176),
known as the "Fiscal Code,"136 or such successor legislation, on the
amount of said tax, and an additional penalty of 1% of the unpaid tax for
each month or fraction thereof during which the tax remains unpaid
shall be added and collected, but the amount of penalty shall not exceed
15% in the aggregate. Where an action is brought for the recovery of
tax, the taxpayer liable for the tax shall, in addition, be liable for the
costs of collection, interest and penalties, including, but not limited to,
court costs and attorneys' fees.
136. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 1 et seq.
§ 325-83 HANOVER CODE § 325-84
1:614
§ 325-85. Violations and penalties.
B. Pursuant to the Act, the Department may establish conditions under
which a Tax Officer, with the concurrence of the TCC, may abate
interest or penalties that would otherwise be imposed for the
nonreporting or underreporting of income tax liabilities or for
nonpayment of taxes previously imposed and due if the taxpayer files
delinquent returns and pays the tax in full.
C. The provisions of Subsection B above shall not affect or terminate any
petitions, investigations, prosecutions or other proceedings pending
under this article or prevent the commencement of further prosecution
of any proceedings by the appropriate authorities for violations of this
article. However, no proceedings shall be commenced on the basis of
delinquent returns filed pursuant to this section if the returns are
determined to be substantially true and correct and the tax due is paid
within the prescribed time.
A. Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to make any declaration or
return required by this article, any employer who fails, neglects or
refuses to register or to pay the tax deducted from his employees or
fails, neglects or refuses to deduct or withhold the tax from his
employees, any person who refuses to permit the Tax Officer or any
agent designated by him to examine his books, records or papers and
any person who knowingly makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent
return or attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full
disclosure of the amount of his net profits or earned income in order to
avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed by this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $2,500 for each offense, and costs, and, in default of payment
of said fine and costs, to be imprisoned for a period not exceeding six
months.
B. Any employer who is required under this article to collect, account for
and distribute taxes and who willfully fails to collect or truthfully
account for and distribute such tax commits a misdemeanor and shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $25,000 or to
imprisonment not exceeding two years, or both.
C. Any person who divulges any information which is confidential under
the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $2,500 for each offense, and
costs, or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding one year, or both.
D. The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
E. The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for
making the declaration or returns required by this article shall not
excuse him or her from making such declaration or return.
§ 325-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-85
1:615
§ 325-86. Applicability.
This article shall not apply to any person or property as to whom or which it
is beyond the legal power of the municipality to levy, assess and impose the
tax or duties as herein provided.
§ 325-87. Purpose; repealer; effect of prior provisions.
The primary purpose of this article is to conform the local income tax
currently levied on earned income and net profits by the municipality with
the Act and to do so within the time frame set forth in the Act. Any
prior ordinance levying such tax is hereby amended and restated in its
entirety to read as set forth in this article. To the extent that any previous
ordinance or portion thereof is inconsistent or conflicts with this article,
such ordinance(s) or portion thereof shall be repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency and/or conflict. To the extent that any prior ordinance levying
such tax was in force immediately prior to enactment of this article, this
article is intended as a continuation of such prior ordinance and not as the
enactment of an ordinance imposing a new tax. In the event this article
or any portion thereof is determined to be unconstitutional or otherwise
invalid, the prior ordinance, or portion thereof, levying a similar tax shall
remain in full force and effect and shall not be affected by the adoption
of this article. Nothing contained herein shall affect, impair or otherwise
abrogate any act done or liability incurred, nor shall any provision of this
article affect, impair or preclude any suit or prosecution pending, whether
or not currently initiated, to enforce any right, penalty or violation under
the authority or any previous ordinance in force prior to adoption of this
article.
§ 325-88. Effective date.
The effective date of this article and beginning of the initial current year
shall be January 1, 2012.
F. The Borough of Hanover hereby approves and adopts the Cost of
Collection Schedule,137 attached hereto and made a part hereof, to be
imposed by the designated Tax Officer for the collection of taxes on
earned income and net profits upon any taxpayer whose taxes are or
become delinquent and/or remain due and unpaid; provided, however,
that the TCC may approve amendments to said fee schedule by
resolution from time to time. Amendments to the collection schedule
shall become effective upon adoption by the TCC. The designated Tax
Officer is hereby authorized to retain such costs of collection as set
forth in the attached schedule, as may be amended and supplemented
from time to time, in recovering delinquent taxes and as permitted to be
assessed to delinquent taxpayers pursuant to law.
137. Editor's Note: Said schedule is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 325-85 HANOVER CODE § 325-88
1:616
ARTICLE VIII
Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance (LERTA) Program
[Adopted 2-27-2019 by Ord. No. 2281]
§ 325-89. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings set forth below:
ASSESSED VALUATION — The assessment placed on real property by the
York County Assessment Office upon which all real estate tax shall be
calculated.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Hanover.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of Hanover.
COUNTY — The County of York.
DETERIORATED AREA — Any property designated by the Borough Council
of the Borough of Hanover in accordance with this article.
DETERIORATED PROPERTY — Any industrial, commercial or other
business property owned by an individual, association or corporation, and
located in a deteriorated area, as determined by the Borough Council of
the Borough of Hanover and as provided for herein, or any such property
which has been the subject of an order by a government agency requiring
the property or unit to be vacated, condemned or demolished by reason of
noncompliance with laws, ordinances or regulations.
HPSD — The Hanover Public School District.
IMPROVEMENT or IMPROVEMENTS — Repair, construction or
reconstruction, including alterations and additions, having the effect of
rehabilitating a deteriorated property so that it becomes habitable or
attains higher standards of safety, health, economic use or amenity; or is
brought into compliance with laws, ordinances or regulations governing
such standards. Ordinary upkeep and maintenance shall not be deemed an
improvement.
LOCAL TAXING AUTHORITY — The Borough of Hanover, the Hanover
Public School District, the County of York or any other governmental entity
having the authority to levy real property taxes within the Borough of
Hanover.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
limited liability company, company, or any other organization of any kind
paying property taxes on real estate and improvements thereto located in
the eligible area as designated by Resolution No. 1244, adopted by the
Borough Council on February 27, 2019 and as identified in § 325-90 of this
article.
YORK COUNTY ASSESSMENT OFFICE — The Department of Assessment
of the York County Assessment and Tax Claim Office.
§ 325-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-90
1:617
§ 325-90. Exemption area.
Each property located in the deteriorated area shall be eligible to
participate in the Tax Exemption Program so long as it meets all of the
requirements for the Tax Exemption Program as set forth in this article.
§ 325-91. Exemption amount.
A. By Resolution No. 1244, adopted on February 27, 2019, the Borough
Council determined and affixed the boundaries of the deteriorated area
as those real properties designated and identified as follows:
(1) Those properties located in the Designated Downtown District as
identified in the attached map entitled Borough of Hanover,
Hanover LERTA Program, dated January 29, 2019.
(2) The real properties identified and designated as follows:
(a) York County Tax Parcel ID No. 670001900390000000 (North
Hanover Mall to 1155 Carlisle Street);
(b) York County Tax Parcel ID No. 670001801950000000 (East
Chestnut Street and North Railroad Street to 108 East
Chestnut Street);
(c) York County Tax Parcel ID No. 670000301760000000 (Brick
structure at Ridge Avenue and East Middle Street to 237 Ridge
Avenue);
(d) York County Tax Parcel ID No. 670000404110000000 (East
Middle Street and Factory Street to 421-423 East Middle
Street);
(e) York County Tax Parcel ID No. 670000404460000000 (East
Middle Street and Factory Street to 501 East Middle Street);
(f) York County Tax Parcel ID Nos. 670000901630000000,
670000901710000000 (Former Donald B. Smith Roofing to
310 Juniper Lane and 316 Juniper Lane);
(g) York County Tax Parcel ID No. 670000901940000000 (Former
Eisenhart Wallcovering Building to 400 Pine Street);
(h) York County Tax Parcel ID No. 670001001370000000 (Former
Newcomb's Market to 387 High Street);
(i) York County Tax Parcel ID No. 670001003570000000 (Former
Bowman's Feed Store to 400 Carlisle Street); and
(j) York County Tax Parcel ID Nos. 67000090203A000000 (498
Poplar Street), 67000090203B000200 (Poplar Street),
670000901690000000 (425 Poplar Street).
§ 325-90 HANOVER CODE § 325-91
1:618
§ 325-92. Exemption schedule. [Amended 3-27-2019 by Ord. No.
2282]
The length and the amount of the exemption provided for this article shall
be declining percentage over a ten-year period, calculated as follows:
A. The amount to be exempted from Borough real property taxes shall be
limited to that portion of the additional assessment valuation
attributable to the actual costs of the improvements to Deteriorated
Property constructed after the effective date of this article in
accordance with the exemption schedule established by this article.
B. The exemption shall be limited to the improvements for which the
exemption has been requested in the manner set forth in this article
and for which a separate tax assessment has been made by the York
County Assessment Office. The exemption shall only be granted if the
improvements have been completed in compliance with all applicable
laws, ordinances, codes, rules, regulations, and a land development
plan, if required, was approved by Borough Council, prior to
construction of such Improvements.
C. In the case where a property in the deteriorated area is damaged,
destroyed or demolished by any cause or for any reason and the
assessed valuation of the property affected has been reduced as a result
of such damage, destruction or demolition, the exemption from
Borough real property taxation shall be limited to the actual cost of the
improvements or construction that is in excess of the original
assessment that existed prior to such damage, destruction or
demolition. In the event a property has been fully demolished in
accordance with a demolition permit issued by the Borough and such
property remained vacant of any structure for more than one year from
the date of issuance of such demolition permit, the exemption from
Borough real property taxation shall be the actual cost of the
improvements or construction.
D. The exemption from Borough real property taxes granted pursuant to
this article shall be upon the improvements on the property and shall
run with the land, and shall not terminate upon the sale or exchange of
the property.
A. For the first year immediately following the date upon which the
improvements become assessable, in an amount equal to 100% of the
assessed valuation of the eligible improvements shall be exempted from
Borough real property taxation.
B. For the second year immediately following the date upon which the
improvements become assessable, in an amount equal to 90% of the
assessed valuation of the eligible improvements shall be exempted from
Borough real property taxation.
§ 325-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-92
1:619
§ 325-93. Term of tax exemption program/sunset provision.
This article shall become effective on the effective date and shall be
applicable for a period of 10 calendar years thereafter, at which time it
shall automatically expire. Nothing contained herein shall act to prohibit
the Borough Council from enacting a similar ordinance, or extending this
article. Any property tax exemption granted under the provisions of this
article shall continue according to the exemption schedule set forth in this
C. For the third year immediately following the date upon which the
improvements become assessable, in an amount equal to 80% of the
assessed valuation of the eligible improvements shall be exempted from
Borough real property taxation.
D. For the fourth year immediately following the date upon which the
improvements become assessable, in an amount equal to 70% of the
assessed valuation of the eligible improvements shall be exempted from
Borough real property taxation.
E. For the fifth year immediately following the date upon which the
improvements become assessable, in an amount equal to 60% of the
assessed valuation of the eligible improvements shall be exempted from
Borough real property taxation.
F. For the sixth year immediately following the date upon which the
improvements become assessable, in an amount equal to 50% of the
assessed valuation of the eligible improvements shall be exempted from
Borough real property taxation.
G. For the 7th year immediately following the date upon which the
improvements become assessable, in an amount equal to 40% of the
assessed valuation of the eligible improvements shall be exempted from
Borough real property taxation.
H. For the 8th year immediately following the date upon which the
improvements become assessable, in an amount equal to 30% of the
assessed valuation of the eligible improvements shall be exempted from
Borough real property taxation.
I. For the 9th year immediately following the date upon which the
improvements become assessable, in an amount equal to 20% of the
assessed valuation of the eligible improvements shall be exempted from
Borough real property taxation.
J. For the 10th year immediately following the date upon which the
improvements become assessable, in an amount equal to 10% of the
assessed valuation of the eligible improvements shall be exempted from
Borough real property taxation.
K. The exemption shall terminate on the 11th year immediately following
the date upon which the improvements become assessable.
§ 325-92 HANOVER CODE § 325-93
1:620
article even if this article expires, terminates, is amended or repealed by
the Borough Council.
§ 325-94. Exemption after termination.
Any person timely applying for and receiving an exemption in accordance
with the provisions of this article shall be entitled to the exemption in
accordance with the exemption schedule set forth in § 325-92 of this article
even if such exemption schedule extends beyond the termination of the
Tax Exemption Program, and for this purpose the Tax Exemption Program
shall continue in force and effect until the last such exemption amount
granted pursuant hereto has expired. In the event of any dispute regarding
the timeliness or completion of any such application, the determination of
Borough Council made at a public meeting shall be final and binding.
§ 325-95. Procedure for obtaining exemption.
§ 325-96. Revocation of exemption.
The exemption from Borough real property taxes provided for in this article
shall be forfeited by the applicant and/or any subsequent owner of the
A. Each application for exemption shall be in writing on a form established
from time to time by Borough Council. Application for exemption forms
may be obtained from the Borough at the Borough offices located at 44
Frederick Street, Hanover, York County, Pennsylvania 17331.
B. Each person desiring an exemption in accordance with this article shall
fully complete and submit to the Borough at 44 Frederick Street,
Hanover, York County, Pennsylvania 17331, an application for
exemption at the time of application for a building permit or
construction permit for such improvements. Failure to timely apply for
the exemption shall disqualify the improvements from the exemption
provided for in this article.
C. Upon receipt by the Borough of a fully completed application for
exemption, the Borough shall forward a copy thereof to the County
Assessment Office and instruct the York County Board of Assessment
Appeals to separately assess the eligible improvements after
completion of construction of such improvements, calculate the amount
of the assessment eligible for tax exemption in accordance with the
limits established by the Borough from time to time, if any, and notify
the Borough and the taxpayer thereof. Appeals from the assessments
and the amount eligible for the exemption may be taken by the owner of
such property or the Borough, as provided by law; provided, however,
after the initial assessment, the applicant waives the right to appeal the
assessment for the term of the Tax Exemption Program or exemption.
Upon receipt of such notification from the York County Assessment
Office, the exemption may be taken in accordance with the exemption
schedule set forth in § 325-92 of this article.
§ 325-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-96
1:621
property and such exemption shall be revoked by the Borough upon the
occurrence of any of the following:
§ 325-97. Appeals.
Appeals from the reassessment and the determination of the amounts of
assessed valuation eligible for exemption may be filed with the York County
Board of Assessment Appeals.
§ 325-98. Rules and regulations.
Borough Council is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt,
promulgate, amend, implement and enforce, by resolution of Borough
Council from time to time, reasonable rules and regulations to carry out the
terms and provisions of this article.
§ 325-99. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable. If any provision, sentence,
clause, section, subsection or portion of this article is for any reason found
to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality
or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections, subsections or portions of this article. It is
hereby declared as the intent of the Borough Council that this article would
have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid provision,
sentence, clause, section, subsection or portion thereof not been included
herein.
§ 325-100. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting with the provisions of this
article are hereby repealed insofar as they are inconsistent with this article.
A. The failure to pay in full any nonexempt real estate taxes by the last day
of the time period to pay such taxes in the penalty period. Upon receipt
of the notice of nonpayment of nonexempt real property taxes, the
Borough Treasurer shall immediately terminate the exemption.
B. The failure to pay when due any amount due and owing to the Borough.
Upon receipt of notice of nonpayment of any such amount, the Borough
Treasurer shall immediately terminate the exemption.
C. The failure to obtain and pay in full all fees for all necessary and proper
permits, licenses and certificates prior to commencement of
construction of the improvements to, or occupancy of, the property.
D. The failure to comply with the minimum standards established by all
applicable laws, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations.
E. The failure to comply with the provisions of this article.
§ 325-96 HANOVER CODE § 325-101
1:622
§ 325-101. Contingency.
This article is contingent upon the enactment or adoption of a similar tax
exemption ordinance or resolution by both the County and the HPSD which
applies to the subject matter of this article.
§ 325-102. When effective.
This article shall become effective upon enactment and upon the
satisfaction of the contingency and conditions set forth in § 325-101 this
article.
§ 325-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-102
1:623
Chapter 330
TRAILERS; TEMPORARY STRUCTURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Building regulations — See Ch. 150.
Housing standards — See Ch. 230.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 286.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 346.
Water — See Ch. 355.
§ 330-1. Requirements for use or occupancy.
No person or persons shall live in or occupy a trailer, semitrailer or any
other kind or type of temporary or movable structure for a period of more
than 24 hours within the corporate limits of the Borough of Hanover,
unless and until the said trailer, semitrailer or other temporary or movable
structure shall first have been connected to the sanitary sewer system and
to the water system of the said Borough of Hanover.
Chapter 335
UTILITY POLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
§ 325-102 HANOVER CODE § 330-1
1:624
ARTICLE I
Marking
[Adopted 4-17-1924 by Ord. No. 364]
§ 335-1. Timely marking required; list of poles.
Within 90 days after the publication of this article, all public utility
companies placing or maintaining poles on any of the streets, alleys or other
public thoroughfares of the Borough shall be required to number each and
every pole and give some distinctive mark or designation of ownership,
in order that the police inspection thereof may be more conveniently and
efficiently done, recorded and reported; and, within the said 90 days, all
public utility companies shall file with the Borough Secretary a list of
poles according to number, the highway location of such numbers and
the distinctive mark which denotes ownership. The said companies shall
thereafter maintain the said method of naming, numbering and recording
with the Borough Secretary as new poles are placed, changes made and as
the marks or numbers become illegible.
§ 335-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-1
1:625

ARTICLE II
Erection of Poles
[Adopted 11-5-1894 by Ord. No. 69]
§ 335-2. Location; approval required.138
From and after the passage of this article, said company shall erect its said
poles only at such points or places in the streets and alleys of the said
Borough as shall be designated by the Street Committee of the Borough
Council, and no poles shall be erected unless the same first be approved by
the said Street Committee.
138. Editor's Note: Original § 89-3, Annual fee for Western Union Telegraph Company, which
immediately preceded this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 335-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-2
1:627
Chapter 339
VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Snow emergencies — See Ch. 304.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 316.
Abandoned or junked vehicles — See Ch. 342.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 346.
§ 339-1. Authorization to remove and impound vehicles.
The members of the Police Department of the Borough of Hanover are
hereby authorized to have removed and impounded any vehicle violating
any parking ordinance of the Borough of Hanover.
§ 339-2. Removal and impounding by garage.
Said removal and impounding shall be performed by a garage to be
designated and approved by the Council of the Borough of Hanover.
§ 339-3. Bond by garage.
Said garage shall furnish and provide to the Borough of Hanover a bond, in
the amount as shall from time to time be fixed by Council, indemnifying the
owner of such vehicle against the loss thereof, or injury or damage thereto,
while in the custody of said garage.
§ 339-4. Towing and storage charges.
The towing and storage charges performed hereunder shall be fixed by the
Council of the Borough of Hanover, collected by the Mayor and paid into the
Borough treasury.
§ 339-5. Notice to owner.
Within 12 hours from the time of removal of such vehicle, notice of the
fact that such vehicle has been impounded shall be sent by the Police
Department to the owner of record of such vehicle, designating the place
from which said vehicle was removed, the reason for its removal and
impounding and the garage in which it has been impounded.
§ 339-6. Payment final unless under protest.
The payment of the charges herein provided, unless such payment shall
be made under protest, shall be final and conclusive and shall constitute a
waiver of any right to recover the money so paid.
§ 335-2 HANOVER CODE § 339-7
1:628
§ 339-7. Hearings on payment made under protest.
In the event the towing and impounding charges are paid under protest, the
offender shall be entitled to a hearing before a Magisterial District Judge,
Mayor or court of record having jurisdiction, in which case the defendant
shall be proceeded against and receive such notice as is provided by the
Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania139 in other cases of
summary offenses, and shall have the same rights to appeal and waiver of
hearing.
§ 339-8. Removal by driver prior to official removal.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this chapter if, at the
time of such intended removal, the owner or person for the time being in
charge of such vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and intention
to immediately remove said vehicle.
Chapter 342
VEHICLES, ABANDONED OR JUNKED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Automobile graveyards — See Ch. 130. Vehicle impoundment — See Ch. 339.
§ 342-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall, for
the purpose of this chapter, have the following meanings, except in those
instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE — A motor vehicle, or parts thereof, which
has been voluntarily relinquished by its owner, with the intention of
terminating his ownership, possession and control, without vesting
ownership in any other person.
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle, or parts thereof, not in
running condition left or stored in the open, and not in such an enclosure as
is reasonably calculated to prevent children from playing on or about such
motor vehicle and/or detrimental to the general appearance and character
of the immediate neighborhood.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle, machine or equipment which is powered
or self-propelled and also any trailer or semitrailer designed for use with
such vehicles.
PROPERLY LICENSED VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle bearing a current
official state inspection emblem.
139. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 339-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-2
1:629
§ 342-2. Storage of abandoned or junked vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, firm, association or
corporation, excluding licensed and/or authorized motor vehicle dealers, to
park or store or to permit another person, partnership, firm, association
or corporation to park or store in the open on private property within
the Borough of Hanover, York County, Pennsylvania, any abandoned motor
vehicle or junked motor vehicle for a period longer than six months.
§ 342-3. Evidence of abandoned or junked vehicle.
The following acts or circumstances shall be prima facie evidence that a
motor vehicle is an abandoned or junked motor vehicle:
§ 342-4. Exceptions.
§ 342-5. Notice to remove vehicle; failure to comply.
The Borough Manager, or any police officer or employee of the Borough
designated thereby for the purpose, is hereby authorized to give notice,
by personal service or by United States mail, to the owner and/or the
lessee of the premises where an abandoned motor vehicle and/or a junked
A. A motor vehicle not properly licensed that has remained on private
property with or without the consent of the owner or person in control
of the property for a period of more than six months.
B. Powered machinery and equipment not subject to licensing that has
remained unused on private property for a period of six months.
A. Owners of motor vehicles to be repaired, rebuilt or customized that are
parked or stored in the open on private property and are classified as
"abandoned or junked vehicles," according to § 342-3 of this chapter,
may apply to the Zoning Hearing Board for a home occupation to
perform such work. The Zoning Hearing Board shall establish a
reasonable time for repairing, rebuilding or customizing each motor
vehicle and shall impose any reasonable conditions in granting the
same or may, in its discretion, deny the application.
B. Owners of abandoned or junked motor vehicles stored or parked on
private property which from the outside appear to be complete motor
vehicles, with or without wheels and tires, properly blocked, all parts
secured and the area around and beneath the motor vehicle properly
maintained, may apply to the Zoning Hearing Board for a temporary
permit to park or store the aforementioned motor vehicle on private
property for one year in accordance with § 140-26 of the Hanover
Borough Zoning Ordinance.140 The Zoning Hearing Board may impose
reasonable conditions in granting the same or may, in its discretion,
deny the application.
140. Editor's Note: See Ch. 370, Zoning.
§ 342-2 HANOVER CODE § 342-5
1:630
motor vehicle is parked or stored in violation of this chapter, directing and
requiring the owner and/or lessee to remove said motor vehicle from the
premises within five days after the issuance of such notice. In case any
person, partnership, firm, association or corporation shall neglect, fail or
refuse to comply with such notice within a period of time stated therein, the
Borough authorities may remove the motor vehicle parked and/or stored in
violation of this chapter, and the cost thereof, together with any additional
penalty authorized by the law, may be collected by the Borough from
such person, partnership, firm, association or corporation in the manner
provided by law.
§ 342-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership, firm, association or corporation who or which shall
fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter
within five days after receiving the notice as provided for in § 342-5 of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to the penalties as
provided for in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, enacted December 29,
1954.
Chapter 346
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Parking Authority — See Ch. 8, Art. II.
Parking meters — See Ch. 254.
Snow emergencies — See Ch. 304.
Vehicle impoundment — See Ch. 339.
Abandoned or junked vehicles — See Ch. 342.
Vehicle weight limits — See Ch. 350.
§ 346-1. Parking.
Parking of vehicles in the Borough of Hanover is hereby regulated as
follows:
A. How to park. [Amended 3-17-1954 by Ord. No. 825; 10-31-1968 by
Ord. No. 1411]
(1) When parking, vehicles shall be drawn up to the right-hand curb
and stopped not more than six inches from the curb and parallel
thereto, except that:
(a) Vehicles shall be parked at right angles to the curbline on
Center Square.
§ 342-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-1
1:631
(b) Vehicles shall be parked with the front thereof toward the curb
at an angle to be shown by appropriate markings on the
surface of the street and curb on:
Name of Street Side Location
East Chestnut
Street
Between the first and second
alleys east of and
approximately parallel to
Railroad Street
East Walnut
Street
Southeast Between Eagle Avenue and
York Street
McCosh Street West From Stock Street
southwardly for a distance of
216.5 feet
(2) Double parking is prohibited within the Borough of Hanover except
for such time as may actually be required for loading and unloading
of passengers or materials.
B. Streets and alleys in which parking is prohibited. Parking is prohibited
at all times in the following streets and alleys:141
Name of Street Side Location
Alley extending
northward from
Baltimore Street,
commonly known as
"Newcomer's Alley"
[Added 9-17-1952 by
Ord. No. 790]
From Baltimore Street to York
Street
Alley extending
westward from Baltimore
Street at the property of
Metropolitan Edison
Company
From Baltimore Street to the
intersection of the first alley
west of and parallel with
Baltimore Street
Alley extending
northward from
Broadway at the
property occupied by
Samuel Shirk & Son,
Inc., sometimes known
as "Railroad Street"
[Amended 4-23-1952
by Ord. No. 782]
From Broadway to East
Chestnut Street, except for a
space 60 feet in length on the
west side thereof, beginning
100 feet north of Broadway,
where parking is permitted
for loading and unloading only
during usual and customary
business hours
141. Editor's Note: This subsection was amended as follows to repeal various entries:
9-21-1960 by Ord. No. 1055; 3-21-1962 by Ord. No. 1131; and 10-31-1968 by Ord. No.
1411. See additional amendments noted in the table below.
§ 346-1 HANOVER CODE § 346-1
1:632
Name of Street Side Location
Alley extending
southward from
Broadway at the
property occupied by J.C.
Tanger & Son
[Amended 4-23-1952
by Ord. No. 782]
From Broadway to East
Walnut Street, at the point
sometimes known as "Five
Points," except for a space 60
feet in length on the west side
thereof, beginning 75 feet
south of Broadway, where
parking is permitted for
loading and unloading only
during usual and customary
business hours
Alley extending eastward
from Carlisle Street,
known as "Bank Lane"
[Amended 4-4-1984 by
Ord. No. 1772;
5-8-2002 by Ord. No.
2052]
From Carlisle Street to
Railroad Street, except for a
loading/unloading zone on the
south side from a point 25
feet from the rear of the east
side of Carlisle Street
sidewalk a distance of 80 feet
eastwardly 8:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m., and parking shall be
allowed here 8:00 p.m. to 8:00
a.m. daily
Alley extending
westwardly from Carlisle
Street, known as
"College Avenue"
[Amended 1-26-2000
by Ord. No. 2033]
From Carlisle Street to High
Street, except for a loading/
unloading area starting 25
feet behind the curb a
distance of 60 feet on the
south side
Alley extending eastward
from Carlisle Street at
the property of Helen S.
Delone [Added
3-16-1949 by Ord. No.
690]
From Carlisle Street to
Railroad Street
Alley extending north
from Frederick Street to
West Chestnut Street,
known as "Doss Alley"
[Amended 4-4-1984 by
Ord. No. 1772]
Except for a loading/
unloading zone on the east
side from a point 45 feet
north of the northern edge of
the Frederick Street cartway,
north a distance of 150 feet
§ 346-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-1
1:633
Name of Street Side Location
Alley extending
southward from
Frederick Street being
the first alley west of and
parallel to Baltimore
Street [Amended
1-26-2000 by Ord. No.
2033]
From Frederick Street to
West Walnut Street, except for
a loading/unloading zone on
the west side from a point 25
feet behind the curb for a
distance of 60 feet,
southwardly
Alley sometimes known
as "Hoffacker's Alley"
From Broadway to East
Chestnut Street
Baltimore Street [Added
1-26-2000 by Ord. No.
2033]
East and
west
From Exchange Place north to
Center Square, no parking, no
stopping and no standing
Boundary Avenue
[Added 9-19-1951 by
Ord. No. 767; amended
10-31-1968 by Ord.
No. 1411; 4-16-1997
by Ord. No. 1999]
From Baltimore Street to
South Franklin Street, except
for on the south side from the
South Franklin Street
intersection eastwardly 75
feet
Broadway From Center Square to the
first alley east of Center
Square
Broadway [Added
1-26-2000 by Ord. No.
2033]
From Railroad Street
westwardly to Center Square,
on the north and south sides,
no stopping and no standing
Broadway [Added
6-15-1983 by Ord. No.
1755]
East From Keagy Avenue north to
Hollywood Avenue
Carlisle Street [Added
10-16-1957 by Ord.
No. 939]
From the south side of Kuhn
Drive northwardly to the
Borough line
Carlisle Street [Added
12-26-2001 by Ord.
No. 2048]
East At the sixth meter stall south
of Park Avenue, except for
loading and unloading only in
said stall
Carlisle Street [Added
1-26-2000 by Ord. No.
2033]
West From Bank Lane south to
Center Square, no parking, no
stopping, and no standing
Carver Alley, sometimes
known as "North
Franklin Street" [Added
6-21-1950 by Ord. No.
730]
From Frederick Street to the
first alley north of and parallel
with Frederick Street
§ 346-1 HANOVER CODE § 346-1
1:634
Name of Street Side Location
Center Square (northeast
quadrant) [Added
1-26-2000 by Ord. No.
2033]
From Broadway northwardly
to the interior Square
curbline north of and parallel
to Broadway, except for
loading and unloading
between the decorative pole
lamps adjacent to the curb
parallel to Carlisle Street
Center Square
(northwest quadrant)
[Added 1-26-2000 by
Ord. No. 2033]
Frederick Street northwardly
to the interior Square
curbline north of and parallel
to Frederick Street, except for
loading and unloading
adjacent to the space between
the decorative pole lamp
parallel to the curb parallel to
Carlisle Street
Center Square
(southeast quadrant)
[Added 1-26-2000 by
Ord. No. 2033]
From Broadway southwardly
to the interior Square
curbline south of and parallel
to Broadway, except for
loading and unloading
adjacent to the space between
the decorative pole lamps
parallel to the curb parallel to
Baltimore Street
Center Square
(southwest quadrant)
[Added 1-26-2000 by
Ord. No. 2033]
From Frederick Street
southwardly to the interior
Square curbline south of and
parallel to Frederick Street,
except for loading and
unloading adjacent to the
space between the decorative
pole lamps parallel to the
curb parallel to Baltimore
Street
College Avenue [Added
10-16-1963 by Ord.
No. 1195]
From High Street to the first
alley west of and parallel to
High Street, commonly called
"Wendler's Alley"
Conewago Avenue
[Added 4-11-1951 by
Ord. No. 758]
From Carlisle Street to North
Franklin Street
Eagle Avenue [Added
6-6-1979 by Ord. No.
1705]
From Hanover Street to the
first alley north of and parallel
to Hanover Street
§ 346-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-1
1:635
Name of Street Side Location
Eagle Avenue [Added
10-16-1963 by Ord.
No. 1195]
From Hanover Street to
Pleasant Street
East Chestnut Street
[Amended 7-21-1951
by Ord. No. 833]
From Broadway westward to
the first alley intersecting said
East Chestnut Street
East Chestnut Street
[Amended 7-21-1951
by Ord. No. 833]
From North Street westward
for a distance of 200 feet
East Walnut Street (or
the alley which is a
continuation of East
Walnut Street)
From Baltimore Street to York
Street
Exchange Place
[Amended 4-4-1984 by
Ord. No. 1772;
1-26-2000 by Ord. No.
2033]
From Baltimore Street
eastward to Railroad Street,
except for a loading/unloading
zone on the north side from a
point 25 feet east of the rear
of the east side of Baltimore
Street sidewalk eastwardly 60
feet
Exchange Place
[Amended 4-4-1984 by
Ord. No. 1772;
1-26-2000 by Ord. No.
2033]
From Baltimore Street
westward to Centennial
Avenue, except for a loading/
unloading zone on the south
side from a point 25 feet west
of the rear of the Baltimore
street sidewalk, westwardly
60 feet
Factory Street [Added
6-6-1979 by Ord. No.
1705]
From Middle Street
eastwardly to the first alley
east of and parallel to Middle
Street
First alley east of and
parallel with Baltimore
Street
From Walnut Street, at the
point sometimes known as
"Five Points," to Newcomer's
Alley
First alley west of and
parallel to Carlisle Street
[Added 4-15-1953 by
Ord. No. 802]
From West Chestnut Street to
the end of said alley at
property of the Hanover Shoe,
Inc.
§ 346-1 HANOVER CODE § 346-1
1:636
Name of Street Side Location
First alley northwest of
and parallel to East
Middle Street [Added
5-21-1958 by Ord. No.
957]
From Eagle Avenue to
Railroad Street
First alley north of and
parallel to Hanover
Street [Added
6-15-1983 by Ord. No.
1755]
South From York Street to Eagle
Avenue
First alley west of and
parallel with High Street
[Added 7-19-1950 by
Ord. No. 731]
From Poplar Street northward
to the alley sometimes known
as the "Hostetter Alley"
First alley east of and
parallel with Locust
Street [Added
2-15-1956 by Ord. No.
891]
From Broadway to East
Walnut Street
First alley east of and
parallel to Moul Avenue
[Added 5-25-2016 by
Ord. No. 2245]
Extending from Grant Drive
south to its termination point
at lands belonging to the
Hanover School District
First alley north of and
parallel with Pleasant
Street [Added
9-19-1951 by Ord. No.
767; amended
2-19-1986 by Ord. No.
1815]
North and
south
From York Street to Eagle
Avenue
First alley north of and
parallel with West
Chestnut Street
From Carlisle Street
westward to North Franklin
Street
First alley southeast of
and parallel to West
Walnut Street, commonly
called "Shue's Alley"
[Added 9-17-1958 by
Ord. No. 975]
Southwestwardly from
Baltimore Street to Ruth
Avenue
First alley northwest of
and parallel with York
Street, sometimes known
as "School Avenue"
From Broadway to East
Walnut Street
§ 346-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-1
1:637
Name of Street Side Location
Forney Avenue [Added
12-19-1962 by Ord.
No. 1162]
From the first alley north of
Frederick Street to the first
alley south of Poplar Street
Frederick Street [Added
1-26-2000 by Ord. No.
2033]
From Doss Alley east to
Center Square on the north
and south sides, no parking,
no stopping and no standing
Newcomer Alley, which
is the first alley
southeast of and parallel
to East Walnut Street
[Added 5-21-1958 by
Ord. No. 957]
From York Street to Baltimore
Street
North Franklin Street
[Added 12-26-2001 by
Ord. No. 2048]
From West Chestnut Street
northwardly 130 feet on the
east side, except for loading
and unloading only
North Street [Added
7-21-1951 by Ord. No.
833]
From East Chestnut Street to
Broadway
Middle Street [Added
5-23-2012 by Ord. No.
2186]
East and
west
From Philadelphia Street
southerly to the railroad
tracks of CSX Corporation
Pleasant Street [Added
10-16-1963 by Ord.
No. 1195]
From York Street to Eagle
Avenue
Second alley from Center
Square, commonly
known as "Wagner Alley,"
extending southward
from Frederick Street
[Added 4-15-1953 by
Ord. No. 802]
From Frederick Street to
Exchange Place
Second alley east of and
parallel with Railroad
Street [Added
10-19-1955 by Ord.
No. 884]
From East Chestnut Street
northward to the first alley
north of and parallel with said
East Chestnut Street
Stock Street [Added
4-24-2019 by Ord. No.
2285]
South From Eichelberger Street
westwardly 97 feet, parking is
prohibited
Stoner Avenue [Added
6-6-1979 by Ord. No.
1705]
From Frederick Street to
West Chestnut Street
§ 346-1 HANOVER CODE § 346-1
1:638
Name of Street Side Location
Third Street [Added
12-26-2001 by Ord.
No. 2048]
From Carlisle Street
westwardly 100 feet on the
north side, no parking, no
stopping and no standing.
Wall Street [Added
12-15-1954 by Ord.
No. 836]
From Carlisle Street to
Railroad Street
West Chestnut Street
[Added 12-19-1962 by
Ord. No. 1162]
From a point 200 feet west of
Hoffman Avenue to Forney
Avenue
West Clearview Road
[Amended 10-16-1963
by Ord. No. 1195]
From Carlisle Street to
Randolph Street
C. Streets and alleys in which parking is restricted. Parking is restricted in
the following streets and alleys in the manner hereinafter provided:142
Name of Street Side Location
Allegheny Avenue
[Added 9-3-1969 by
Ord. No. 1455]
North From Eichelberger Street
eastwardly a distance of 75
feet and westwardly a
distance of 75 feet
Allegheny Avenue
[Added 6-15-1955 by
Ord. No. 876]
North From Penn Street to the first
alley west of Penn Street,
during school hours
Allegheny Avenue
[Added 9-3-1969 by
Ord. No. 1455]
South From Eichelberger Street
eastwardly a distance of 50
feet and westwardly a
distance of 75 feet
Alley extending
westward from Baltimore
Street, commonly known
as "Elk's Alley" [Added
9-17-1952 by Ord. No.
790]
Both From Baltimore Street to
Centennial Avenue, except for
loading and unloading
142. Editor's Note: This subsection was amended as follows to repeal various entries:
7-19-1950 by Ord. No. 731; 4-11-1951 by Ord. No. 758; 12-15-1954 by Ord. No. 836;
10-17-1956 by Ord. No. 1055; 10-31-1968 by Ord. No. 1411; and 5-17-1972 by Ord. No.
1548. See additional amendments noted in the table below.
§ 346-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-1
1:639
Name of Street Side Location
Alley extending
northwestwardly from
the intersection of East
Chestnut Street and
Broadway, sometimes
known as the "Cordage
Alley" [Added
3-21-1951 by Ord. No.
754]
West
Alley extending
northward from East
Chestnut Street, at the
property occupied by
Hanover Fire Company
No. 1 [Added
7-19-1950 by Ord. No.
731]
West From East Chestnut Street to
the first alley north of and
parallel to East Chestnut
Street
Alley at the east side of
St. Vincent's Catholic
Church [Added
4-17-1957 by Ord. No.
927]
West From Third Street to South
Street
Alley (commonly known
as "St. Vincent's Lane")
between St. Vincent's
Catholic Church and the
property known as "212
Third Street" [Added
6-16-1965 by Ord. No.
1275]
Both From Third Street to South
Street
Alley extending eastward
from York Street at
Trinity Reformed Church
[Amended 7-21-1951
by Ord. No. 833]
North From York Street to School
Avenue
Alley extending eastward
from York Street at
Trinity Reformed Church
[Amended 7-21-1951
by Ord. No. 833]
South From the first alley east of
and parallel to York Street
westward for a distance of
125 feet
Baltimore Street [Added
9-17-1975 by Ord. No.
1644]
East From Center Square
southwardly to the first alley
south of and parallel to
Broadway
§ 346-1 HANOVER CODE § 346-1
1:640
Name of Street Side Location
Baltimore Street [Added
9-3-1969 by Ord. No.
1455]
East From Granger Street
northwardly a distance of 75
feet
Baltimore Street [Added
11-7-1973 by Ord. No.
1601]
East From a point 164 feet north of
the northern curbline of
Hanover Street, northwardly
a distance of 150 feet,
between the hours of 2:30
p.m. and 3:30 p.m., Monday
through Friday, except for
school buses loading and
unloading
Baltimore Street [Added
4-16-1997 by Ord. No.
1999]
East From the southern curbline of
Hanover Street 66 feet
southwardly
Baltimore Street [Added
4-17-1968 by Ord. No.
1387; amended
6-15-1977 by Ord. No.
1682; 4-16-1997 by
Ord. No. 1999]
East From the southern curbline of
Middle Street southwardly a
distance of 130 feet
Baltimore Street [Added
6-16-1965 by Ord. No.
1275]
East From 75 feet north of
Pleasant Street to Pleasant
Street
Baltimore Street [Added
12-15-1976 by Ord.
No. 1672]
East From Pleasant Street north a
distance of 70 feet
Baltimore Street [Added
12-15-1976 by Ord.
No. 1672]
East From Pleasant Street
southward a distance of 286
feet
Baltimore Street [Added
5-20-1959 by Ord. No.
995]
East From 125 feet south of
Pleasant Street to 155 feet
south of Pleasant Street,
except for loading and
unloading
Baltimore Street [Added
6-16-1965 by Ord. No.
1275]
West From 75 feet north of
Boundary Avenue to Boundary
Avenue
Baltimore Street [Added
8-16-1967 by Ord. No.
1359]
West From the first alley south of
and parallel with Boundary
Avenue to a point 50 feet
north and to a point 50 feet
south of said alley
§ 346-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-1
1:641
Name of Street Side Location
Baltimore Street [Added
5-15-1968 by Ord. No.
1390]
West From Center Square
southwardly to the alley
known as "Exchange Place"
Baltimore Street
[Amended 11-20-1957
by Ord. No. 947]
West In front of the Gettysburg
Auto Parts Store
Baltimore Street [Added
4-16-1997 by Ord. No.
1999]
West From northern curbline of
Hanover Street northwardly a
distance of 65 feet
Baltimore Street [Added
4-17-1968 by Ord. No.
1387; amended
6-15-1977 by Ord. No.
1682; 4-16-1997 by
Ord. No. 1999]
West From the southern curbline of
Middle Street southwardly
150 feet
Baltimore Street [Added
8-15-1984 by Ord. No.
1783]
West At its intersection with Mount
Royal Avenue, from the alley
opposite Mount Royal south to
the first alley south of and
parallel with the
aforementioned alley
extension of Mount Royal
Avenue
Baltimore Street [Added
5-15-1968 by Ord. No.
1390; amended
6-15-1977 by Ord. No.
1682]
West From a point 108 feet north of
the northern curbline of West
Middle Street southwardly to
Middle Street
§ 346-1 HANOVER CODE § 346-1
1:642
Name of Street Side Location
Blossom Drive [Added
5-25-2016 by Ord. No.
2245]
Left-hand
side
From the intersection with
Grant Drive, to a sign 60 feet
from Grant Drive; from a sign
395 feet from the intersection
with Grant Drive south to the
next driveway; from a point
50 feet west of the second
intersection with Grant Drive
to the second intersection
with Grant Drive; from the
second intersection to Grant
Drive east 25 feet to a sign;
from a point 500 feet from the
second intersection with
grant drive to a point 50 feet
north of the intersection with
Spencer Drive; from a point
135 feet from the intersection
with Spencer Drive west
approximately 60 feet to the
next driveway on Blossom
Drive; from a point 260 feet
from the intersection with
Washington Avenue west to
the third intersection with
Grant Drive
§ 346-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-1
1:643
Name of Street Side Location
Blossom Drive [Added
5-25-2016 by Ord. No.
2245]
Right-hand
side
From the first intersection
with Grant Drive to a sign 60
feet from Grant Drive; from a
point approximately 105 feet
from the first intersection
with Grant Drive to a point
approximately 650 feet from
the first intersection with
Grant Drive; from a point 55
feet west of the second
intersection with Grant Drive;
from the second intersection
with Grant Drive to the
intersection with Spencer
Drive; from the intersection
with Spencer Drive north to
the next driveway on Blossom
Drive; from a point 145 feet
from the intersection with
Spencer Drive west to the
intersection with Washington
Avenue; from the intersection
with Washington Avenue west
to a sign 50 feet from
Washington Avenue; from a
point 152 feet from the
intersection with Washington
Avenue east to the
intersection with Grant Drive
Boundary Avenue
[Added 10-15-1969 by
Ord. No. 1457]
North From the first alley west of
and parallel to Centennial
Avenue eastwardly a distance
of 100 feet and westwardly a
distance of 100 feet
Boundary Avenue
[Added 6-19-1985 by
Ord. No. 1802]
South At its intersection with
Baltimore Street a distance of
45 feet from the corner, no
stopping or standing
Broadway [Added
2-16-1983 by Ord. No.
1751]
East Parking is prohibited 163 feet
Broadway [Amended
10-6-1965 by Ord. No.
1288; 6-15-1977 by
Ord. No. 1682]
East From the railroad northward
to lands of No. 513 Broadway,
known as "Trone's Gulf
Service Station"
§ 346-1 HANOVER CODE § 346-1
1:644
Name of Street Side Location
Broadway [Amended
4-15-1953 by Ord. No.
802; 4-16-1997 by Ord.
No. 1999]
East Both north and south of
Fulton Street and both north
and south of East Chestnut
Street, within 117 feet of the
intersections of the curbs of
said streets
Broadway [Added
11-10-1965 by Ord.
No. 1292; amended
4-12-2006 by Ord. No.
2107]
East From Fulton Street to the first
alleyway north of and parallel
to Fulton Street
Broadway [Added
12-27-2006 by Ord.
No. 2116]
East From the first alley south of
and parallel to Fulton Street
to the first driveway south of
and parallel the aforesaid
alleyway, except for loading
and unloading
Broadway [Added
2-16-1983 by Ord. No.
1751]
East A distance of 128 feet,
southwardly from Grant Drive
Broadway [Added
11-4-1964 by Ord. No.
1248]
East From Highland Avenue
southwardly for a distance of
75 feet, except for intervals of
15 minutes only
Broadway [Added
8-19-1959 by Ord. No.
1013]
East From the first alley north of
Locust Street north 43 feet,
except for loading and
unloading
Broadway [Added
12-15-1976 by Ord.
No. 1672]
East From the Moulstown Road
northward a distance of 54
feet
Broadway [Amended
4-15-1953 by Ord. No.
802; 4-16-1997 by Ord.
No. 1999]
East From the northern edge of the
first alley south of Ridge
Avenue northward to the
southern edge of the first
alley north of Ridge Avenue,
except for a distance of 30
feet beginning at a point 25
feet north of the northern
curbline of the first alley
south of Ridge Avenue where
parking will be limited to 15
minutes
§ 346-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-1
1:645
Name of Street Side Location
Broadway East From the second alley north
of and parallel to Ridge
Avenue northwardly for a
distance of 75 feet, except for
intervals of 15 minutes only
Broadway [Amended
10-6-1965 by Ord. No.
1288; 6-15-1977 by
Ord. No. 1682]
East From School Avenue a
distance of 34 feet northward,
except for loading and
unloading
Broadway [Added
8-19-1992 by Ord. No.
1910]
East and
west
From Eisenhower Drive
northwardly to the Flickinger
Road intersection,
southwardly to the first alley
intersection perpendicular
with Broadway, running
westwardly to the first alley
west of and parallel to
Broadway; this intersection is
at 1216 Broadway
Broadway [Added
8-16-1967 by Ord. No.
1359]
East and
west
From McKinley Avenue to a
point 100 feet north and to a
point 100 feet south of said
McKinley Avenue
Broadway [Amended
10-6-1965 by Ord. No.
1288; 6-15-1977 by
Ord. No. 1682]
North From the alley known as
"Allewelt's Alley" for a
distance of 90 feet westward
and for a distance of 25 feet
eastward
Broadway [Amended
10-6-1965 by Ord. No.
1288; 6-15-1977 by
Ord. No. 1682]
North From the alley sometimes
known as "Railroad Street,"
for a distance of 94 feet
eastward
Broadway [Amended
4-15-1953 by Ord. No.
802; 4-16-1997 by Ord.
No. 1999]
South East of Locust Street, within
50 feet of the intersection of
the curbs of Locust Street and
Broadway
Broadway [Amended
4-15-1953 by Ord. No.
802; 4-16-1997 by Ord.
No. 1999]
South Both north and south of
Philadelphia Street, within 50
feet of the intersection of the
curbs of Philadelphia Street
and Broadway
Broadway [Amended
10-6-1965 by Ord. No.
1288; 6-15-1977 by
Ord. No. 1682]
South From York Street a distance
of 62 feet eastward
§ 346-1 HANOVER CODE § 346-1
1:646
Name of Street Side Location
Broadway [Added
11-10-1965 by Ord.
No. 1292; amended
4-12-2006 by Ord. No.
2107]
West From the north side of East
Chestnut Street northwardly
to the second driveway
perpendicular to Broadway
Broadway [Added
11-19-1958 by Ord.
No. 976]
West From East Chestnut Street
south 60 feet
Broadway [Amended
4-15-1953 by Ord. No.
802; 4-16-1997 by Ord.
No. 1999]
West Both north and south of
Fulton Street and both north
and south of East Chestnut
Street, within 50 feet of said
curb intersections
Broadway [Added
2-16-1983 by Ord. No.
1751]
West From the northern curbline of
Grant Drive northwardly a
distance of 160 feet
Broadway [Added
2-16-1983 by Ord. No.
1751]
West To the first alley south of and
parallel to Grant Drive
Broadway West From a point 90 feet south of
North Street a distance of 30
feet southwardly, except for
loading and unloading
Broadway [Amended
4-15-1953 by Ord. No.
802; 4-16-1997 by Ord.
No. 1999]
West From the northern edge of the
first alley south of Ridge
Avenue northward for a
distance of 260 feet
Broadway [Amended
4-15-1953 by Ord. No.
802; 4-16-1997 by Ord.
No. 1999]
West North of Stock Street, within
50 feet of the intersections of
the curbs of Broadway and
Stock Streets; and south of
Stock Street, within 120 feet
of the intersections of the
curbs of Broadway and Stock
Streets
Carlisle Street [Added
10-2-1985 by Ord. No.
1808]
On the northeast corner at its
intersection with Park Avenue
a distance of 75 feet
northward from Park Avenue
on Carlisle Street
Carlisle Street [Added
4-15-1959 by Ord. No.
992]
East From Chestnut Street
northwardly for a distance of
162 feet
§ 346-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-1
1:647
Name of Street Side Location
Carlisle Street [Added
8-19-1992 by Ord. No.
1910]
East From the intersection with
Eisenhower Drive north to the
Borough line and south to
Kuhn Drive/Dart Drive
Carlisle Street
[Amended 3-21-1962
by Ord. No. 1131]
East From the northern curbline of
Library Place to the southern
edge of Kuhn Drive
Carlisle Street [Added
5-15-1968 by Ord. No.
1390]
West From Bank Lane to Center
Square
Carlisle Street
[Amended 11-20-1963
by Ord. No. 1201]
West From the north curbline of
Chestnut Street northwardly
115 feet
Carlisle Street [Added
5-15-1968 by Ord. No.
1390]
West From Chestnut Street to Gail
Street
Carlisle Street [Added
2-24-1960 by Ord. No.
1034]
West From Conewago Avenue north
182 feet to Third Street
Carlisle Street [Added
6-16-1965 by Ord. No.
1275]
West From Conewago Avenue
southwardly to the
Pennsylvania Railroad
Carlisle Street
[Amended 3-21-1962
by Ord. No. 1131]
West From Elm Avenue to Maple
Avenue
Carlisle Street
[Amended 3-21-1962
by Ord. No. 1131]
West From the southern edge or
boundary of Fourth Street
southward to a point 75 feet
south of the southern edge or
boundary of the first alley
south of and parallel to Fourth
Street
Carlisle Street
[Amended 3-21-1962
by Ord. No. 1131]
West From the northern edge or
boundary of Kendig's Lane
northward for a distance of
117.3 feet
Carlisle Street
[Amended 3-21-1962
by Ord. No. 1131]
West From the southern edge or
boundary of Kendig's Lane
southward for a distance of
154 feet
Carlisle Street
[Amended 3-21-1962
by Ord. No. 1131]
West From Maple Avenue
southward for a distance of
159 feet 11 inches
§ 346-1 HANOVER CODE § 346-1
1:648
Name of Street Side Location
Carlisle Street [Added
8-20-1958 by Ord. No.
966]
West From Third Street
northwardly for a distance of
110 feet
Carlisle Street [Added
2-15-1961 by Ord. No.
1081]
West From a point measured
northwardly 330 feet from
Third Street to a point 354
feet from Third Street, except
for loading and unloading
Centennial Avenue
[Amended 10-17-1956
by Ord. No. 917;
amended 9-6-1995 by
Ord. No. 1978]
Both North of Hanover Street,
within 40 feet of West
Hanover Street
Centennial Avenue
[Added 11-19-1958 by
Ord. No. 976]
Both From West Walnut Street
north and south for a distance
of 60 feet
Centennial Avenue East From Exchange Place
southwardly for a distance of
50 feet
Centennial Avenue
[Added 10-16-1963 by
Ord. No. 1195]
East From Frederick Street to the
first alley south of and
parallel with Frederick Street
Centennial Avenue
[Added 1-21-1959 by
Ord. No. 983]
East From Frederick Street
southwardly for a distance of
189 feet
Centennial Avenue
[Amended 10-17-1956
by Ord. No. 917;
9-6-1995 by Ord. No.
1978]
East North of Hanover Street, from
West Walnut Street to the first
alley south of and parallel to
West Walnut Street, a
distance of 237 feet
Centennial Avenue
[Added 3-18-1959 by
Ord. No. 986]
East From the first alley south of
and parallel to West Walnut
Street (called "Shue's Alley")
to the first alley north of and
parallel to West Middle
Street, limited to one hour's
duration
Centennial Avenue
[Added 1-21-1959 by
Ord. No. 983]
West From Frederick Street
southwardly for a distance of
146 feet
§ 346-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-1
1:649
Name of Street Side Location
Centennial Avenue
[Added 6-20-1973 by
Ord. No. 1589]
West From a point 60 feet south of
the first alley south of and
parallel to West Walnut Street
southwardly a distance of 30
feet, except for intervals of 15
minutes only
Center Square
(southeastern corner)
[Added 10-21-1959 by
Ord. No. 1017]
From 43 feet south of
Broadway to 80 feet east of
Baltimore Street
Center Street [Added
12-22-2010 by Ord.
No. 2170]
East and
west
From Ridge Avenue and the
York Railroad crossing at the
Penn Township line
Charles Street [Added
3-15-1967 by Ord. No.
1345]
East From Highland Avenue
northwardly for a distance of
50 feet
Charles Street [Added
3-16-1949 by Ord. No.
690]
East From Highland Avenue to
Potomac Avenue, except for
physicians in attendance at
the Hanover General Hospital
Charles Street [Added
3-15-1967 by Ord. No.
1345]
East From a point 50 feet north of
Highland Avenue to a point 50
feet south of Potomac Avenue,
except for physicians only
Charles Street [Added
3-15-1967 by Ord. No.
1345]
East From Potomac Avenue
southwardly a distance of 50
feet
Charles Street [Added
8-5-1964 by Ord. No.
1242]
West From North Street to Stock
Street
Chestnut Street North From High Street to Railroad
Street
Commerce Street
[Added 9-17-1958 by
Ord. No. 975]
East From Maple Avenue to the
first alley south of and
parallel to Maple Avenue, twohour
parking
Commerce Street
[Added 5-4-1994 by
Ord. No. 1965]
West From the first alley north of
and parallel Third Street a
distance of 65 feet
northwardly
Dart Drive [Added
11-15-1967 by Ord.
No. 1369]
North and
south
From Carlisle Street to
Eichelberger Street
§ 346-1 HANOVER CODE § 346-1
1:650
Name of Street Side Location
Eagle Avenue [Added
5-21-1958 by Ord. No.
957]
South From East Walnut Street to
East Middle Street
Eagle Avenue [Amended
10-16-1963 by Ord.
No. 1195]
South From Middle Street to
Hanover Street
Eagle Avenue [Added
11-10-1965 by Ord.
No. 1292]
South From Pleasant Street to
Spring Avenue
East Chestnut Street
[Added 10-19-1960 by
Ord. No. 1059;
amended 4-12-2006 by
Ord. No. 2107]
East From Allewelt Alley to
Broadway
East Chestnut Street
[Added 10-19-1983 by
Ord. No. 1760]
North From the corner of the
eastern curbline of Market
Alley 75 feet east
East Chestnut Street
[Added 10-6-1965 by
Ord. No. 1288]
Southeast From Carlisle Street
eastwardly for a distance of
150 feet
East Chestnut Street
[Added 10-19-1960 by
Ord. No. 1059;
amended 4-12-2006 by
Ord. No. 2107]
West From the private driveway
opposite North Street to
Broadway
East Elm Avenue [Added
10-17-1956 by Ord.
No. 917]
South From Penn Street westwardly
to the first alley west of and
parallel to Penn Street a
distance of 180 feet, during
school hours
East Hanover Street
[Added 6-6-1979 by
Ord. No. 1705;
amended 4-15-1987 by
Ord. No. 1826]
South From Railroad Street
westwardly a distance of 40
feet
East Middle Street
[Amended 8-2-1958 by
Ord. No. 966;
6-15-1977 by Ord. No.
1682]
North From Baltimore Street to York
Street
East Middle Street
[Added 9-3-1969 by
Ord. No. 1455]
North From School Avenue
eastwardly a distance of 30
feet and westwardly a
distance of 30 feet
§ 346-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-1
1:651
Name of Street Side Location
East Middle Street
[Added 11-21-1984 by
Ord. No. 1789]
North From the corner of York
Street eastwardly to the first
driveway east of York Street
East Middle Street
[Added 3-21-1962 by
Ord. No. 1131]
North and
south
From the intersection of the
eastern curbline of Ridge
Avenue eastward for a
distance of 175 feet
East Middle Street
[Amended 8-2-1958 by
Ord. No. 966;
6-15-1977 by Ord. No.
1682]
South From the first alley east and
parallel to Baltimore Street to
York Street
East Middle Street
[Added 10-15-1969 by
Ord. No. 1457]
South From Ridge Avenue
westwardly a distance of 100
feet
East Middle Street
[Amended 8-2-1958 by
Ord. No. 966;
6-15-1977 by Ord. No.
1682]
South From York Street to the
Western Maryland Railroad
right-of-way
East Middle Street
[Added 2-21-1973 by
Ord. No. 1568
amended 4-18-1973 by
Ord. No. 1569]
West From Factory Street
westwardly a distance of 330
feet, restricted to two hours,
Monday through Friday from
7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
East Walnut Street [Added 10-17-1956 by Ord. No. 917; repealed
9-7-1977 by Ord. No. 1687]
East Walnut Street From Philadelphia Street
eastwardly to the first alley
east of and parallel to
Philadelphia Street, Monday
through Friday from 8:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m., except for
intervals of three hours only
East Walnut Street
[Added 10-15-1969 by
Ord. No. 1457]
North From the first alley west of
and parallel to Ridge Avenue
to a point 123 feet eastwardly
East Walnut Street
[Added 8-5-1964 by
Ord. No. 1242]
West For a distance of 50 feet north
and south of Baer Avenue
Eichelberger Street
[Added 6-20-1973 by
Ord. No. 1589]
East From North Street
northwardly a distance of 60
feet
§ 346-1 HANOVER CODE § 346-1
1:652
Name of Street Side Location
Eichelberger Street
[Added 11-15-1967 by
Ord. No. 1369]
East and
west
From Grant Drive
northwardly to the end
thereof at lands now or
formerly of Adams Agstone,
Inc.
Eichelberger Street
[Added 11-15-1967 by
Ord. No. 1369]
West From Allegheny Avenue to
Clearview Road
Eichelberger Street
[Added 8-20-1958 by
Ord. No. 966]
West From Stock Street to
Allegheny Avenue
Eisenhower Drive
[Added 8-19-1992 by
Ord. No. 1910]
North and
south
From Carlisle Street
eastwardly to Eichelberger
Street
Elm Avenue [Added
2-24-1960 by Ord. No.
1034]
North From Carlisle Street west 105
feet to the first alley west of
and parallel with Carlisle
Street
Elm Avenue [Added
6-14-1966 by Ord. No.
1310; amended
6-15-1977 by Ord. No.
1682]
North and
south
From High Street eastwardly
a distance of 150 feet and
westwardly a distance of 173
feet
Elm Avenue [Added
6-14-1966 by Ord. No.
1310; amended
6-15-1977 by Ord. No.
1682]
North and
south
From Randolph Street
eastwardly a distance of 75
feet and westwardly a
distance of 75 feet
Elm Avenue [Added
4-15-1959 by Ord. No.
992]
South From Carlisle Street
westwardly to the first alley
west of and parallel to Elm
Avenue
Exchange Place South From Centennial Avenue
westwardly to the first alley
west of and parallel to
Centennial Avenue
Factory Street [Added
6-6-1979 by Ord. No.
1705]
North From a point 70 feet east of
the center line of Hanover
Street to a point 210 feet east
of the center line of Hanover
Street
§ 346-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-1
1:653
Name of Street Side Location
Factory Street [Added
6-6-1979 by Ord. No.
1705]
North From a point 70 feet east of
the center line of Hanover
Street to a point 30 feet west
of the center line of Hanover
Street, except for intervals of
two hours only
Factory Street
[Amended 6-14-1966
by Ord. No. 1310]
North From Middle Street
eastwardly a distance of 180
feet
Factory Street [Added
4-20-1966 by Ord. No.
1303]
North and
south
From East Hanover Street
eastwardly a distance of 160
feet
Factory Street
[Amended 6-14-1966
by Ord. No. 1310]
South From Middle Street
eastwardly a distance of 180
feet, from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday through Friday
Factory Street [Added
7-18-1973 by Ord. No.
1592]
South From Terrace Avenue
westwardly a distance of 70
feet
Filbert Street [Added
10-16-1963 by Ord.
No. 1195; amended
5-15-1974 by Ord. No.
1614]
West From South Street to Poplar
Street
First alley southwest of
and parallel with
Baltimore Street [Added
9-17-1958 by Ord. No.
975]
Southwestwardly from West
Walnut Street to West Middle
Street, except that loading
and unloading shall be
permitted in a loading zone,
which is on the southwest
side of said alley from the first
alley southwest of and parallel
to West Walnut Street,
commonly called "Shue's
Alley," to the first alley
northwest of and parallel to
West Middle Street
First alley west of and
parallel to Baltimore
Street [Added
4-15-1987 by Ord. No.
1826]
East From Middle Street
southward a distance of 67
feet
§ 346-1 HANOVER CODE § 346-1
1:654
Name of Street Side Location
First alley west of and
parallel to Baltimore
Street [Added
4-15-1987 by Ord. No.
1826]
West From Middle Street
southward a distance of 82
feet
First alley east of and
parallel to Broadway
[Added 2-21-1973 by
Ord. No. 1568]
West From Fulton Street
southwardly a distance of 204
feet
First alley south of and
parallel to Broadway
[Added 7-18-1951 by
Ord. No. 759; amended
2-17-1982 by Ord. No.
1742]
North From Locust Street west to
School Avenue
First alley south of and
parallel to Broadway
[Added 7-18-1951 by
Ord. No. 759; amended
2-17-1982 by Ord. No.
1742]
South from Locust Street west a
distance of 125 feet
First alley east of and
parallel to Carlisle Street
[Added 4-20-1966 by
Ord. No. 1303]
East From Clearview Road
northwardly to proposed Dart
Drive
First alley north of and
parallel to Chestnut
Street
South From Carlisle Street to
Railroad Street
First alley north of and
parallel to Clearview
Road [Added 6-16-1965
by Ord. No. 1275]
North From Carlisle Street to the
first alley east of Carlisle
Street
First alley west of and
parallel to Eagle Avenue
[Added 6-14-1966 by
Ord. No. 1310]
East From Pleasant Street
northwardly to the first alley
north of and parallel to
Pleasant Street
First alley south of and
parallel to East Middle
Street [Added
9-15-1971 by Ord. No.
1518]
From York Street to Eagle
Avenue, Monday through
Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
§ 346-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-1
1:655
Name of Street Side Location
First alley north of and
parallel with Frederick
Street running
westwardly from Stoner
Avenue to a dead end,
which alley is known as
"College Avenue"
[Added 11-4-1987 by
Ord. No. 1836]
North
First alley south of and
parallel to Frederick
Street [Added
10-15-1969 by Ord.
No. 1457]
North From Centennial Avenue
westwardly a distance of 95
feet
First alley south of and
parallel to Frederick
Street
South From the first alley west of
and parallel to Baltimore
Street to Centennial Avenue
First alley south of and
parallel to Fulton Street
[Added 12-7-1977 by
Ord. No. 1691]
North From Broadway to East
Walnut Street
First alley north of and
parallel to Fulton Street
[Added 2-19-1969 by
Ord. No. 1428]
North and
south
From Broadway to the first
alley east of and parallel to
Broadway
First alley north of and
parallel to Hanover
Street [Added
11-18-1970 by Ord.
No. 1490, approved by
Mayor 11-19-1970]
North and
south
From McAllister Street
westwardly a distance of 100
feet
First alley west of and
parallel with High Street,
commonly called
"Wendier's Alley"
[Added 11-20-1963 by
Ord. No. 1201]
From Frederick Street to
College Avenue, except for
loading and unloading
First alley east of and
parallel to McAllister
Street [Added
8-16-1989 by Ord. No.
1860]
East and
west
From Orchard Street to the
first alley south of and
parallel to High Street
§ 346-1 HANOVER CODE § 346-1
1:656
Name of Street Side Location
First alley south of and
parallel to Mount Royal
Avenue running east
from Baltimore Street
[Added 4-15-1987 by
Ord. No. 1826]
North From Baltimore Street
eastwardly to the first alley
east of and parallel to
Baltimore Street
First alley south of and
parallel to Mount Royal
Avenue running east
from Baltimore Street
[Added 4-15-1987 by
Ord. No. 1826]
South From Baltimore Street a
distance of 30 feet eastwardly
First alley south of and
parallel to Mount Royal
Avenue running east
from Baltimore Street
[Added 4-15-1987 by
Ord. No. 1826]
South Starting at a point of 72 feet
eastwardly from Baltimore
Street to the first alley east of
and parallel to Baltimore
Street
First alley extending
westward from the
intersection of Mount
Royal Avenue and
Baltimore Street [Added
3-20-1996 by Ord. No.
1985]
South From Baltimore Street to
South Franklin Street and
thence westwardly on the
south side from South
Franklin Street to the first
alley west of and parallel to
South Franklin Street;
parking is prohibited on the
whole south side of the
alleyway
First alley north of and
parallel to Park Avenue
[Added 6-14-1966 by
Ord. No. 1310]
North and
south
From Carlisle Street to
Railroad Street
First alley north of and
parallel with
Philadelphia Street
[Added 8-17-1966 by
Ord. No. 1319]
North and
south
From East Middle Street
eastwardly to the first alley
west of and parallel with East
Middle Street
First alley south of and
parallel to Poplar Street
[Added 8-20-1958 by
Ord. No. 966; amended
7-18-1973 by Ord. No.
1592]
North and
south
From High Street to the first
alley west of and parallel to
High Street
§ 346-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-1
1:657
Name of Street Side Location
First alley south of and
parallel to Ridge Avenue
[Added 6-14-1966 by
Ord. No. 1310]
North and
south
From Broadway eastwardly to
the first alley east of and
parallel to Broadway
First alley west of and
parallel to St. Vincent's
Lane [Added 5-15-1974
by Ord. No. 1614]
East From Third Street
southwardly a distance of 30
feet
First alley west of and
parallel to St. Vincent's
Lane [Added 5-15-1974
by Ord. No. 1614]
West From Third Street
southwardly a distance of 70
feet
First alley north of and
parallel Third Street
[Added 5-4-1994 by
Ord. No. 1965]
South From Commerce Street
eastwardly a distance of 95
feet
First alley south of and
parallel to Walnut Street
North and
south
From Ruth Avenue to the
Hanover Borough School
District property
First alley south of and
parallel to Walnut Street
(sometimes known as
"Shue's Alley")
[Amended 11-20-1957
by Ord. No. 947]
North For a space of 60 feet
westwardly from a sign "No
Parking to Corner," except for
loading and unloading
First alley south of and
parallel to Walnut Street
(sometimes known as
"Shue's Alley")
[Amended 11-20-1957
by Ord. No. 947]
North From Ruth Avenue to
Centennial Avenue
First alley northwest of
and parallel with West
Chestnut Street [Added
8-19-1959 by Ord. No.
1013]
North Extending southwestwardly
from High Street to the first
alley southwest of and parallel
with High Street
First alley northwest of
and parallel with West
Chestnut Street [Added
8-19-1959 by Ord. No.
1013]
South Extending southwestwardly
from High Street to the first
alley southwest of and parallel
with High Street, except for
loading and unloading
§ 346-1 HANOVER CODE § 346-1
1:658
Name of Street Side Location
First alley north of and
parallel to West Hanover
Street [Amended
4-23-1952 by Ord. No.
782; 4-4-1984 by Ord.
No. 1772]
North Between York Street and
Eagle Avenue, from a point 66
feet west of York Street to a
point 66 feet east of Eagle
Avenue
First alley north of and
parallel with West
Hanover Street [Added
8-16-1967 by Ord. No.
1359; amended
10-14-2009 by Ord.
No. 2154]
North and
south
From a point 20 feet west of
Baltimore Street to a point 50
feet west of Baltimore Street
First alley north of and
parallel with West
Hanover Street [Added
8-16-1967 by Ord. No.
1359; amended
10-14-2009 by Ord.
No. 2154]
North and
south
From a point 100 feet west of
Baltimore Street to the first
alley west of and parallel with
Baltimore Street
First alley north of and
parallel to West Hanover
Street [Added 9-3-1969
by Ord. No. 1455]
South From Baltimore Street to the
first alley west of Baltimore
Street, from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m., Monday through
Saturday
First alley north of and
parallel to West Hanover
Street [Amended
4-23-1952 by Ord. No.
782; 4-4-1984 by Ord.
No. 1772]
South Between York Street and
Eagle Avenue, entire length
Fleming Avenue [Added
9-3-1969 by Ord. No.
1455]
West From Frederick Street
southwardly a distance of 50
feet
Forney Avenue [Added
12-19-1962 by Ord.
No. 1162]
East From Poplar Street to the first
alley south of Poplar Street
Frederick Street [Added 9-3-1969 by Ord. No. 1455; superseded
7-5-1972 by Ord. No. 1552]
Frederick Street
[Amended 10-17-1956
by Ord. No. 917]
North For a distance of 40 feet on
both sides of the driveways
into the Acme Market
§ 346-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-1
1:659
Name of Street Side Location
Frederick Street [Added
1-21-1959 by Ord. No.
983; amended
5-17-1972 by Ord. No.
1548]
North From its intersection with
Centennial Avenue and High
Street, westwardly for a
distance of 297 feet
Frederick Street [Added
2-15-1961 by Ord. No.
1081]
North From a point measured
eastwardly 170 feet from
Forney Avenue to a point 195
feet from Forney Avenue,
except for intervals of 15
minutes only
Frederick Street [Added
6-20-1973 by Ord. No.
1589]
North From North Franklin Street
eastwardly a distance of 45
feet
Frederick Street
[Amended 10-17-1956
by Ord. No. 917]
North For a distance of 15 feet on
both sides of the driveway at
Strine's Parking Lot, No. 225
Frederick Street
Frederick Street [Added
1-21-1959 by Ord. No.
983; amended
5-17-1972 by Ord. No.
1548]
South From Centennial Avenue
eastwardly to Center Square
Frederick Street [Added
1-21-1959 by Ord. No.
983; amended
5-17-1972 by Ord. No.
1548]
South From its intersection with
Centennial Avenue and High
Street, westwardly for a
distance of 212 feet
Frederick Street [Added
10-16-1963 by Ord.
No. 1195]
South From Fleming Avenue to
Meade Avenue
Frederick Street [Added
12-15-1976 by Ord.
No. 1672]
South From Meade Avenue
northeast a distance of 126
feet
Fulton Street [Added
4-19-1950 by Ord. No.
722]
East From Broadway to East
Middle Street
Fulton Street [Added
9-3-1969 by Ord. No.
1455]
West From Broadway southwardly
to the first alley south of and
parallel to Broadway
§ 346-1 HANOVER CODE § 346-1
1:660
Name of Street Side Location
Gail Avenue (being the
first alley north of and
parallel to East Chestnut
Street) [Added
6-14-1966 by Ord. No.
1310; amended
4-17-1968 by Ord. No.
1387]
North From Railroad Street to North
Street
Gail Avenue (being the
first alley north of and
parallel to East Chestnut
Street) [Added
6-14-1966 by Ord. No.
1310; amended
4-17-1968 by Ord. No.
1387]
South From Railroad Street to the
first alley west of and parallel
to North Street
Gail Street [Added
8-20-1958 by Ord. No.
66]
Northwest From North Franklin Street to
High Street, except for
intervals of one hour only
Gail Street [Added
8-20-1958 by Ord. No.
66]
South From North Franklin Street to
High Street, except for
intervals of one hour only
George Street [Added
9-3-1969 by Ord. No.
1455]
East From Allegheny Avenue
northwardly a distance of 50
feet and southwardly for a
distance of 50 feet
George Street [Added
5-20-1964 by Ord. No.
1229]
East From North Street to the first
alley north of and parallel
with Stock Street
George Street [Added
5-20-1964 by Ord. No.
1229]
West From the first alley south of
and parallel with Stock Street
to Allegheny Avenue
§ 346-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-1
1:661
Name of Street Side Location
Grant Drive [Added
5-25-2016 by Ord. No.
2245]
Northeast From a sign approximately
250 feet from the intersection
with Moul Avenue to the first
driveway on Grant Drive; from
a sign approximately 280 feet
from the first intersection
with Blossom Drive, to the
second intersection with
Blossom Drive; from the
southern side of the second
intersection with Blossom
Drive to a sign 30 feet from
the second intersection with
Blossom Drive; from a sign
200 feet from the second
intersection with Blossom
Drive south to the third
intersection with Blossom
Drive
Grant Drive [Added
2-16-1983 by Ord. No.
1751; amended
8-15-1984 by Ord. No.
1783]
Northwest At its intersection with
Broadway, 122 feet
Grant Drive [Added
2-16-1983 by Ord. No.
1751; amended
8-15-1984 by Ord. No.
1783]
Southeast At its intersection with
Broadway, 95 feet
Grant Drive [Added
2-16-1983 by Ord. No.
1751; amended
8-15-1984 by Ord. No.
1783]
Southeast At its intersection with
Broadway, 125 feet
Grant Drive [Added
2-16-1983 by Ord. No.
1751; amended
8-15-1984 by Ord. No.
1783]
Southwest At its intersection with
Broadway, from Broadway to
the first alley west of and
parallel with Broadway
§ 346-1 HANOVER CODE § 346-1
1:662
Name of Street Side Location
Grant Drive [Added
5-25-2016 by Ord. No.
2245]
Southwest From the intersection with
Moul Avenue east to the first
intersection with Blossom
Drive; from the first
intersection with Blossom
Drive east to the first
driveway on Grant Drive
(approximately 100 feet from
Blossom Drive); from a sign
320 feet from the first
intersection with Blossom
Drive east to the next
driveway on Grant Drive; from
a sign approximately 730 feet
from the first intersection
with Blossom Drive south to
the second intersection with
Blossom Drive
Hanover Street [Added
8-16-1967 by Ord. No.
1359]
North From Centennial Avenue to
York Street
High Street [Added
11-4-1987 by Ord. No.
1836]
East North of the Elm Avenue
intersection at the parking lot
entrance to the first
apartment complex north of
Elm Avenue, a distance of 40
feet north of and 60 feet south
of the parking lot
High Street [Added
2-19-1969 by Ord. No.
1428]
East From a point 80 feet south of
Fourth Street to a point 180
feet south of Fourth Street
High Street [Amended
3-21-1962 by Ord. No.
1131]
East From Frederick Street to
West Chestnut Street
High Street [Added
9-20-1978 by Ord. No.
1696]
East From a point 129 feet south of
Kuhn Drive to a point 117 feet
north of Kuhn Drive
High Street [Added
6-14-1966 by Ord. No.
1310; amended
6-15-1977 by Ord. No.
1682]
East From the southern edge or
right-of-way line of Maple
Avenue southwardly a
distance of 75 feet
High Street [Added
9-19-1962 by Ord. No.
1155]
East From its intersection with
Third Street southwardly for a
distance of 50 feet
§ 346-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-1
1:663
Name of Street Side Location
High Street [Added
9-19-1962 by Ord. No.
1155]
East From a point 50 feet south
from its intersection with
Third Street to a point 200
feet south from its
intersection with said Third
Street, limited to one hour's
duration
High Street [Added
6-14-1966 by Ord. No.
1310; amended
6-15-1977 by Ord. No.
1682]
East and
west
From Elm Avenue
northwardly a distance of 150
feet and southwardly a
distance of 175 feet
High Street [Added
9-19-1962 by Ord. No.
1155]
West From its intersection with
Chestnut Street northwardly
for a distance of 75 feet
High Street [Added
6-14-1966 by Ord. No.
1310; amended
6-15-1977 by Ord. No.
1682]
West From the southern edge or
right-of-way line of Maple
Avenue southwardly a
distance of 50 1/2 feet
High Street [Added
11-10-1965 by Ord.
No. 1292]
West From Pine Street to South
Street
Juniper Lane [Amended
6-14-1966 by Ord. No.
1310]
East From Diller Road to Pine
Street, from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday through Friday
Juniper Lane [Amended
6-14-1966 by Ord. No.
1310]
West From Diller Road to Pine
Street
Kilpatrick Avenue
[Added 12-11-2002 by
Ord. No. 2058]
North and
south
From the first alley west of
and parallel Frederick Street
Library Place [Amended
12-15-1954 by Ord.
No. 836; 10-14-2009
by Ord. No. 2154]
Between Carlisle Street and
Railroad Street, except in
parking spaces designated by
painted stalls for use by
vehicles used by people
engaged in activities at
Guthrie Memorial Library,
Hanover's public library
Locust Street [Amended
4-15-1953 by Ord. No.
802; 10-31-1968 by
Ord. No. 1411]
East From Broadway to East
Middle Street
§ 346-1 HANOVER CODE § 346-1
1:664
Name of Street Side Location
Locust Street [Added
12-16-1959 by Ord.
No. 1025]
North From East Middle Street to
Spring Avenue
Locust Street [Added
5-20-1970 by Ord. No.
1476]
North From Spring Avenue
eastwardly to the Hanover
Borough line
Locust Street [Amended
4-15-1953 by Ord. No.
802; 10-31-1968 by
Ord. No. 1411]
West From Broadway to the first
alley south of and parallel to
Broadway
Locust Street [Added
9-3-1969 by Ord. No.
1455]
West From East Walnut Street
southwardly for a distance of
50 feet
Maple Avenue [Added
11-4-1964 by Ord. No.
1248]
North From the first alley west of
and parallel with High Street
to a point 50 feet west of said
alley
Maple Avenue [Added
3-15-1961 by Ord. No.
1086]
North and
south
From Carlisle Street
westwardly 60 feet
McAllister Street
[Added 10-15-1969 by
Ord. No. 1458]
For a distance of 32 feet
adjacent to property known as
No. 36 McAllister Street,
Monday through Saturday
from 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.,
except for intervals of 15
minutes
McAllister Street
[Added 8-9-2006 by
Ord. No. 2109]
At the intersection with
Orchard Street, a distance of
40 feet eastwardly from the
northeast corner of Orchard
Street at McAllister Street
McCosh Street [Added
3-17-1954 by Ord. No.
825]
East Southwardly for a distance of
216.5 feet
McCosh Street [Added
9-20-1972 by Ord. No.
1554]
West From a point 155 feet north of
the northern curbline of
North Street, northwardly a
distance of 25 feet
Middle Street [Added
10-19-1960 by Ord.
No. 1059]
North From Centennial Avenue to
Second Avenue
§ 346-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-1
1:665
Name of Street Side Location
Middle Street [Added
10-19-1960 by Ord.
No. 1059]
South From Second Avenue to
Meade Avenue
Middle Street [Added
11-18-1970 by Ord.
No. 1490, approved by
Mayor 11-19-1970]
West From the Western Maryland
Railroad and Penn Central
tracks northwardly to the first
alley
Moul Avenue [Added
3-21-1962 by Ord. No.
1131; amended
10-19-1983 by Ord.
No. 1760]
South From the intersection of the
eastern curbline of Ridge
Avenue with the southern
curbline of Moul Avenue for a
distance of 175 feet and from
Washington Street to Wilson
Avenue on the south side from
7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday
Moulstown Road [Added
12-15-1976 by Ord.
No. 1672]
North From Broadway east a
distance of 335 feet
Moulstown Road [Added
8-19-1992 by Ord. No.
1910]
North and
south
Eastwardly from Broadway to
the Borough line
North Forney Avenue
[Added 8-5-1964 by
Ord. No. 1242]
East From the first alley north of
and parallel with Frederick
Street southwardly a distance
of 75 feet
North Forney Avenue
[Added 6-2-1971 by
Ord. No. 1511]
East From the Penn Central
Railroad right-of-way
southwardly a distance of 200
feet
North Forney Avenue
[Added 10-16-1963 by
Ord. No. 1195]
West From Frederick Street
northwardly to the storm
sewer box culvert
North Forney Avenue
[Added 9-3-1969 by
Ord. No. 1455]
West From Pine Street southwardly
a distance of 70 feet,
restricted to one hour
North Franklin Street
[Added 3-18-1959 by
Ord. No. 986]
East From West Chestnut Street
north 100 feet, limited to one
hour's duration
North Franklin Street
[Added 9-3-1969 by
Ord. No. 1455]
West From Park Avenue
northwardly for a distance of
50 feet
§ 346-1 HANOVER CODE § 346-1
1:666
Name of Street Side Location
North Stephen Place
[Added 8-9-2006 by
Ord. No. 2109]
East Between George Street and
Potomac Avenue, a distance of
75 feet southwardly from
Potomac Avenue.
North Stephen Place
[Added 8-9-2006 by
Ord. No. 2109]
South Between George Street and
Potomac Avenue, a distance of
200 feet westwardly from the
George Street intersection
North Street [Added
11-21-1962 by Ord.
No. 1160]
South From Carlisle Street to the
intersection of Railroad Street
North Street [Added
10-19-1960 by Ord.
No. 1059]
West From Chestnut Street to
George Street
Orchard Street
[Amended 4-20-1966
by Ord. No. 1303;
12-15-1976 by Ord.
No. 1672]
East From 316 feet northeast of
McAllister Street, for a
distance of 106 feet
Orchard Street
[Amended 4-20-1966
by Ord. No. 1303;
12-15-1976 by Ord.
No. 1672]
West From 316 feet northeast of
McAllister Street, for a
distance of 64 feet
Park Avenue [Added
6-18-1952 by Ord. No.
789; amended
5-15-1974 by Ord. No.
1614]
North From Carlisle Street to
Railroad Street
Park Avenue South From Carlisle Street
westwardly a distance of 160
feet
Park Avenue [Added
6-18-1952 by Ord. No.
789; amended
5-15-1974 by Ord. No.
1614]
South From Carlisle Street to
Railroad Street
Penn Street [Added
6-15-1955 by Ord. No.
876]
West From Allegheny Avenue to
Elm Avenue, during school
hours
§ 346-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-1
1:667
Name of Street Side Location
Philadelphia Street
[Added 3-15-1967 by
Ord. No. 1345]
North From East Middle Street to
East Walnut Street, limited to
two hours, from 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday
Philadelphia Street
[Added 10-21-1959 by
Ord. No. 1017]
South From East Middle Street to
Gay Street
Philadelphia Street
[Added 3-15-1967 by
Ord. No. 1345]
South From Middle Street to
Broadway
Pine Street [Added
10-19-1983 by Ord.
No. 1760]
North A distance of 40 feet east of
the intersections of Forney
Avenue and of Sprenkle
Avenue, and 30 feet west of
the intersections of Forney
Avenue and of Sprenkle
Avenue
Pine Street [Added
4-17-1968 by Ord. No.
1387; amended
7-20-1977 by Ord. No.
1685]
North From a point 83 feet west of
Juniper Lane to Juniper Lane
Pine Street [Added
4-17-1968 by Ord. No.
1387; amended
7-20-1977 by Ord. No.
1685]
South From High Street westwardly
a distance of 1,000 feet to the
end of the property of Penland
Paper Company
Pine Street [Added
4-17-1968 by Ord. No.
1387; amended
7-20-1977 by Ord. No.
1685]
South From a point 130 feet
northeast of Poplar Street
northeastwardly for a
distance of 200 feet
Pleasant Street [Amended 3-21-1962 by Ord. No. 1131; 5-8-2002
by Ord. No. 2052; repealed 12-11-2002 by Ord. No. 2058]
Pleasant Street
[Amended 10-16-1963
by Ord. No. 1195]
North From Eagle Avenue to
Baltimore Street
Pleasant Street
[Amended 11-20-1957
by Ord. No. 947]
West From York Street to Fulton
Street
Poplar Street [Amended
11-16-1955 by Ord.
No. 887]
North From High Street to the
boundary line of the Borough
of Hanover
§ 346-1 HANOVER CODE § 346-1
1:668
Name of Street Side Location
Poplar Street [Added
11-10-1965 by Ord.
No. 1292]
North From North Forney Avenue
westwardly to the Hanover
Borough line, between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday through Friday,
inclusive
Poplar Street [Added
6-16-1965 by Ord. No.
1275]
South From North Forney Avenue to
the Hanover Borough line
Potomac Avenue [Added
3-15-1967 by Ord. No.
1345]
North From the eastern edge of
Charles Street eastwardly for
a distance of 100 feet
Potomac Avenue [Added
3-15-1967 by Ord. No.
1345]
South From a point 80 feet east of
the eastern edge of Charles
Street to a point 130 feet east
of the eastern edge of Charles
Street
Railroad Street [Added
6-6-1979 by Ord. No.
1705]
East From the northern curbline of
Broadway northwardly a
distance of 50 feet
Railroad Street [Added
12-16-1959 by Ord.
No. 1025; amended
10-31-1968 by Ord.
No. 1411]
East From East Chestnut Street
north 30 feet
Railroad Street [Added
9-21-1960 by Ord. No.
1055]
East From East Chestnut Street to
a point measured northwardly
45.3 feet from East Chestnut
Street, except for intervals of
15 minutes only between a
point measured northwardly
21.3 feet from East Chestnut
Street for a distance of 24
feet north therefrom
Railroad Street [Added
9-21-1960 by Ord. No.
1055]
East From a point measured
southwardly 41.3 feet from
Gail Street to Gail Street,
except for intervals of 15
minutes only
Railroad Street [Added
10-19-1960 by Ord.
No. 1059]
East From Park Avenue to a point
measured northwardly 260
feet
§ 346-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-1
1:669
Name of Street Side Location
Railroad Street [Added
4-17-1968 by Ord. No.
1387; amended
2-21-1973 by Ord. No.
1568]
East and
west
From Middle Street to
Hanover Street
Railroad Street [Added
4-16-1997 by Ord. No.
1999]
West Southwardly from Bank Lane
a distance of 50 feet and from
a point 94 feet south of Bank
Lane a distance of 22 feet
southwardly toward
Broadway, except for loading
and unloading only
Railroad Street [Added
9-21-1960 by Ord. No.
1055]
West From East Chestnut Street to
a point measured northwardly
157.2 feet from East Chestnut
Street, except for intervals of
15 minutes only between a
point measured northwardly
59.3 feet from East Chestnut
Street for a distance of 72
feet north therefrom
Railroad Street [Added
8-5-1964 by Ord. No.
1242; amended
4-15-1987 by Ord. No.
1826]
West From Park Avenue
northwardly a distance of 75
feet, except for loading and
unloading, and from that
point 75 feet west to a point
175 feet west from 8:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday
Railroad Street Alley
[Added 11-10-1999 by
Ord. No. 2027]
West From Pleasant Street to a
point opposite the north end
of the second driveway off
Pleasant Street, no stopping
and no standing
Randolph Street [Added
10-19-1966 by Ord.
No. 1329]
East From Elm Avenue
northwardly to Kuhn Drive
Ridge Avenue [Added
3-21-1962 by Ord. No.
1131]
East From the intersection of the
southern curbline of Moul
Avenue southward 310 feet to
the intersection of the
southern property line of
Moul's Athletic field
Ridge Avenue South From Broadway to the first
alley east of Broadway
§ 346-1 HANOVER CODE § 346-1
1:670
Name of Street Side Location
Ridge Avenue South From East Middle Street
eastwardly a distance of 115
feet
Ridge Avenue [Added
3-21-1962 by Ord. No.
1131]
West From the northern curbline of
East Middle Street northward
for a distance of 125 feet
Ruth Avenue [Added
7-19-1950 by Ord. No.
731]
West From West Walnut Street to
West Middle Street
School Avenue [Added
9-17-1952 by Ord. No.
790]
East From East Walnut Street to
East Middle Street
Second alley west of and
parallel to East Chestnut
Street, sometimes known
as "Park Avenue
extended" [Added
7-18-1973 by Ord. No.
1592]
East and
west
From Railroad Street
northwardly a distance of 107
feet
Second public alley west
of and parallel to Jackson
Street [Added
8-26-2015 by Ord. No.
2228]
Both From the intersection of said
alley with High Street to the
intersection of said alley with
the first alley east of and
parallel to High Street
South Franklin Street
[Added 6-25-2008 by
Ord. No. 2134]
West From a point 230 feet north of
the first alleyway south of
Boundary Avenue to a point
250 feet north; therefore,
parking shall only be allowed
for loading and unloading in
this twenty-foot area
South Street [Added
5-8-2002 by Ord. No.
2052]
East From St. Vincent's Lane to the
first alley north of and parallel
St. Vincent's Lane during
school hours
Spencer Drive [Added
5-25-2016 by Ord. No.
2245]
At the back of the cul-de-sac,
between the last driveways on
Spencer Drive
Spencer Drive [Added
5-25-2016 by Ord. No.
2245]
North From the intersection with
Blossom Drive 45 feet east to
a sign
§ 346-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-1
1:671
Name of Street Side Location
Spencer Drive [Added
5-25-2016 by Ord. No.
2245]
South From the intersection with
Blossom Drive to the first
driveway on Spencer Drive;
from a point 170 feet from
Blossom Drive east to the next
driveway on Spencer Drive
Spring Avenue [Added
11-21-1984 by Ord.
No. 1789]
East From a point at the last
garage curb cut on the east
side of Spring Avenue
northwardly to the first alley
north of and parallel to York
Street
Stock Street [Added
8-9-2006 by Ord. No.
2109]
On the northeast corner of the
Charles Street intersection, a
distance of 80 feet eastwardly
from Charles Street
Stock Street [Added
5-20-1959 by Ord. No.
995]
North From Broadway west 73 feet
Stock Street [Added
5-20-1959 by Ord. No.
995]
North From Carlisle Street to the
first alley
Stock Street [Added
6-24-2015 by Ord. No.
2221]
North From the intersection of Stock
Street with Carlisle Street to
the intersection of Stock
Street with Eichelberger
Street, and from the
intersection of Stock Street
with McCosh Street to the
intersection of Stock Street
with Penn Street
Stock Street [Added
9-3-1969 by Ord. No.
1455]
North From Eichelberger Street
eastwardly for a distance of
50 feet and westwardly for a
distance of 75 feet
Stock Street [Added
9-3-1969 by Ord. No.
1455]
North and
south
From George Street
eastwardly for a distance of
50 feet and westwardly for a
distance of 50 feet
Stock Street [Added
9-3-1969 by Ord. No.
1455]
North and
south
From Penn Street eastwardly
for a distance of 50 feet and
westwardly for a distance of
50 feet
§ 346-1 HANOVER CODE § 346-1
1:672
Name of Street Side Location
Stock Street [Added
5-20-1959 by Ord. No.
995]
South From Broadway west 178 feet
Stock Street [Added
5-20-1959 by Ord. No.
995]
South From Carlisle Street east 157
feet
Stock Street [Added
9-3-1969 by Ord. No.
1455]
South From Charles Avenue
eastwardly for a distance of
50 feet and westwardly for a
distance of 50 feet
Stock Street [Added
9-20-1972 by Ord. No.
1554; repealed
4-24-2019 by Ord. No.
2285]
Stock Street [Amended
10-17-1956 by Ord.
No. 917; 4-19-1995 by
Ord. No. 1975]
South From McCosh Street
westwardly to Eichelberger
Street
Terrace Avenue [Added
5-15-1974 by Ord. No.
1614; repealed
3-18-1981 by Ord. No.
1727]
Third Street [Added
7-17-1968 by Ord. No.
1402; repealed
2-17-1982 by Ord. No.
1742]
Third Street [Added
8-20-1958 by Ord. No.
966]
North From Carlisle Street to a
point westward 70 feet
Third Street [Added
8-20-1958 by Ord. No.
966]
North From a point 70 feet west of
Carlisle Street to a point 110
feet west of Carlisle Street,
except for intervals of one
hour only
Third Street [Added
12-19-1979 by Ord.
No. 1710]
North From Commerce Street
westwardly to the Hanover
Borough/Conewago Township
line
Third Street [Amended
3-16-1983 by Ord. No.
1754]
North Opposite Filbert Street to
Commerce Street
§ 346-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-1
1:673
Name of Street Side Location
Third Street [Amended
3-16-1983 by Ord. No.
1754]
North From the intersection at High
Street to the intersecting
alley at Sterner's Garage
Third Street [Added
6-6-1979 by Ord. No.
1705]
North From the eastern curbline of
Krug Avenue eastwardly a
distance of 50 feet
Third Street [Added
7-17-1968 by Ord. No.
1402]
North That portion situated north of
the right-of-way of the
Western Maryland Railroad,
from North Franklin Street
eastwardly a distance of 150
feet
Third Street [Added
11-21-1962 by Ord.
No. 1160]
North That portion lying south of the
right-of-way of the Western
Maryland Railway, from
Carlisle Street to High Street
Third Street [Added
9-17-1975 by Ord. No.
1644]
South From a point 35 feet from the
intersection of High Street
and Third Street eastwardly
for a distance of 50 feet,
except for loading and
unloading
Third Street [Amended
3-16-1983 by Ord. No.
1754]
South From the intersecting alley at
Sterner's Garage to
Commerce Street
Third Street (that portion
lying north of the rightof-
way of the Western
Maryland Railway)
[Added 7-3-1962 by
Ord. No. 1145]
South From Carlisle Street to High
Street
Walnut Street [Added
5-19-1971 by Ord. No.
1506, approved by
Mayor 5-20-1971]
North From Centennial Avenue
westwardly for a distance of
100 feet, except for loading
and unloading
Washington Avenue
[Added 5-25-2016 by
Ord. No. 2245]
Both From the intersection with
Blossom Drive to the first
driveway on Washington
Avenue
§ 346-1 HANOVER CODE § 346-1
1:674
Name of Street Side Location
West Avenue (being the
first alley south of and
parallel with Fourth
Street [Added 3-6-1963
by Ord. No. 1174]
South From Church Street (being
the first alley west of and
parallel with North Franklin
Street) to the second alley
west of and parallel with
Fourth Street, a distance of
182 feet
West Chestnut Street
[Added 3-18-1959 by
Ord. No. 986]
North From High Street west to the
first alley west of and parallel
to High Street, limited to one
hour's duration
West Chestnut Street
[Added 8-17-1966 by
Ord. No. 1319]
North From Stoner Avenue
eastwardly a distance of 60
feet
West Chestnut Street
[Amended 10-17-1956
by Ord. No. 917]
South From High Street eastwardly
to the western boundary line
of the property of the Park
Theater
West Chestnut Street
[Amended 10-17-1956
by Ord. No. 917]
South From High Street westwardly
to Stoner's Alley a distance of
460 feet
West Chestnut Street
[Added 4-15-1964 by
Ord. No. 1223]
South From North Franklin Street to
High Street
West Chestnut Street
[Added 8-17-1966 by
Ord. No. 1319]
South From Stoner Avenue
westwardly a distance of 75
feet
West Hanover Street
[Added 4-23-1952 by
Ord. No. 782; amended
9-6-1995 by Ord. No.
1978]
North East of Centennial Avenue,
within 25 feet of Centennial
Avenue, limited to 15-minute
parking from a point 25 feet
from the corner, a distance of
an additional 40 feet
West Hanover Street
[Added 4-23-1952 by
Ord. No. 782; amended
9-6-1995 by Ord. No.
1978]
South East of Centennial Avenue,
within 60 feet of Centennial
Avenue
West Middle Street
[Amended 11-20-1957
by Ord. No. 947;
6-15-1977 by Ord. No.
1682]
North From Ruth Avenue eastward
to the first alley west of and
parallel to Baltimore Street
§ 346-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-1
1:675
Name of Street Side Location
West Middle Street
[Amended 11-20-1957
by Ord. No. 947;
6-15-1977 by Ord. No.
1682]
South From Baltimore Street to the
first alley west of and parallel
to Baltimore Street
West Walnut Street
[Added 11-19-1958 by
Ord. No. 976]
Both From Centennial Avenue west
60 feet
West Walnut Street
[Added 11-19-1958 by
Ord. No. 976]
North From Centennial Avenue east
60 feet
West Walnut Street South From Baltimore Street to
Centennial Avenue
West Walnut Street
[Amended 11-23-1960
by Ord. No. 1063]
South From Centennial Avenue to
Meade Avenue, except for
loading and unloading within
the space of 50 feet east of
Meade Avenue to a point 160
feet east of Meade Avenue
Wilson Avenue [Added
11-10-1999 by Ord.
No. 2027]
North and
south
From Moul Avenue eastwardly
to the first school driveway,
no stopping and no standing
Wilson Avenue [Added
8-15-1984 by Ord. No.
1783]
Southeast At its intersection with
Broadway, from Broadway to
the first driveway south of
and parallel with Broadway
York Street [Added
3-21-1962 by Ord. No.
1131]
East From the southern edge of the
alley south of East Middle
Street, southward to the
northern edge of Spring
Avenue
York Street [Added
4-16-1997 by Ord. No.
1999]
North From the Middle Street
intersection westwardly 153
feet and eastwardly 128 feet
York Street [Added
10-16-1963 by Ord.
No. 1195]
North From Spring Avenue
eastwardly to the Borough
line
York Street [Added
6-16-1965 by Ord. No.
1275]
South From 75 feet west of Hanover
Street to Hanover Street
York Street [Added
8-5-1964 by Ord. No.
1242]
South From Hanover Street to
Spring Avenue
§ 346-1 HANOVER CODE § 346-1
1:676
Name of Street Side Location
York Street [Added
4-16-1997 by Ord. No.
1999]
South From the Middle Street
intersection westwardly 126
feet and eastwardly 155 feet
York Street [Amended
10-17-1956 by Ord.
No. 917; 5-19-1971 by
Ord. No. 1506]
West From Broadway a distance of
98 feet southward
York Street [Amended
10-17-1956 by Ord.
No. 917; 5-19-1971 by
Ord. No. 1506]
West For a distance of 40 feet
southward commencing at a
point 98 feet from Broadway,
except for loading and
unloading
York Street [Amended
10-17-1956 by Ord.
No. 917; 5-19-1971 by
Ord. No. 1506,
approved by Mayor
5-20-1971]
West From the entrance to the
fairgrounds northward to the
first alley parallel to such
entrance, a distance of 73 feet
York Street [Added
3-21-1962 by Ord. No.
1131]
West From the southern edge of the
first alley north of Pleasant
Street, southward for a
distance of 274 feet
D. Miscellaneous prohibitions and regulations.
(1) Parking in front of churches, theaters, doctors' offices and hotels.
No parking, except for loading and unloading, shall be allowed for a
space of approximately 40 feet directly in front of any church
during the hours for services therein; and no parking, except for
loading and unloading, shall be allowed for a space of
approximately 20 feet directly in front of any theater during the
hours the same is open for business, nor directly in front of any
physician's office, nor directly in front of any hotel; provided,
however, that in the event that any hotel shall desire the restriction
against parking provided in this subsection to be applicable to a
space larger than said 20 feet in this subsection specified, a written
application for such additional restricted space may be filed with
the Borough Council, and in the event that the Borough Council
shall determine that the requested additional restricted parking
space is desirable for the accommodation of patrons and other
persons using said hotel premises and that the grant of said
request is in the public interest, said application shall be granted,
upon the condition, however, that the total space so restricted in
front of such hotel after the grant of said application shall not
exceed 65 feet and upon the further condition that said hotel shall
pay to the Borough annually, on or before March 1, a license fee in
the amount of $175 to cover the costs incurred by the Borough in
§ 346-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-1
1:677
the supervision and maintenance of said additional restricted
parking space. [Amended 3-6-1963 by Ord. No. 1174]
(2) No parking shall be allowed in front of any gasoline service station
placed and maintained in accordance with ordinances of this
Borough and laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, nor in
such a manner as to obstruct the entrance to any building.
[Amended 12-29-1954 by Ord. No. 858]143
(3) No vehicle shall remain continuously parked on any street or
thoroughfare in the Borough of Hanover for a period of more than
24 hours. [Amended 11-18-1959 by Ord. No. 1021]144
(4) On the streets, areas or portions thereof set forth in this Subsection
D(4), it shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor
vehicle or other vehicle to park such vehicle between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day except Sundays and the
following legal holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day and
Christmas Day, for more than three hours at any time, except such
spaces as are or shall be designated as cab stands, bus stops,
entrances to hotels, theaters, fireplugs and other places where
parking is now or may hereafter be prohibited. The foregoing shall
apply to the following streets, areas or portions thereof: [Added
10-6-1971 by Ord. No. 1528]
Name of Street Side Location
Broadway East From the first alley north of
and parallel to Locust Street
to Fulton Street
Broadway West From the first alley north of
and parallel to Allewalt Alley
(such first alley sometimes
known as "Moul Alley") to the
Western Maryland Railroad
crossing
(5) On the streets, areas or portions thereof set forth in this
§ 346-1D(5), it shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any
motor vehicle or other vehicle to park such vehicle between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day except Sundays and the
following legal holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day and
Christmas Day, for more than four hours at any time, except such
spaces as are or shall be designated as cab stands, bus stops,
entrances to hotels, theaters, fireplugs and other places where
143. Editor's Note: Original § 119-1D(3), which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 11-4-1964 by Ord. No. 1248.
144. Editor's Note: Original § 119-1D(5), (6) and (7), which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 10-31-1968 by Ord. No. 1411.
§ 346-1 HANOVER CODE § 346-1
1:678
parking is now or may hereafter be prohibited. The foregoing shall
apply to the following streets, areas or portions thereof: [Amended
10-19-1966 by Ord. No. 1329; 10-6-1971 by Ord. No. 1528]145
Name of Street Side Location
Baltimore Street [Repealed 10-19-1983 by Ord. No. 1760]
Carlisle Street East and
west
Between Park Avenue and the
Pennsylvania Railroad
Frederick Street North and
south
Between Centennial Avenue
and Meade Avenue
York Street Northeast
and
southwest
Between Middle Street and
the alley at No. 240 York
Street
(6) On the streets, areas or portions thereof set forth in this
§ 346-1D(6), it shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any
motor vehicle or other vehicle to park between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day except Saturdays and Sundays and
the following legal holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day and
Christmas Day, for more than two hours at any time, except when
such spaces are or shall be designated as cab stands, bus stops,
entrances to hotels, theaters, fireplugs and other places where
parking is now or may hereafter be prohibited. The foregoing shall
apply to the following streets, areas or portions thereof: [Added
6-15-1977 by Ord. No. 1682]
Name of Street Side Location
Baltimore Street East and
west
Between Middle Street and
Hanover Street
West Middle Street
[Added 12-7-1977
by Ord. No. 1691]
South Between Ruth Avenue and the
first alley west of and parallel
to Baltimore Street
(7) On the streets, areas or portions thereof set forth in this
§ 346-1D(7), it shall be unlawful for the owners or operators of any
motor vehicle or other vehicle to park such vehicle between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day except Sundays and the
following legal holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day and
Christmas Day, for more than 1/2 hour at any time, except when
such spaces are or shall be designated as cab stands, theaters,
fireplugs and other places where parking is now or may hereafter
be prohibited. The foregoing shall apply to the following streets,
areas or portions thereof: [Added 6-15-1977 by Ord. No.
1682]146
145. Editor's Note: Original § 119-1D(9), added 9-3-1969 by Ord. No. 1455, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 11-7-1973 by Ord. No. 1601.
§ 346-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-1
1:679
Name of Street Side Location
East Walnut Street South Between the first alley east of
and parallel to Locust Street
and Baer Avenue
E. Overnight parking. No persons shall park any vehicle or continue to
have said vehicle parked as set forth below between the hours of 12:01
a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day: [Amended 7-17-1957 by Ord. No.
933; 8-7-1991 by Ord. No. 1896]
Name of Street Side Location
Baltimore Street Between Center Square and
Middle Street
Broadway East Between Center Square and the
first alley north of and parallel to
Locust
Broadway West Between Center Square and the
first alley north of and parallel to
Allewelt Alley
Carlisle Street Between Center Square and Park
Avenue
Center Square
Frederick Street Between Center Square and High
Street
York Street Between Broadway and Middle
Street
F. Unlawful usages. Unless specifically allowed under some law or
ordinance, and except for the delivering of merchandise or the loading
or unloading of the same, no vehicle shall remain parked in the streets
or alleys of the Borough of Hanover for commercial purposes or for the
sale or exhibition of any article, or for the storing of the vehicle itself or
property therein, or for any commercial purpose wherein the parking of
the vehicle becomes a means whereby the commercial transaction is
affected or effected; and no vehicle shall be used or parked in a highway
within the said Borough of Hanover for the purpose or intent of
committing or inducing any unlawful act therein or thereby.
G. Parking at intersections. Parking is prohibited at all times within the
following distances of the intersections of the curbs in the following
streets and alleys: [Added 9-17-1952 by Ord. No. 790]
146. Editor's Note: Original § 119-1D(12), added 9-7-1977 by Ord. No. 1687, which followed
this subsection, was repealed 10-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2154.
§ 346-1 HANOVER CODE § 346-1
1:680
Name of Street Side Location
Baltimore Street
[Added 7-18-1956
by Ord. No. 910]
West North of Pleasant Avenue, within
151 feet of the intersection of the
curbs of Baltimore Street and
Pleasant Avenue
Broadway [Added
7-3-1962 by Ord.
No. 1145]
Both Within 50 feet of the intersection
of the curbs at McKinley Avenue
Broadway [Added
12-27-2017 by Ord.
No. 2263]
East Originating at the northern curb
of the alley adjacent to 631
Broadway and extending 60 feet
in a northwardly direction
Broadway [Amended
3-21-1962 by Ord.
No. 1131;
9-20-1972 by Ord.
No. 1554; 9-7-1977
by Ord. No. 1687]
East Both north and south of Fulton
Street and both north and south of
East Chestnut Street, within 117
feet of the intersections of the
curbs of said streets
Broadway [Amended
3-21-1962 by Ord.
No. 1131;
9-20-1972 by Ord.
No. 1554; 9-7-1977
by Ord. No. 1687]
East From the northern edge of the
first alley south of Ridge Avenue
northward to the southern edge of
the first alley north of Ridge
Avenue, except for a distance of
30 feet beginning at a point 25
feet north of the northern curbline
of the first alley south of Ridge
Avenue where parking will be
limited to 15 minutes
Broadway [Amended
3-21-1962 by Ord.
No. 1131;
9-20-1972 by Ord.
No. 1554; 9-7-1977
by Ord. No. 1687]
South East of Locust Street, within 50
feet of the intersection of the
curbs of Locust Street and
Broadway
Broadway [Amended
3-21-1962 by Ord.
No. 1131;
9-20-1972 by Ord.
No. 1554; 9-7-1977
by Ord. No. 1687]
South Both north and south of
Philadelphia Street, within 50 feet
of the intersections of the curbs of
Philadelphia Street and Broadway
Broadway [Amended
3-21-1962 by Ord.
No. 1131;
9-20-1972 by Ord.
No. 1554; 9-7-1977
by Ord. No. 1687]
West Both north and south of Fulton
Street and both north and south of
East Chestnut Street, within 50
feet of said curb intersections
§ 346-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-1
1:681
Name of Street Side Location
Broadway [Amended
3-21-1962 by Ord.
No. 1131;
9-20-1972 by Ord.
No. 1554; 9-7-1977
by Ord. No. 1687]
West From the northern edge of the
first alley south of Ridge Avenue
northward for a distance of 260
feet
Broadway [Amended
3-21-1962 by Ord.
No. 1131;
9-20-1972 by Ord.
No. 1554; 9-7-1977
by Ord. No. 1687]
West Both north and south of Stock
Street, within 50 feet of the
intersections of the curbs of
Broadway and Stock Streets
Carlisle Street
[Amended
10-19-1955 by Ord.
No. 884]
East North of Stock Street, within 75
feet of the intersection of the
curbs of Carlisle Street and Stock
Street
Carlisle Street
[Amended
10-19-1955 by Ord.
No. 884]
Northeast Northwest of Center Square,
within 57 feet of the intersection
of the curbs of Carlisle Street and
Center Square
Carlisle Street
[Amended
10-19-1955 by Ord.
No. 884]
West North of Elm Avenue, within 50
feet of the intersection of the
curbs of Carlisle Street and Elm
Avenue
Carlisle Street
[Amended
10-19-1955 by Ord.
No. 884]
West South of Maple Avenue, within 50
feet of the intersection of the
curbs of Carlisle Street and Maple
Avenue
Carlisle Street
[Added 3-27-2019
by Ord. No. 2283]
West 58 feet south of York Rail tracks
(near Library Place)
Centennial Avenue
[Added 7-3-1962 by
Ord. No. 1145]
Both Within 50 feet of the intersection
of the curbs of Middle Street
Centennial Avenue Both North of West Hanover Street,
within 40 feet of the intersection
of the curbs of West Hanover
Street and Centennial Avenue, as
provided in § 346-1C
East Middle Street
[Amended
2-10-1999 by Ord.
No. 2019]
Northwest corner of the
intersection of East Middle Street
and School Avenue, 10 feet
westwardly
§ 346-1 HANOVER CODE § 346-1
1:682
Name of Street Side Location
East Middle Street
[Amended
2-10-1999 by Ord.
No. 2019]
Northeast side of the intersection
of East Middle Street and York
Street, 180 feet from the York
Street curbline eastwardly
East Middle Street
[Amended
2-10-1999 by Ord.
No. 2019]
Both Both east and west of Fulton
Street, within 50 feet of the
intersection of the curb of said
street
East Middle Street
[Added 10-24-2018
by Ord. No. 2275]
North Originating at Ridge Avenue 84
feet west on East Middle Street to
the utility pole
East Middle Street
[Amended
2-10-1999 by Ord.
No. 2019]
North Both east and west of Eagle
Avenue, within 50 feet of the
intersection of the curb of East
Middle Street and Eagle Avenue
East Middle Street
[Amended
2-10-1999 by Ord.
No. 2019]
North West of York Street, within 50 feet
of the intersection of the curb of
East Middle Street and York
Street
Forney Avenue
[Added 4-18-1956
by Ord. No. 899;
9-21-1977 by Ord.
No. 1689]
East North of Frederick Street, within
100 feet of the intersection
Forney Avenue
[Added 4-18-1956
by Ord. No. 899;
9-21-1977 by Ord.
No. 1689]
East and
west
South of Frederick Street, within
125 feet of the intersection
Frederick Street,
[Added 4-18-1956
by Ord. No. 899;
9-21-1977 by Ord.
No. 1689]
North East of Forney Avenue, within 125
feet of the intersection with
Forney Avenue
Frederick Street
[Added 4-18-1956
by Ord. No. 899;
9-21-1977 by Ord.
No. 1689]
North and
south
West of Forney Avenue, within 150
feet of the intersection
Frederick Street
[Amended
2-15-1956 by Ord.
No. 891]
Northwest Southwest of High Street, within
104 feet of the intersection of the
curbs of Frederick Street and
High Street
§ 346-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-1
1:683
Name of Street Side Location
Frederick Street
[Added 4-18-1956
by Ord. No. 899;
9-21-1977 by Ord.
No. 1689]
South East of Forney Avenue, within 167
feet of the intersection with
Forney Avenue
Frederick Street
[Amended
2-15-1956 by Ord.
No. 891]
Southeast Southwest of Centennial Avenue,
within 61 feet of the intersection
of the curbs of Frederick Street
and Centennial Avenue
Fulton Street West North of Middle Street, within 50
feet of the intersection of the
curbs of Fulton Street and Middle
Street
Hanover Street
[Added 7-3-1996 by
Ord. No. 1986]
Northeast and southeast corners
of Hanover Street and McAllister
Street, within 50 feet of the
intersection with McAllister
Street, including all stopping and
standing
High Street [Added
2-16-1955 by Ord.
No. 870]
Northeast Southeast of West Chestnut
Street, within 52 feet of the
intersection of the curbs of High
Street and West Chestnut Street
High Street [Added
2-16-1955 by Ord.
No. 870]
Southwest Southeast of Poplar Street, within
45 feet of the intersection of the
curbs of High Street and Poplar
Street
High Street [Added
7-17-1996 by Ord.
No. 1987]
West Between Linden Avenue,
northward to the first driveway
intersecting High Street, which
driveway is parallel to Linden
Avenue
Library Place [Added
12-15-1954 by Ord.
No. 836]
South East of Carlisle Street, within 60
feet of the intersection of the
curbs of Carlisle Street and
Library Place
Locust Street [Added
4-20-1955 by Ord.
No. 874]
West Within 117 feet of the intersection
of the curbs of Broadway and
Locust Street
McAllister Street
[Added 7-3-1996 by
Ord. No. 1986]
Northeast corner from Hanover
Street to the first driveway north
of and parallel to Hanover Street,
during school hours
§ 346-1 HANOVER CODE § 346-1
1:684
Name of Street Side Location
McCosh Street Both North of Stock Street, within 60
feet of the intersection of the
curbs of McCosh Street and Stock
Street
Park Avenue South Within 50 feet of the intersection
of Park Avenue with the first alley
west of and parallel to Carlisle
Street
Pine Street [Added
2-19-1986 by Ord.
No. 1815]
Southwest Within 50 feet of the intersection
of North Forney Avenue and Pine
Street (adjacent Eisenhart
Wallpaper)
Poplar Street [Added
7-20-1977 by Ord.
No. 1685]
South Within 112 feet of the intersection
of the curbs of High and Poplar
Streets
Railroad Street
[Added 3-27-2019
by Ord. No. 2283]
Both 80 feet south of the York Rail
tracks (near Library Place)
Stock Street [Added
10-19-1955 by Ord.
No. 884]
Both Within 75 feet of the intersections
of the curbs of Stock Street and
Broadway and within 75 feet of
the intersections of the curbs of
Stock Street and Carlisle Street
West Chestnut Street
[Added 2-28-2018
by Ord. No. 2268]
South From the first alley known as Doss
Alley, 38 feet east of said alley on
West Chestnut Street
West Hanover Street North East of Centennial Avenue, within
25 feet of Centennial Avenue, as
provided in § 346-1C
West Hanover Street South East of Centennial Avenue, within
60 feet of Centennial Avenue, as
provided in § 346-1C
Young's Circle
[Added 4-14-1999
by Ord. No. 2021]
South Between High Street westwardly
to the first driveway west of and
parallel to High Street for more
than a period of one hour at a
time
§ 346-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-2
1:685
§ 346-2. One-way thoroughfares.147
The following designated streets and alleys are declared to be one-way
thoroughfares:
Name of Street Limits
Alley leading eastwardly from
Baltimore Street to the first alley
east of and parallel with Baltimore
Street, sometimes known as "Bixler
Alley"
Between Baltimore Street and the
first alley east of and parallel with
Baltimore Street, with its entrance
at Baltimore Street and its exit at
the first alley east of and parallel
with Baltimore Street
Alley leading from Baltimore Street
westward to Centennial Avenue at
the property occupied by
Metropolitan Edison Company
[Amended 4-19-1950 by Ord. No.
722]
Between Baltimore Street and the
second alley west of and parallel
with Baltimore Street, sometimes
known as the "Wagner Alley," with
its entrance at Baltimore Street and
its exit at the said second alley west
of and parallel with Baltimore Street
Alley leading southwardly from
Broadway to East Walnut Street at
the property occupied by J. C.
Tanger & Son
Between Broadway and East Walnut
Street, with its entrance at
Broadway and its exit at East Walnut
Street
Alley leading eastward from Carlisle
Street at the property occupied by
Hanover Savings Fund Society,
sometimes known as "Bank Lane"
[Amended 3-16-1949 by Ord. No.
690]
Between Carlisle Street and
Railroad Street, with its entrance at
Carlisle Street and its exit at said
Railroad Street
Alley leading westward from Carlisle
Street to North Franklin Street at
the property occupied by the
Hanover Shoe Store, sometimes
known as "Bank Lane" [Amended
10-18-1950 by Ord. No. 739]
Between Carlisle Street and the first
alley west of and parallel with
Carlisle Street, with its entrance at
Carlisle Street and its exit at the
said first alley west of and parallel
with Carlisle Street
Alley leading from East Chestnut
Street to Broadway, known as
"Allewelt Alley" and also known as
"Hoffacker Alley" [Amended
10-6-1965 by Ord. No. 1288]
Between East Chestnut Street and
Broadway, with its entrance at
Broadway and its exit at East
Chestnut Street
Alley leading from Frederick Street
northward to West Chestnut Street
at the property occupied by the
State Theatre
Between Frederick Street and West
Chestnut Street, with its entrance at
Frederick Street and its exit at West
Chestnut Street
147. Editor's Note: This section was amended as follows to repeal various entries: 6-18-1952 by
Ord. No. 789; 11-20-1957 by Ord. No. 947; 10-19-1960 by Ord. No. 1059; and 4-15-1964 by
Ord. No. 1223. See additional amendments noted in the table below.
§ 346-2 HANOVER CODE § 346-2
1:686
Name of Street Limits
Alley leading southward from
Frederick Street, being the first
alley east of and parallel with
Centennial Avenue, and sometimes
known as the "Wagner Alley"
[Added 7-18-1951 by Ord. No.
759]
Between Frederick Street and
Exchange Place, with its entrance at
Frederick Street and its exit at
Exchange Place
Alley leading from Frederick Street
southward to West Walnut Street at
the property occupied by
Montgomery Ward Co.
Between Frederick Street and West
Walnut Street, with its entrance at
Frederick Street and its exit at West
Walnut Street
Alley leading from Gail Street to
Broadway, known as "Moul Alley"
and sometimes "Market Alley"
[Amended 10-6-1965 by Ord. No.
1288; 4-4-1984 by Ord. No. 1772]
Between Gail Street and Broadway
with its entrance at Gail Street and
its exit at Broadway
Alley leading southward from Third
Street, at the east of St. Vincent's
Catholic Church [Added 4-17-1952
by Ord. No. 927]
Between Third Street and South
Street, with its entrance at Third
Street and its exit at South Street
Alley extending eastward from York
Street at Trinity Reformed Church
[Added 9-17-1952 by Ord. No.
790]
Between York Street and School
Avenue, with its entrance at York
Street and its exit at School Avenue
Blossom Drive [Added 5-25-2016
by Ord. No. 2245]
In its entirety within the Borough,
with its entrance at the first
intersection with Grant Drive off of
Moul Avenue and its exit at the third
intersection with Grant Drive
Boundary Avenue [Added 9-7-1977
by Ord. No. 1687; amended
12-19-1984 by Ord. No. 1797]
From Baltimore Street to the first
alley west of and parallel to
Baltimore Street, with its entrance
at Baltimore Street and its exit at
the first alley west of and parallel to
Baltimore Street
Broadway [Added 10-6-1965 by
Ord. No. 1288]
From York Street to Fulton Street
and East Chestnut Street, with its
entrance at York Street and its exit
at Fulton Street and East Chestnut
Street
Chestnut Street [Added 10-6-1965
by Ord. No. 1288]
From Broadway to North Forney
Avenue, with its entrance at
Broadway and its exit at North
Forney Avenue
§ 346-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-2
1:687
Name of Street Limits
College Avenue [Added 9-20-1972
by Ord. No. 1554]
From High Street to Stoner Avenue,
with its entrance at High Street and
its exit at Stoner Avenue
East Elm Avenue (alley portion)
[Added 6-19-1963 by Ord. No.
1179; amended 3-25-2009 by
Ord. No. 2150]
With its entrance at Broadway and
its exit at the intersection with the
first alleyway west of and parallel
with Broadway
Fifth Street [Added 3-16-1983 by
Ord. No. 1754]
From Carlisle Street westward to a
point at the first alley west of and
parallel to Carlisle Street, with its
entrance at Carlisle Street and its
exit at the first alley west of and
parallel to Carlisle Street
First alley south of and parallel to
Allegheny Avenue [Added
7-17-1968 by Ord. No. 1402]
From Broadway to Penn Street, with
its entrance at Broadway and its exit
at Penn Street
First alley south of and parallel with
East Elm Avenue [Added
6-19-1963 by Ord. No. 1179;
amended 7-17-1968 by Ord. No.
1402]
From Penn Street to Broadway, with
its entrance at Penn Street and its
exit at Broadway
First alley north of and parallel to
Hanover Street [Added
12-15-1976 by Ord. No. 1672;
amended 7-3-1996 by Ord. No.
1986]
From Eagle Avenue to McAllister
Street, with its entrance at Eagle
Avenue and its exit at McAllister
Street
First alley north of and parallel to
Hanover Street [Added 9-7-1994
by Ord. No. 1967]
From McAllister Street to Eagle
Avenue, with its entrance on
McAllister Street and its exit at
Eagle Avenue
First alley west of and parallel to
High Street, sometimes known as
"Wendler's Alley" [Added
9-20-1972 by Ord. No. 1554]
From College Avenue to Frederick
Street, with its entrance at College
Avenue and its exit at Frederick
Street
First alley south of and parallel to
Library Place [Added 8-17-1966 by
Ord. No. 1319]
From Carlisle Street eastwardly to
the first alley east of and parallel to
Carlisle Street, with its entrance at
Carlisle Street and its exit at the
first alley east of and parallel to
Carlisle Street
§ 346-2 HANOVER CODE § 346-2
1:688
Name of Street Limits
First alley north of and parallel to
Philadelphia Street [Added
11-20-1985 by Ord. No. 1809]
East of Middle Street, one-way west
with its entrance at the intersection
with the first alley west of and
parallel to Gay Street and its exit at
Middle Street
First alley north of and parallel to
Stock Street [Added 9-20-1972 by
Ord. No. 1554]
From Eichelberger Street
westwardly to the first alley west of
and parallel to Eichelberger Street,
with its entrance at the first alley
west of and parallel to Eichelberger
Street and its exit at Eichelberger
Street
Frederick Street [Added 10-6-1965 by Ord. No. 1288; repealed
4-19-1972 by Ord. No. 1544]
Gail Avenue (being the first alley
north of and parallel to East
Chestnut Street) [Added
6-14-1966 by Ord. No. 1310]
From Railroad Street to North
Street, with its entrance at Railroad
Street and its exit at North Street
Library Place [Added 4-25-2007 by
Ord. No. 2125]
From Railroad Street to Carlisle
Street, with its entrance at Railroad
Street and its exit at Carlisle Street
Locust Street [Added 9-5-1984 by
Ord. No. 1784; amended
3-25-2009 by Ord. No. 2150]
From the Borough line at Penn
Township to East Walnut Street,
with its entrance at the Borough line
and its exit at East Walnut Street
McAllister Street [Added
2-21-1973 by Ord. No. 1568]
From Middle Street to Pleasant
Street, with its entrance at Middle
Street and its exit at Pleasant Street
North Franklin Street [Added
11-15-1961 by Ord. No. 1119]
From Bank Lane to Frederick
Street, with its entrance at Bank
Lane and its exit at Frederick Street
North Stephen Place [Added
4-25-2007 by Ord. No. 2125]
On the west side from Allegheny
Avenue southwardly from a point 25
feet south of Allegheny Avenue to a
point 75 feet south of Allegheny
Avenue
North Street [Added 11-21-1962
by Ord. No. 1160]
From Carlisle Street to the
intersection of Railroad Street, with
its entrance at Carlisle Street and its
exit at said intersection with
Railroad Street
§ 346-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-2
1:689
Name of Street Limits
North Street [Added 10-6-1965 by
Ord. No. 1288]
From East Chestnut Street to
Broadway, with its entrance at East
Chestnut Street and its exit at
Broadway
Orchard Street [Added 7-3-1996
by Ord. No. 1986]
From York Street to McAllister
Street, with its entrance at York
Street and its exit at McAllister
Street
Park Avenue [Added 12-16-1964
by Ord. No. 1252]
From Carlisle Street to Railroad
Street, with its entrance at Carlisle
Street and its exit at Railroad Street
Railroad Street [Repealed 2-16-1983 by Ord. No. 1751]
Railroad Street [Added
10-16-1963 by Ord. No. 1195]
From Hanover Street to Middle
Street, with its entrance at Hanover
Street and its exit at Middle Street
Ruth Avenue [Added 12-19-1979
by Ord. No. 1710]
From West Middle Street to West
Hanover Street, with its entrance at
West Middle Street and its exit at
West Hanover Street
School Avenue [Added 5-20-1959
by Ord. No. 995]
From Broadway to the first alley to
the east, with its entrance at
Broadway and its exit at said first
alley to the east
Stoner Avenue [Added 11-10-1965
by Ord. No. 1292; amended
9-20-1972 by Ord. No. 1554]
From West Chestnut Street to
Frederick Street, with its entrance
at College Avenue, its southern exit
at Frederick Street and its northern
exit at West Chestnut Street
Third Street [Amended
11-21-1962 by Ord. No. 1160]
On the northern side of the right-ofway
of the Western Maryland
Railway, between Carlisle Street and
High Street, with its entrance at
Carlisle Street and its exit at High
Street
Third Street [Amended
11-21-1962 by Ord. No. 1160]
On the southern side of the right-ofway
of the Western Maryland
Railway, between Carlisle Street and
High Street, with its entrance at
High Street and its exit at Carlisle
Street
§ 346-3. Traffic lights; stop signs; bus stops; taxi stands. [Amended
12-29-1954 by Ord. No. 858]
§ 346-2 HANOVER CODE § 346-3
1:690
A. At the following intersections, official traffic signals shall be erected (or,
if already erected, are hereby ratified) and traffic at such intersections
may be directed by such signals:
Intersection
Baltimore Street and Hanover Street
Baltimore Street and Middle Street
Broadway and Eisenhower Drive [Added 8-19-1992 by Ord. No.
1910]
Broadway and Grant Drive [Added 2-16-1983 by Ord. No. 1751]
Broadway and Stock Street
Broadway and York Street
Carlisle Street and Chestnut Street
Carlisle Street and Clearview Road [Added 9-21-1960 by Ord. No.
1055]
Carlisle Street and Eisenhower Drive [Added 8-19-1992 by Ord.
No. 1910]
Carlisle Street and Kuhn Drive - Dart Drive [Added 9-21-1977 by
Ord. No. 1689]
Carlisle Street and Park Avenue [Added 10-31-1968 by Ord. No.
1411]
Carlisle Street and Radio Road [Added 9-21-1977 by Ord. No.
1689]
Carlisle Street and Stock Street
Center Square and Baltimore Street
Center Square and Broadway
Center Square and Carlisle Street
Center Square and Frederick Street
Eichelberger Street and Dart Drive [Added 2-19-1986 by Ord. No.
1815]
Eisenhower Drive and Eichelberger Street [Added 2-10-1999 by
Ord. No. 2019]
Eisenhower Drive and K-Mart and Hanover Crossing driveways
[Added 2-10-1999 by Ord. No. 2019]
Eisenhower Drive and Wilson Avenue [Added 2-10-1999 by Ord.
No. 2019]
Frederick Street and Forney Avenue [Added 9-21-1977 by Ord. No.
1689]
Frederick Street and High Street
High Street and Chestnut Street
High Street and Elm Avenue [Added 9-21-1977 by Ord. No. 1689]
§ 346-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-3
1:691
§ 346-4. Turns. [Amended 10-31-1968 by Ord. No. 1411]
Intersection
York Street and Middle Street
York Street and Pleasant Street. [Added 9-21-1977 by Ord. No.
1689]
B. The following areas are hereby established as taxicab stands for
occupancy by one cab only at the following locations, and no vehicle
other than a taxicab shall be parked in said areas at any time: [Added
11-18-1970 by Ord. No. 1491, approved by Mayor 11-19-1970]
Name of Street Side Location
Baltimore Street West First parking space south of
Exchange Place
Carlisle Street [Repealed 2-16-1983 by Ord. No. 1751]
Carlisle Street West First parking space south of
Chestnut Street
Center Square Southeast quadrant, parking area
parallel to the east curb
A. No turns to the left shall be permitted on:
Name of Street Location
Baltimore Street Between Center Square and the first
alley on Baltimore Street from Center
Square
Carlisle Street [Added
5-15-1991 by Ord. No.
1895]
At the exit from 991 Carlisle Street
onto Carlisle Street
Carlisle Street [Added
5-15-1991 by Ord. No.
1895]
At the exit from the driveway at 1039
Carlisle Street and Carlisle Street
Carlisle Street Between Center Square and the first
alley on Carlisle Street from Center
Square
Eisenhower Drive [Added
11-10-1999 by Ord. No.
2027]
At the north and south side of the
second crossover on Eisenhower Drive
west of Broadway
Eisenhower Drive [Added
11-10-1999 by Ord. No.
2027]
At the north and south side of the
George Street intersection
Flickinger Road [Added
8-28-2019 by Ord. No.
2287]
From the northbound lanes of Route
194 North (Broadway)
§ 346-3 HANOVER CODE § 346-4
1:692
§ 346-5. Signal lights. [Amended 12-29-1954 by Ord. No. 858]
At intersections and/or crossings, including Center Square, where there are
automatic signal lights, operators of vehicles shall obey the directions of
such signals as prescribed by law. Pedestrian traffic shall likewise obey the
directions of such signals, but on Center Square and at Broadway and York
Street, shall proceed only on a "Walk" signal.
Name of Street Location
Frederick Street Between Center Square and the first
alley on Frederick Street from Center
Square
George Street [Added
5-10-2006 by Ord. No.
2108]
From the north side lanes of
Eisenhower Drive at the George Street
intersection, southwardly onto George
Street
Middle Street [Added
6-15-1977 by Ord. No.
1682; amended 9-20-1978
by Ord. No. 1696]
At the Baltimore Street intersection
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday,
inclusive
Route 194 North (Broadway)
[Added 8-28-2019 by Ord.
No. 2287]
From Flickinger Road
B. No turns to the right shall be permitted on red on:
Name of Street Location
Carlisle Street [Added
2-16-1983 by Ord. No.
1751]
Intersection of southbound traffic with
Chestnut Street
Carlisle Street [Added
2-16-1983 by Ord. No.
1751]
At the intersection of westbound
traffic on Stock Street with Carlisle
Street northbound
Center Square [Added
2-16-1983 by Ord. No.
1751]
Frederick Street [Added
2-16-1983 by Ord. No.
1751]
At the intersection of southbound
traffic on North Forney Avenue with
westbound traffic on Frederick Street
York Street [Added
2-16-1983 by Ord. No.
1751]
At the intersection with Broadway
§ 346-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-6
1:693
§ 346-6. Center Square.
All traffic shall keep to the right in going around any portion of Center
Square, and when stopping for signal in Center Square, vehicles shall avoid
pedestrian lanes of traffic.
§ 346-7. Miscellaneous regulations.
§ 346-8. Speed limits. [Amended 11-16-1966 by Ord. No. 1333]
Except as otherwise provided by the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, all vehicles driven on any part of the following thoroughfares
of the Borough of Hanover shall be limited to the maximum speed as
hereinafter set forth, and any speed in excess of such maximum as herein
provided shall be unlawful:
A. No persons shall place any sign or paint any curbing to regulate traffic
in highways within the Borough of Hanover, except under proper
municipal authority.
B. In addition to any penalty prescribed by law, any person or persons
defacing, knocking down or removing any traffic or parking sign, signal
or marking placed by the Borough under proper authority shall pay to
the Borough an amount to cover the damages caused thereby.
[Amended 12-29-1954 by Ord. No. 858]
C. No operator of any bicycle or motorcycle, when the same shall be in
motion on any thoroughfare of the Borough of Hanover, shall carry any
other person upon the handlebars, frame or tank of such vehicles, and
no persons shall so ride upon said vehicle.
D. No persons upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster,
toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any thoroughfare of the
Borough of Hanover, except while crossing a street on a crosswalk.
E. No persons shall stand in a thoroughfare in the Borough of Hanover for
the purpose of soliciting a ride from the operator of any private vehicle.
F. From and after the passage of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation to move or cause to be moved over any of
the streets, thoroughfares, highways or alleys of this Borough any track
vehicle driven by its own power or in any manner other than upon a
platform vehicle having pneumatic or hard-rubber tires. When so
transported upon another vehicle, such track vehicle shall be securely
fastened thereto. [Added 3-21-1951 by Ord. No. 755]
G. On Eisenhower Drive at the intersection of the second crossover west of
Broadway, all traffic entering Eisenhower Drive from the north and
south driveways shall be limited to right-hand turns onto Eisenhower
Drive, only. [Added 5-24-2000 by Ord. No. 2038]
§ 346-6 HANOVER CODE § 346-8
1:694
§ 346-9. Powers of Police and Fire Department [Amended 2-16-1983
by Ord. No. 1751]
A. The maximum speed shall be 35 miles per hour upon the following
thoroughfares:
Name of Street Location
Baltimore Street From Pleasant Street to the Hanover
Borough line
Broadway [Repealed
2-17-1982 by Ord. No.
1742]
Carlisle Street From Third Street to Hanover
Borough line
Dart Drive [Added
11-15-1967 by Ord. No.
1369]
From Carlisle Street eastwardly to
Eichelberger Street
Eichelberger Street [Added
11-15-1967 by Ord. No.
1369]
From Grant Drive northwardly to the
end thereof at lands now or formerly
of Adams Agstone, Inc.
Elm Avenue From Carlisle Street to the Hanover
Borough line
Fame Avenue [Added
2-19-1969 by Ord. No.
1428]
From Moul Avenue to the Hanover
Borough-Penn Township boundary line
Frederick Street [Repealed
2-17-1982 by Ord. No.
1742]
High Street From Jackson Street to the Hanover
Borough line
York Street From Hanover Street to the Hanover
Borough line
B. The maximum speed shall be 15 miles per hour on the following
thoroughfares: [Added 5-25-2016 by Ord. No. 2245148]
Name of Street Location
Blossom Drive In its entirety
Grant Drive Between Moul Avenue and its southernmost
intersection with Blossom Drive
Spencer Drive In its entirety
C. The maximum speed upon all the remaining thoroughfares within the
Borough of Hanover shall be 25 miles per hour.
148. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection B as Subsection C.
§ 346-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-9
1:695
§ 346-10. Definitions.
With respect to any words or phrases used in this chapter which are defined
in the Act of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
known as the "Vehicle Code," the definitions as set forth in the Vehicle Code
are hereby adopted for the purposes of this chapter.
§ 346-11. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with or inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed, except that this repeal shall
not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any persons for any
act done or committed in violation of any such ordinance hereby repealed
prior to the effective date of this chapter, and excepting further, that the
provisions of this chapter shall not repeal or supersede any of the provisions
of Ordinance No. 579, as amended, commonly known as the "Parking Meter
Ordinance."150
§ 346-12. Bus stops. [Amended 5-16-1962 by Ord. No. 1139]
The following areas are hereby established as bus stops, and no vehicle,
other than a bus engaged in loading, unloading or awaiting passengers,
shall be parked there at any time:
A. The Police Department and the parking attendants of the Borough of
Hanover shall enforce the provisions of this chapter, with the power to
assess fines for violations as provided within the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code,149 as amended, and on the basis of fines for
parking established as follows:
(1) A fine of $2 for the first 60 minutes of overtime parking.
(2) A fine of $4 for overtime parking in excess of 60 minutes.
(3) A fine of $10 for parking not paid within 48 hours of the violation.
B. In the event of fire or other emergency, or to expedite traffic or
safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Fire Department may direct
traffic as conditions require; and provided further that, in case of
emergency, the Police Department may temporarily amend, change or
suspend or abrogate any of the provisions of this chapter.
149. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
150. Editor's Note: See now Ch. 254, Parking Meters.
§ 346-9 HANOVER CODE § 346-12
1:696
Name of
Street
Inbound/
Outbound Side Location
Baltimore
Street
Inbound East At East Hanover Street,
north of East Hanover
Street
Baltimore
Street
Outbound West At Penney's Store, south
of Square
Carlisle Street Inbound West At Mid-Town Paint &
Wallpaper, south of West
Chestnut Street
Carlisle Street Outbound East At Bank of Hanover, two
spaces, north of Bank
Lane
Frederick Street
[Added
5-16-1984 by
Ord. No. 1781]
North At the western boundary
line of the Fox Theater,
westerly to the driveway
cut to the Greyhound Bus
Station
Third Street Inbound South At Commerce Street,
east of Commerce Street,
beyond driveway
Third Street Inbound South At Sullivan's Store, east
of High Street
Third Street Outbound North At Commerce Street,
west of Commerce Street
Third Street Outbound North At Sun Gas Station, west
of gas station
York Street Inbound East At 132 feet south of
Broadway for a distance
of 66 feet
York Street Inbound East At Spring Avenue, north
of Spring Avenue
York Street Outbound West At fair grounds entrance,
south of fair grounds
entrance
§ 346-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-13
1:697
§ 346-13. Handicapped parking.151 [Added 5-21-1997 by Ord. No.
2002; amended 5-8-2002 by Ord. No. 2052; 4-25-2007 by Ord. No.
2125; 9-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2137; 2-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2148;
10-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2154]
The following locations are hereby declared to be handicapped parking
spaces, and official handicapped parking signs shall be erected in such a
position as to face approaching traffic and indicate with arrows at the front
and back of the space the area set aside for handicapped parking. Parking
in these spaces shall be limited as indicated for each space.
Name of Street Time Limit Location
Broadway 2-hour interval On the east side northwardly from
the intersection of the first alley
north of and parallel Locust Street
a distance of 45 feet
Broadway 2-hour interval On the northeast corner of the
Locust Street intersection, a
distance of 22 feet from the "No
Parking Area" at the hydrant
Broadway 3-hour interval On the southwest corner of the
Fulton Street intersection, a
distance of 22 feet southward
from the corner
Fulton Street On the west side, northwardly
from the intersection with the first
alley south of and parallel to East
Walnut Street from a point 20 feet
north of the alley intersection a
distance of 15 feet
Pleasant Street On the south side, eastwardly
from the intersection of Baltimore
Street from a point 25 feet east of
Baltimore Street to a point 50 feet
eastwardly from Baltimore Street
§ 346-13.1. Application for new handicapped parking spaces.
[Added 4-26-2017 by Ord. No. 2256]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
APPLICANT — A resident (or the parent, guardian or legal
representative of the resident) who files an application for the
installation of a handicapped parking space.
151. Editor's Note: Original § 119-14, added 5-16-1956 by Ord. No. 905, was repealed
10-31-1968 by Ord. No. 1411.
§ 346-13 HANOVER CODE § 346-13.1
1:698
BLOCK — The property abutting on one side of a street and lying
between the two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets or nearest
intersecting or intercepting street and railroad right of way, waterway,
or other barrier to or gap in the continuity of development along such
street, alleys excluded.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Hanover, York County, Pennsylvania.
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACE — A parking space reserved for use
by handicapped persons or disabled veterans utilizing vehicles lawfully
bearing handicapped registration plates or placards.
PARKING REVIEW COMMITTEE — A committee of the Borough made
up of the Public Safety Committee, the Chief of Police and the Director
of Public Works.
PLACARD — An instrument of notice that is hung from the inside
rearview mirror of a vehicle or otherwise displayed on a vehicle as
required by law indicating that said vehicle is currently authorized to
park in a handicapped parking area.
RESIDENT — An individual who occupies real estate within the
Borough where such real estate is used as said individual's principal
residence.
B. Application process.
(1) Fees. The application for the erection of a permanent or temporary
handicapped parking space shall be made available to any Borough
resident (or the parent, guardian or legal representative of a
Borough resident) and when submitted shall be accompanied by a
fee of $50. An annual renewal fee of $10 shall apply to all permits
renewed under Subsection D below. Fees may be waived if the
applicant falls within the Federal Housing and Urban Development
Poverty Guidelines.
(2) Application. The application will be designed and developed by the
Parking Review Committee, but shall include, at a minimum, the
identity of the applicant, the address of the applicant's residence,
the make, model and license plate number of the applicant's vehicle
(if any), the applicant's disability, whether the disability is
permanent or temporary, whether off-street parking is available
immediately adjacent to or on the applicant's property, the location
of any current handicapped parking spaces on the same block
where the applicant resides, and a signature section. The
application shall also contain a clause informing the applicant that
the applicant is required to notify the Borough Manager
immediately if and when the applicant moves from the address set
forth on the application or no longer has a disability or no longer
possesses a valid handicapped registration plate or placard. If the
applicant is applying to have the fee waived due to economic
hardship, the applicant must provide documentation that their
§ 346-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-13.1
1:699
income falls within the Federal Housing and Urban Development
Poverty Guidelines. Upon receipt of an application from a
handicapped or disabled individual (or such person's parent,
guardian or legal representative), the Parking Review Committee
may collect such relevant information as the Committee deems
necessary to evaluate the application, including medical records
evidencing the applicant's disability.
C. Eligibility.
(1) After acquiring a handicapped or disabled veteran's registration
plate or placard from the Department, any Borough resident may
file an application for the creation of a handicapped parking space
upon the block on which the resident resides. The possession of a
handicapped or disabled veteran's registration plate or placard
does not guarantee that the resident's application for a
handicapped parking space will be granted.
(2) Statement of disability. All applications for a handicapped parking
space must be supported by proof of the applicant's asserted
disability from a medical doctor, doctor of osteopathy, or doctor of
podiatry medicine (collectively, "physician"). The application shall
include a statement by a physician, which shall be signed by the
physician and which statement shall not be issued more than six
months prior to the date of the application. Said physician's
statement shall specifically set forth the nature of the applicant's
disability, how the disability limits the applicant's mobility, and the
estimated duration of the applicant's disability. Notwithstanding
the applicant's provision of a physician's statement of disability, the
Parking Review Committee may require the applicant to provide
additional medical records evidencing the applicant's ongoing
disability.
(3) Criteria. In order to provide an adequate number of handicapped
parking spaces in a particular block and to preserve adequate
parking spaces for all Borough residents, before the Borough
creates a handicapped parking space, the Parking Review
Committee must determine that the limitations upon the number
and placement of handicapped parking spaces on a particular block
set forth in Subsection C(4) hereof will not be exceeded if the
requested handicapped parking space is created, that the applicant
has proven that there is no handicapped accessible off-street
parking available to the applicant, and that the applicant meets one
or more of the following criteria:
(a) The applicant is medically required to use portable oxygen;
(b) The applicant has limited or no use of one or both legs;
(c) The applicant suffers from severe limitation in the ability to
walk due to any arthritic, neurological or orthopedic condition
§ 346-13.1 HANOVER CODE § 346-13.1
1:700
or any physical ailment that prevents the applicant from
walking 200 feet without stopping to rest;
(d) The applicant suffers from a serious cardiac condition to the
extent that the person's functional limitations are classified in
severity as Class III or Class IV according to the standards set
by the American Heart Association; or
(e) The applicant suffers from any other physical or mental
impairment not heretofore mentioned which constitutes a
substantial degree of disability and imposes great difficulty on
the applicant walking more than 200 feet without stopping.
(4) Final determination.
(a) After collecting all pertinent information, the Parking Review
Committee will review and investigate all information related
to the application. The Parking Review Committee may obtain
an independent medical review of the applicant's medical
records and asserted disability. If the Parking Review
Committee determines the applicant has met the requirements
of this section, the Parking Review Committee may approve
and authorize the creation of the handicapped parking space
and installation of signage in accordance with applicable state
laws and regulations and shall define the duration of its
validity. In the event the Parking Review Committee
determines the applicant has not met the requirements of this
article, the Parking Review Committee shall deny the
application and inform the applicant, in writing, of the denial
and the reason(s) for the denial. The applicant may appeal the
decision of the Committee to Borough Council, which shall
consider such appeal pursuant to the provisions of the Local
Agency Law.152 Upon approval for a handicap parking space,
the applicant shall pay to the Borough $185 to cover the cost of
material and labor to erect the handicapped parking sign and
paint the appropriate markings within the street right-of-way.
In addition, the applicant shall pay to the Borough $100, which
will be held in escrow by the Borough to pay the costs of
removal of the sign and street painting when same are no
longer authorized.
(b) Fees described in § 346-13.1B(1) and C(4) are based upon
reasonable estimates of the cost of labor and material to
complete the tasks for which the fee is charged. The charges
shall be subject to change to reflect increases or decreases in
the cost of such labor and materials upon resolution of the
Borough Council enacted from time to time.
152. Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 551 et seq.
§ 346-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-13.1
1:701
(5) Nonexclusive right. If a handicapped parking space is created
under this section, the handicapped parking space so created may
be used by any person parking a vehicle lawfully bearing
registration plates or placards issued to handicapped persons or
disabled veterans. The decision to approve the creation of a
handicapped parking space shall not be construed as granting the
applicant the exclusive right to park his/her vehicle in the
handicapped parking space created hereunder.
(6) Other parking regulations. Nothing in this chapter shall exempt
handicapped individuals from other parking restrictions or
regulations applicable to the space/block.
D. Limitation on number of handicapped parking spaces. The Parking
Review Committee shall not authorize handicapped parking space(s) in
excess of the limitations set forth below.
(1) Central Business District. No additional handicapped parking
spaces may be granted by the Parking Review Committee within
the Central Business District, as defined by the Zoning
Ordinance153 of the Borough. The Director of Public Works may
direct the installation of a handicapped parking space within the
Central District as he/she deems appropriate to ensure adequate
and convenient parking for handicapped persons and the general
public. In making such determinations, the Public Works Director
shall consider all relevant factors that the Parking Review
Committee must consider pursuant hereto.
(2) One-way roadways. When the roadway is a one-way roadway, no
more than two handicapped parking spaces may be granted on
each side of the block on which parking is permitted.
(3) Two-way roads. When the roadway is a two-way street, no more
than three handicapped parking spaces may be granted on each
side of the block on which parking is permitted.
(4) Other parking restrictions. The Parking Review Committee may
consider other parking restrictions applicable to a particular block
and other information regarding the block, including, but not
limited to, the size of the block and existing limitations or
restrictions on parking in the area and may further restrict the
number of handicapped parking spaces to maintain an adequate
number of unregulated parking spaces, as it deems appropriate.
(5) Council action. Borough Council may authorize more than the
maximum number of handicapped parking spaces on a particular
block by ordinance, setting forth the block which is excluded from
the above limitations and the maximum number of handicapped
parking spaces permitted on that particular block. Any such
ordinance shall expire and be of no further force and effect after
153. Editor's Note: See Ch. 370, Zoning.
§ 346-13.1 HANOVER CODE § 346-13.1
1:702
the expiration of two years from the effective date of the amending
ordinance, unless reenacted by Council. The Parking Review
Committee shall notify each applicant on the subject block no more
than 90 days and no less than 60 days prior to the expiration of
such ordinance.
(6) Existing handicapped parking spaces in excess of the limitations
set forth in this section and existing on the effective date of this
section shall be permitted to remain in place, subject to annual
review by the Parking Review Committee and/or review by the
Committee in response to a complaint of misuse or lack of need
therefor. Applicants for preexisting handicapped parking spaces
shall be notified of the obligation for an annual review of the grant
of the handicapped parking space and of the obligation to notify the
Borough of a change of circumstances resulting in the absence of a
need for the handicapped parking space as set forth in Subsection
B(2) above.
(7) In designating a handicapped parking space, the Parking Review
Committee and the Director of Public Works shall confirm that the
space to be designated and any access isles shall be level, with
surface slopes not exceeding 1:50 (2%) in all directions.
E. Placement of signs.
(1) Generally. For a single application for a handicapped parking
space, sign and road marking placements will be positioned as
close as possible to the place of residence of the applicant as the
street design and existing street features permit. In the event more
than the permissible number of handicapped parking spaces are
requested on a one- or two-way roadway, the handicapped parking
spaces may be relocated in the center of the block or otherwise
adequately positioned to collectively reflect, as a whole, the needs
of all applicants, as determined by the Parking Review Committee.
(2) Authority to post. The Director of the Department of Public Works
will direct all postings, sign removal and replacements of
handicapped parking space in accordance with Department rules
and regulations. The Department of Public Works will report the
posting or removal of handicapped parking signs and road
markings and all actions taken upon applications for handicapped
parking spaces to the Parking Review Committee.
(3) Disputes regarding sign placement. The Parking Review
Committee shall be responsible for investigating Borough and
citizen complaints regarding the placement of handicapped
parking signs and the Parking Review Committee shall require that
all complaints be in writing and it shall conduct an investigation of
the complaint within 90 calendar days after receiving a complaint.
Upon conducting an investigation, the Parking Review Committee
shall report the complaint, its investigation and its findings in a
§ 346-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-13.1
1:703
manner it deems just and appropriate, including, but not limited to,
the removal of the handicapped parking space. The complainant,
block residents, applicant and the Borough shall be entitled to
present evidence to the Parking Review Committee.
F. Annual reporting.
(1) Annual reporting. After approval of the application, the applicant
shall submit an annual renewal application. The renewal
application shall be designed by the Parking Review Committee
and require the applicant to verify the continuance of his/her
disability. The Parking Review Committee shall require an
applicant to submit an updated physician's statement of the
applicant's disability, based on the criteria set forth under the
Eligibility and Determination subsections of this chapter. The
Parking Review Committee may require the applicant to submit
medical records, other than a physician's statement, which
evidences the applicant's ongoing disability. In January of each
year, the Parking Review Committee shall mail to (via regular first
class mail) each applicant (and applicants under prior rules and
regulations) the renewal application referenced herein. If the
applicant fails to submit the renewal application, including the
physician's statement of disability and additional medical records
(if such records are requested) by March 15 of that year or the
applicant is no longer eligible for a handicapped parking space, the
Parking Review Committee shall inform the Director of Public
Works that the handicapped parking space should be removed. The
Parking Review Committee may obtain an independent medical
review of the applicant's medical records. The Parking Review
Committee shall give written notice of its determination that the
applicant is no longer eligible for a handicapped parking space to
the applicant within 30 days of the Borough's receipt of the renewal
application. The applicant may appeal the determination of the
Parking Review Committee to Borough Council, which shall
consider such appeal pursuant to the provisions of the Local
Agency Law.
G. Penalties for violations.
(1) False statements. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly
and willfully, with the intent to deceive, make a false statement to
any public official for the purpose of obtaining a handicapped
parking space. Any person who violates this provision shall be
guilty of committing a summary offense and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined not less than $500, nor more than $1,000,
plus court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the
Borough in the enforcement proceedings.
(2) Violations. Any person who violates any other provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of committing a summary offense and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to a criminal fine not to exceed
§ 346-13.1 HANOVER CODE § 346-13.1
1:704
§ 346-14. Stop intersections. [Added 12-29-1954 by Ord. No. 858]154
The following intersections are hereby declared to be stop intersections,
and official stop signs shall be erected (or are hereby confirmed if
heretofore erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the firstnamed
street in the direction or directions hereby indicated. All vehicles
approaching the intersection upon the second-named street in the direction
or directions hereby indicated in each case shall come to a full stop, within
a reasonable distance, before entering said intersection:
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Allegheny Avenue [Added
11-15-1961 by Ord. No.
1119]
East Penn Street
Allegheny Avenue [Added
2-19-1969 by Ord. No.
1428; amended 6-19-1985
by Ord. No. 1802]
East and west Eichelberger Street
Allegheny Avenue [Amended
11-15-1961 by Ord. No.
1119]
North and south North Stephen Place
Allegheny Avenue [Added
10-6-1971 by Ord. No.
1528]
North and south Oak Street
Allegheny Avenue [Added
11-18-1970 by Ord. No.
1490]
South McCosh Street
Allewelt Alley [Added
6-19-1957 by Ord. No. 932]
East Bank Lane
Allewelt Alley [Added
9-7-1977 by Ord. No. 1687]
South Gail Street
$1,000 per violation and, in default of payment thereof, may be
imprisoned for a period of time not to exceed 30 days.
(3) Penalties for violation. Whoever parks in a designated handicapped
parking space and does not lawfully bear handicapped registration
plate or placards shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than
$1,000 and in default of payment thereof may be imprisoned for a
period of time not to exceed 30 days.
154. Editor's Note: This section was amended as follows to repeal various entries: 10-6-1965 by
Ord. No. 1288; 10-31-1968 by Ord. No. 1411; and 6-25-2003 by Ord. No. 2070. See
additional amendments noted in the table below.
§ 346-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-14
1:705
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Alley extending westwardly
from Broadway, the first alley
south of and parallel
McKinley Avenue [Added
12-26-2001 by Ord. No.
2048]
East and west First alley west of and
parallel Broadway
Alley extending from
Broadway, the first alley
north of and parallel Railroad
Street [Added 6-27-2018 by
Ord. No. 2271]
North Gail Street
Alley extension of Allegheny
Avenue east of Penn Street
[Added 9-9-1998 by Ord.
No. 2013]
North and south First alley west of and
parallel to Broadway
Aspen Court [Added
2-10-1999 by Ord. No.
2019]
South Primrose Lane
Baer Avenue East and west Pleasant Street
Baer Avenue East and west Spring Avenue
Baer Avenue [Added
8-16-1967 by Ord. No.
1359]
North and south First alley east of and
parallel to Broadway
Baer Avenue West East Hanover Street
Baer Avenue West Terrace Avenue
Baltimore Street East and west Pleasant Avenue
Baltimore Street East and west Walnut Street
Baltimore Street West Granger Street
Baltimore Street West Mount Royal Avenue
Bank Lane [Amended
10-6-1965 by Ord. No.
1288]
North Allewelt Alley
Barberry [Added 6-6-1979
by Ord. No. 1705]
South Primrose
Barberry Drive [Added
6-17-1987 by Ord. No.
1829]
North Clearview Read
Barberry Lane [Added
6-1-1988 by Ord. No. 1845]
South Grant Drive
§ 346-14 HANOVER CODE § 346-14
1:706
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Blossom Drive [Added
5-25-2016 by Ord. No.
2245]
East The southernmost
intersection of Grant
Drive
Blossom Drive [Added
5-25-2016 by Ord. No.
2245]
West The second
intersection of Grant
Drive
Boundary Avenue [Added
2-19-1969 by Ord. No.
1428]
South First alley east of
Second Avenue
Boundary Avenue [Added
2-19-1969 by Ord. No.
1428]
South Fleming Avenue
Boundary Avenue [Added
3-15-1967 by Ord. No.
1345]
South Meade Avenue
Boundary Avenue [Added
2-19-1969 by Ord. No.
1428]
South Second Avenue
Boundary Avenue [Added
2-19-1969 by Ord. No.
1428]
South South Forney Avenue
Brandy Court [Added
6-1-1988 by Ord. No. 1845]
West Primrose Lane
Brandywine Court [Added
8-26-2015 by Ord. No.
2227]
East Brandywine Court and
alley running south to
Paul Street
Brandywine Lane [Added
6-1-1988 by Ord. No. 1845]
North Primrose Lane
Brandywine Lane [Added
8-24-2016 by Ord. No.
2249]
South Unnamed alley
connecting
Brandywine Lane to
Paul Street
Broadway North Baer Avenue
Broadway North Fulton Street
Broadway North Hollywood Avenue
Broadway North Keagy Avenue
Broadway North Locust Street
Broadway North Moulstown Road
Broadway North Ridge Avenue
§ 346-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-14
1:707
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Broadway [Amended
10-31-1968 by Ord. No.
1411]
North and south Grant Drive
Broadway North and south McKinley Avenue
Broadway [Added
10-31-1968 by Ord. No.
1411]
North and south Washington Avenue
Broadway [Amended
10-31-1968 by Ord. No.
1411]
North and south Wilson Avenue
Broadway South County Road (part
nearest to Borough
line on Broadway)
Broadway [Amended
10-6-1965 by Ord. No.
1288]
South Moul Alley
Broadway South North Street
Carlisle Street East Elm Avenue
Carlisle Street East Fourth Street
Carlisle Street East Maple Avenue
Carlisle Street East Third Street
Carlisle Street East and west Park Avenue
Carlisle Street West Academy Street
Carlisle Street West Allegheny Avenue
Carlisle Street West Clearview Road
Carlisle Street West Library Place
Centennial Avenue East and west West Hanover Street
Centennial Avenue East and west West Middle Street
Centennial Avenue East and west West Walnut Street
Charles Street [Added
11-15-1961 by Ord. No.
1119]
East West Avenue
Charles Street [Added
11-15-1961 by Ord. No.
1119]
East and west Allegheny Avenue
Charles Street [Added
11-15-1961 by Ord. No.
1119]
East and west East Elm Avenue
Charles Street East and west Highland Avenue
§ 346-14 HANOVER CODE § 346-14
1:708
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Charles Street [Added
11-15-1961 by Ord. No.
1119]
East and west McKinley Avenue
Charles Street [Amended
11-15-1961 by Ord. No.
1119]
East and west Potomac Avenue
Charles Street [Added
11-15-1961 by Ord. No.
1119]
East and west Sunset Avenue
Cherry Lane [Added
6-1-1988 by Ord. No. 1845]
East Pine Street
Chestnut Street [Added
3-6-1963 by Ord. No. 1174]
South Hoffman Avenue
Clearview Road [Added
10-21-1959 by Ord. No.
1017]
North Charles Street
Clearview Road [Added
2-19-1969 by Ord. No.
1428]
North Eichelberger Street
Clearview Road [Added
10-21-1959 by Ord. No.
1017]
North McCosh Street
Clearview Road [Added
10-21-1959 by Ord. No.
1017]
North North Stephen Place
Clearview Road [Added
10-21-1959 by Ord. No.
1017]
South Eichelberger Street
Clearview Road [Amended
7-3-1962 by Ord. No. 1145]
South McCosh Street
Clearview Road [Added
10-21-1959 by Ord. No.
1017]
South Sherwood Street
Clearview Road [Added
6-17-1987 by Ord. No.
1829]
West Dart Drive
College Avenue, which is the
first alley north of and
parallel to Frederick Street
[Added 6-19-1957 by Ord.
No. 932]
North First alley west of and
parallel to Carlisle
Street
§ 346-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-14
1:709
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Dart Drive [Added
5-13-1998 by Ord. No.
2011]
North and south Primrose Lane
Dart Drive [Added
8-16-1989 by Ord. No.
1860]
North and south Wilson Avenue
Dart Drive [Added
12-15-1976 by Ord. No.
1672]
West Eichelberger Street
DeGuy Avenue [Added
8-16-1989 by Ord. No.
1860]
North Clearview Read
DeGuy Avenue [Added
8-16-1989 by Ord. No.
1860]
South Grant Drive
Deerfield Condominium
[Added 6-1-1988 by Ord.
No. 1845]
West Primrose Lane
Diller Road [Added
6-1-1988 by Ord. No. 1845]
East Sprenkle Avenue
Diller Road [Added
11-15-1961 by Ord. No.
1119]
North Juniper Lane
Diller Road [Added
6-17-1964 by Ord. No.
1232]
North North Forney Avenue
Diller Road [Added
6-17-1964 by Ord. No.
1232]
South Queen Street
Doss Alley [Added 9-9-1998
by Ord. No. 2013]
North and south First alley west of and
parallel to Baltimore
Street
Driftwood Court [Added
6-1-1988 by Ord. No. 1845]
West Filbert Street
Eagle Avenue [Added
9-9-1998 by Ord. No. 2013]
North First alley east of and
parallel to East
Hanover Street
Eagle Avenue [Amended
6-19-1957 by Ord. No. 932]
South Orchard Street
East Chestnut Street North and south Railroad Street
§ 346-14 HANOVER CODE § 346-14
1:710
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
East Chestnut Street
[Amended 10-6-1965 by
Ord. No. 1288]
South North Street
East Chestnut Street South Unnamed alley
East Hanover Street North and south McAllister Street
East Middle Street North Factory Street
East Middle Street North and south Baer Avenue
East Middle Street North and south Fulton Street
East Middle Street North and south Locust Street
East Middle Street North and south Philadelphia Street
East Middle Street, extended
[Added 11-15-1961 by Ord.
No. 1119]
North Moul Avenue
East Walnut Street [Added
8-5-1964 by Ord. No. 1242]
East Baer Avenue
East Walnut Street North Baer Avenue
East Walnut Street [Added
2-17-1971 by Ord. No.
1502]
North and south Locust Street
East Walnut Street [Added
4-17-1991 by Ord. No.
1892]
South Philadelphia Street
East Walnut Street [Added
6-6-1979 by Ord. No. 1705]
West Fame Avenue
Eichelberger Street [Added
11-15-1967 by Ord. No.
1369]
East Dart Drive
Eichelberger Street [Added
2-19-1969 by Ord. No.
1428]
East Dart Drive
Eichelberger Street [Added
2-19-1969 by Ord. No.
1428]
East East Elm Avenue
Eichelberger Street [Added
6-26-2019 by Ord. No.
2286]
East and west Clearview Road
Eichelberger Street [Added
5-20-1970 by Ord. No.
1476]
East and west Elm Avenue
§ 346-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-14
1:711
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Eichelberger Street [Added
2-19-1969 by Ord. No.
1428; amended 2-17-1971
by Ord. No. 1502]
East and west Grant Drive
Eichelberger Street [Added
5-21-1958 by Ord. No. 957]
North Allegheny Avenue
Eichelberger Street [Added
2-19-1969 by Ord. No.
1428]
West DeGuy Avenue
Eichelberger Street [Added
2-19-1969 by Ord. No.
1428]
West McKinley Avenue
Eichelberger Street
[Amended 2-21-1973 by
Ord. No. 1568]
West North Street
Eichelberger Street [Added
2-19-1969 by Ord. No.
1428]
West Sunset Avenue
Eichelberger Street [Added
2-19-1969 by Ord. No.
1428]
West West Avenue
Eisenhower Drive [Added
8-21-1992 by Ord. No.
1897]
East Broadway
Elm Avenue [Added
5-20-1970 by Ord. No.
1476]
East and west Eichelberger Street
Elm Avenue North High Street
Elm Avenue [Added
11-19-1958 by Ord. No.
976]
North Monroe Street
Elm Avenue [Added
11-15-1961 by Ord. No.
1119]
North and south Hamilton Street
Elm Avenue [Added
11-18-1970 by Ord. No.
1490]
North and south McCosh Street
Elm Avenue [Added
3-15-1967 by Ord. No.
1345]
North and south Willow Street
§ 346-14 HANOVER CODE § 346-14
1:712
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Elm Avenue [Added
11-18-1970 by Ord. No.
1490]
South High Street
Factory Street [Added
7-18-1973 by Ord. No.
1592]
North Terrace Avenue
Fame Avenue [Added
6-6-1979 by Ord. No. 1705]
North East Walnut Street
Filbert Street [Added
10-16-1963 by Ord. No.
1195]
East and west Diller Road
Filbert Street [Added
5-21-1958 by Ord. No. 957]
North and south Diller Road
Filbert Street [Added
10-16-1963 by Ord. No.
1195]
West Princess Street
First alley south of and
parallel to Allegheny Avenue
[Added 7-17-1968 by Ord.
No. 1402]
North First alley west of and
parallel to Broadway
First alley east of and parallel
to Baltimore Street, known as
"Railroad Street Alley"
[Added 7-16-1997 by Ord.
No. 2004]
North and south First alley north of and
parallel to Mount
Royal Avenue
First alley southwest of and
parallel with Baltimore Street
[Added 9-17-1958 by Ord.
No. 975]
East and west First alley southeast of
and parallel with West
Walnut Street,
commonly called
"Shue's Alley"
First alley west of and
parallel with Baltimore Street
[Added 6-19-1985 by Ord.
No. 1802]
North and south Boundary Avenue
First alley west of and
parallel with Baltimore Street
[Added 6-19-1985 by Ord.
No. 1802]
North and south Alley intersection of
the westward
projection of Mount
Royal Avenue from
Baltimore Street
First alley south of and
parallel with Broadway
[Added 8-15-1984 by Ord.
No. 1783]
East and west First alley east of and
parallel with Locust
Street
§ 346-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-14
1:713
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
First alley south of and
parallel to Broadway [Added
7-20-1977 by Ord. No.
1685]
North and south Alley running
perpendicular to East
Walnut Street and
Broadway which forms
a northern extension of
Baer Avenue
First alley west of and
parallel to Broadway [Added
9-20-1978 by Ord. No.
1696]
East and west First alley north of and
parallel to Grant Drive
First alley west of and
parallel with Broadway
[Added 6-19-1985 by Ord.
No. 1802]
East and west Intersection of the first
alley north of and
parallel with Stock
Street
First alley west of and
parallel to Broadway [Added
7-16-1997 by Ord. No.
2004]
North and south First alley south of and
parallel to McKinley
Avenue
First alley east of and parallel
with Carlisle Street [Added
3-18-1981 by Ord. No.
1727]
East and west First alley south of and
parallel to Allegheny
Avenue
First alley west of and
parallel to Carlisle Street
[Added 6-19-1957 by Ord.
No. 932]
East and west College Avenue, which
is the first alley north
of and parallel to
Frederick Street
First alley west of and
parallel with Carlisle Street
[Added 6-19-1985 by Ord.
No. 1802]
North and south Conewago Avenue
First alley west of and
parallel to Carlisle Street
[Added 9-17-1975 by Ord.
No. 1644]
West Gail Street
First alley west of and
parallel to East Middle Street
[Added 7-16-1997 by Ord.
No. 2004]
North and south First alley south of and
parallel to Ridge
Avenue
First alley east of and parallel
to Gay Street [Added
4-17-1991 by Ord. No.
1892]
South First alley north of and
parallel to Philadelphia
Street
§ 346-14 HANOVER CODE § 346-14
1:714
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
First alley north of and
parallel to Grant Drive
[Added 9-20-1978 by Ord.
No. 1696]
North and south First alley west of and
parallel to Broadway
First alley south of and
parallel to Grant Drive
between Broadway and Penn
Street [Added 8-21-1992 by
Ord. No. 1897]
East and west First alley west of and
parallel to Broadway,
on the south side of
Grant Drive
First alley east of and parallel
with Locust Street [Added
3-18-1981 by Ord. No.
1727]
North and south First alley south of and
parallel with East
Walnut Street
First alley east of and parallel
with Middle Street [Added
4-17-1991 by Ord. No.
1892]
North and south First alley north of and
parallel with
Philadelphia Street
First alley east of and parallel
to Moul Avenue [Added
5-25-2016 by Ord. No.
2245]
North Grant Drive
First alley east of and parallel
with North George Street
[Added 11-20-1985 by Ord.
No. 1809]
North Alley projection of
Highland Avenue east
of North George Street
First alley south of and
parallel to South Street
[Added 9-20-1978 by Ord.
No. 1696]
South First alley east of and
parallel to Sprenkle
Avenue
First alley east of and parallel
to Sprenkle Avenue [Added
9-20-1978 by Ord. No.
1696]
East First alley south of and
parallel to South
Street
First alley north of and
parallel to West Chestnut
Street [Added 8-21-1957 by
Ord. No. 935]
North and south First alley west of and
parallel to Carlisle
Street
First alley east of and parallel
with York Street [Added
10-2-1985 by Ord. No.
1808]
East and west Second alley south of
and parallel with
Middle Street
Fleming Avenue [Added
6-6-1979 by Ord. No. 1705]
East Hartman Avenue
§ 346-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-14
1:715
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Fleming Avenue [Added
10-16-1963 by Ord. No.
1195]
East and west West Hanover Street
Forney Avenue [Added
6-6-1979 by Ord. No. 1705]
East and west Hartman Avenue
Forney Avenue [Added
10-16-1963 by Ord. No.
1195]
East and west West Walnut Street
Fourth Street North Krug Avenue
Fourth Street North and south North Franklin Street
Fourth Street [Added
9-19-1962 by Ord. No.
1155]
South Krug Avenue
Foxleigh Drive [Added
8-16-1989 by Ord. No.
1860]
East and west Dart Drive
Frederick Street North Fleming Avenue
Frederick Street North Forney Avenue
Frederick Street North Kilpatrick Avenue
Frederick Street North Meade Avenue
Frederick Street [Added
12-19-1979 by Ord. No.
1710]
North South Franklin Street
Frederick Street [Added
11-21-1962 by Ord. No.
1160]
South Forney Avenue
Fulton Street East and west East Hanover Street
Fulton Street East and west East Walnut Street
Fulton Street East and west Pleasant Street
Fulton Street East and west Terrace Avenue
Gay Street [Added
4-17-1991 by Ord. No.
1892]
South First alley north of and
parallel with
Philadelphia Street
George Street East Highland Avenue
George Street [Added
8-20-1958 by Ord. No. 966]
East North Stephen Place
George Street [Added
8-20-1958 by Ord. No. 966]
East Potomac Avenue
§ 346-14 HANOVER CODE § 346-14
1:716
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
George Street [Added
11-19-1958 by Ord. No.
976]
East and west Allegheny Avenue
George Street [Amended
2-15-1956 by Ord. No. 891]
East and west Elm Avenue
George Street [Added
6-17-1964 by Ord. No.
1232]
East and west Paul Street
George Street [Added
9-26-2018 by Ord. No.
2274]
East and west Wilson Avenue
George Street [Added
8-21-1992 by Ord. No.
1897]
North Eisenhower Drive
George Street [Added
8-21-1992 by Ord. No.
1897]
North and south Wilson Avenue
George Street [Added
11-15-1961 by Ord. No.
1119]
West Penn Street
George Street [Added
6-27-2018 by Ord. No.
2271]
West Wilson Avenue
Georgetown Circle [Added
6-1-1988 by Ord. No. 1845]
West Filbert Street
Grant Drive [Added
8-21-1992 by Ord. No.
1897]
East and west Clearview Road
Grant Drive [Added
4-19-1972 by Ord. No.
1544]
East and west East Walnut Street
Grant Drive [Added
8-21-1992 by Ord. No.
1897]
East and west McCosh Street
Grant Drive [Added
6-17-1964 by Ord. No.
1232]
North George Street
Grant Drive [Added
6-17-1964 by Ord. No.
1232]
North Penn Street
§ 346-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-14
1:717
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Grant Drive [Added
11-15-1967 by Ord. No.
1369]
North and south Eichelberger Street
Grant Drive [Added
10-16-1963 by Ord. No.
1195]
North and south McCosh Street
Grant Drive [Added
11-21-1962 by Ord. No.
1160]
Northeast Clearview Road
Grant Drive [Added
11-18-1970 by Ord. No.
1490]
South Clearview Road
Grant Drive [Added
2-19-1969 by Ord. No.
1428]
South George Street
Grant Drive [Added
2-19-1969 by Ord. No.
1428]
South Penn Street
Grant Drive [Added
5-25-2016 by Ord. No.
2245]
West Moul Avenue
High Street [Added
11-18-1970 by Ord. No.
1490]
East Kendig Lane
High Street East Pine Street
High Street East Poplar Street
High Street East South Street
High Street East Third Street
High Street East and west Maple Avenue
High Street [Added
11-18-1970 by Ord. No.
1490]
West Clearview Road
High Street West Jackson Street
High Street [Added
11-18-1970 by Ord. No.
1490]
West Kuhn Drive
High Street West Park Avenue
Holly Court [Added
6-1-1988 by Ord. No. 1845]
South Grant Drive
§ 346-14 HANOVER CODE § 346-14
1:718
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Honeysuckle Court [Added
10-2-1985 by Ord. No.
1808]
North Barberry Drive
Juniper Lane [Added
11-15-1961 by Ord. No.
1119]
West Sycamore Lane
Kennedy Court [Added
8-21-1991 by Ord. No.
1897]
West Eichelberger Street
Kilpatrick Avenue [Added
11-4-1987 by Ord. No.
1836]
South Hartman Avenue
Krug Avenue [Added
9-20-1972 by Ord. No.
1554]
East and west Fifth Street
Krug Avenue [Added
8-15-1984 by Ord. No.
1783]
North Maple Avenue
Kuhn Drive [Added
2-19-1969 by Ord. No.
1428]
North Randolph Street
Kuhn Drive [Added
2-19-1969 by Ord. No.
1428]
South Keith Drive
Kuhn Drive [Added
2-19-1969 by Ord. No.
1428]
South Shafer Drive
Lee Street [Added 6-1-1988
by Ord. No. 1845]
North Paul Street
Linden Avenue [Added
10-2-1985 by Ord. No.
1808]
East Commerce Street
Locust Street East and west East Walnut Street
Maple Avenue [Added
9-17-1958 by Ord. No. 975]
North Commerce Street
Maple Avenue [Added
2-24-1960 by Ord. No.
1034]
North and south Monroe Street
Maple Avenue [Added
10-16-1963 by Ord. No.
1195]
North and south North Franklin Street
§ 346-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-14
1:719
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Maple Avenue [Added
11-15-1961 by Ord. No.
1119]
South Hamilton Street
McCosh Street [Added
5-21-1958 by Ord. No. 957;
amended 9-21-1988 by
Ord. No. 1847]
East and west Allegheny Avenue
McCosh Street [Added
8-16-1967 by Ord. No.
1359]
East and west DeGuy Avenue
McCosh Street East and west Highland Avenue
McCosh Street East and west Potomac Avenue
McCosh Street [Added
11-15-1961 by Ord. No.
1119]
East and west West Avenue
McCosh Street [Added
12-15-1976 by Ord. No.
1672]
North Dart Drive
McKinley Avenue [Added
4-19-1972 by Ord. No.
1544]
East and west East Walnut Street
McKinley Avenue North George Street
McKinley Avenue [Added
2-20-1957 by Ord. No. 923]
North North Stephen Place
McKinley Avenue [Added
11-16-1955 by Ord. No.
887]
North and south Lee Street
McKinley Avenue [Added
11-15-1961 by Ord. No.
1119]
North and south McCosh Street
McKinley Avenue [Added
11-16-1955 by Ord. No.
887]
North and south Paul Street
McKinley Avenue [Added
11-16-1955 by Ord. No.
887]
North and south Penn Street
McKinley Avenue [Amended
6-17-1964 by Ord. No.
1232]
South North Stephen Place
§ 346-14 HANOVER CODE § 346-14
1:720
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Meade Avenue [Added
10-16-1957 by Ord. No.
939]
Northeast and
southwest
West Walnut Street
Middle Street [Amended
11-15-1961 by Ord. No.
1119]
East and west Ridge Avenue
Middle Street [Added
10-16-1963 by Ord. No.
1195]
North and south Railroad Street
Moul Avenue [Added
11-15-1961 by Ord. No.
1119]
East Grant Drive
Moul Avenue [Added
11-15-1961 by Ord. No.
1119]
East Keagy Avenue
Moul Avenue [Added
11-15-1961 by Ord. No.
1119]
East McKinley Avenue
Moul Avenue [Added
11-15-1961 by Ord. No.
1119]
East Witmer Avenue
Moul Avenue [Added
8-16-1967 by Ord. No.
1359]
East and west Fame Avenue (with
eastbound traffic on
Fame making a right
turn to keep moving)
Moul Avenue [Added
11-15-1961 by Ord. No.
1119]
East and west Hollywood Avenue
Moul Avenue [Amended
10-16-1963 by Ord. No.
1195]
East and west Washington Avenue
Moul Avenue [Amended
10-19-1966 by Ord. No.
1329]
East and west Wilson Avenue
Moul Avenue [Added
6-25-2003 by Ord. No.
2070]
North and south Fame Avenue
Moulstown Road [Added
10-31-1968 by Ord. No.
1411]
North East Walnut Street
Moulstown Road [Added
6-6-1979 by Ord. No. 1705]
North East Walnut Street
§ 346-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-14
1:721
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
North Franklin Street
[Added 4-17-1968 by Ord.
No. 1387]
East Jackson Street
North Franklin Street
[Added 11-18-1959 by Ord.
No. 1021]
East and west College Avenue
North Franklin Street
[Added 2-19-1969 by Ord.
No. 1428]
East and west Fifth Street
North Franklin Street East and west Park Avenue
North Stephen Place [Added
4-17-1957 by Ord. No. 927]
East Sunset Avenue
North Stephen Place [Added
8-20-1958 by Ord. No. 966]
East and west East Elm Avenue
North Stephen Place [Added
8-20-1958 by Ord. No. 966]
South Paul Street
North Street [Added
11-15-1961 by Ord. No.
1119]
South Charles Street
North Street [Added
3-15-1961 by Ord. No.
1086]
South George Street
North Street South McCosh Street
Oak Street [Added 6-1-1988
by Ord. No. 1845]
North and south Elm Avenue
Orchard Street [Added
10-2-1985 by Ord. No.
1808]
West McAllister Street
Paul Street [Added 6-1-1988
by Ord. No. 1845]
East Penn Street
Penn Street East Alley north of Stock
Street
Penn Street [Added
4-17-1957 by Ord. No. 927;
amended 9-5-1973 by Ord.
No. 1597]
East and west Elm Avenue
Penn Street [Added
11-18-1970 by Ord. No.
1490]
East and west Washington Avenue
§ 346-14 HANOVER CODE § 346-14
1:722
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Penn Street [Added
6-27-2018 by Ord. No.
2271]
East and west Wilson Avenue
Philadelphia Street [Added
7-20-1977 by Ord. No.
1685]
East Alley immediately
south of and parallel to
Broadway
Philadelphia Street [Added
6-15-1983 by Ord. No.
1755]
East and west First alley west of and
parallel to Broadway
Pine Street [Added
11-21-1962 by Ord. No.
1160]
North Spruce Street
Pine Street [Added
11-15-1961 by Ord. No.
1119]
South Juniper Lane
Pine Street [Added
3-6-1963 by Ord. No. 1174]
South North Forney Avenue
Pine Street [Added
4-19-1972 by Ord. No.
1544]
South Sprenkle Avenue
Pleasant Avenue [Added
5-20-1959 by Ord. No. 995]
North South Franklin Street
Pleasant Avenue [Added
11-19-1958 by Ord. No.
976]
North South High Street
Pleasant Street [Added
4-20-1955 by Ord. No. 874]
North and south Locust Street
Pleasant Street North and south McAllister Street
Pleasant Avenue South Centennial Avenue
Poplar Street [Added
11-21-1962 by Ord. No.
1160]
North Forney Avenue
Poplar Street [Added
8-16-1967 by Ord. No.
1359]
North Hoffman Avenue
Poplar Street [Added
2-19-1969 by Ord. No.
1428; amended 12-19-1979
by Ord. No. 1710]
North and south Filbert Street
§ 346-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-14
1:723
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Poplar Street [Added
2-19-1969 by Ord. No.
1428]
South Pine Street
Poplar Street [Added
12-19-1962 by Ord. No.
1162]
South Spruce Street
Potomac Avenue [Added
8-20-1958 by Ord. No. 966]
North and south North Stephen Place
Primrose Lane [Added
8-16-1989 by Ord. No.
1860]
East and west DeGuy Avenue
Primrose Lane [Added
10-2-1985 by Ord. No.
1808]
North and south Dart Drive
Primrose Lane [Added
8-16-1989 by Ord. No.
1860]
West Barberry Lane
Princess Street [Added
6-1-1988 by Ord. No. 1845]
East Sprenkle Avenue
Railroad Street East Bank Lane
Railroad Street [Added
10-16-1963 by Ord. No.
1195]
North Library Place
Randolph Street [Added
3-15-1967 by Ord. No.
1345]
East and west Clearview Road
Ridge Avenue East Center Street
Ridge Avenue [Added
9-5-1973 by Ord. No. 1597]
North and south Walnut Street
Ridge Avenue [Added
11-15-1961 by Ord No.
1119]
South Moul Avenue
Ruth Avenue [Added
2-17-1993 by Ord. No.
1933]
North West Walnut Street
School Avenue [Added
11-15-1995 by Ord. No.
1980]
North and south Second alley south of
and parallel with East
Middle Street
§ 346-14 HANOVER CODE § 346-14
1:724
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Second alley east of and
parallel with Philadelphia
Street [Added 4-19-1995 by
Ord. No. 1975]
North and south First alley north of and
parallel to East Middle
Street
Second alley west of and
parallel with Ridge Avenue
[Added 4-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 1975]
North and south Gay Street
South Forney Avenue
[Amended 11-10-1965 by
Ord. No. 1292; 7-20-1977
by Ord. No. 1685]
East and west West Hanover Street
South Franklin Street
[Added 12-19-1979 by Ord.
No. 1710]
East and west Exchange Place
South Street [Added
10-21-1959 by Ord. No.
1017]
North Sprenkle Avenue
South Street [Added
9-21-1955 by Ord. No. 882]
North and south Filbert Street
Spencer Drive [Added
5-25-2016 by Ord. No.
2245]
West Blossom Drive
Spring Avenue [Added
8-15-1984 by Ord. No.
1783]
East and west Fulton Street
Spring Avenue [Added
9-17-1975 by Ord. No.
1644]
North Eagle Avenue
Spring Avenue [Added
4-20-1955 by Ord. No. 874]
North and south Locust Street
Stock Street North and south Charles Street
Stock Street North and south Eichelberger Street
Stock Street North and south George Street
Stock Street North and south McCosh Street
Stock Street North and south Penn Street
Sunset Avenue [Added
11-15-1961 by Ord. No.
1119]
North and south McCosh Street
Sycamore Lane [Added
6-1-1988 by Ord. No. 1845]
East Filbert Street
§ 346-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-14
1:725
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Third Street [Amended
2-10-1999 by Ord. No.
2019]
North and south High Street
Third Street North and south North Franklin Street
Third Street South Commerce Street
Third Street South Krug Avenue
Trudi Court [Added
6-1-1988 by Ord. No. 1845]
North Grant Drive
Unnamed alley connecting
Brandywine Lane to Paul
Street [Added 8-24-2016 by
Ord. No. 2249]
North Brandywine Lane
Unnamed alley between and
parallel to East Middle Street
and East Walnut Street, and
running between Baltimore
and York Streets
North and south Eagle Avenue
Unnamed alley between and
parallel to East Middle Street
and East Walnut Street, and
running between Baltimore
and York Streets
North and south South Railroad Street
Unnamed alley south of and
parallel to Stock Street
between Long Lane and
Charles Street [Added
10-24-2018 by Ord. No.
2276]
East to west Long Lane
Washington Avenue [Added
4-19-1972 by Ord. No.
1544]
East and west East Walnut Street
Washington Avenue [Added
5-25-2016 by Ord. No.
2245]
South Blossom Drive
West Chestnut Street
[Amended 10-6-1965 by
Ord. No. 1288]
North North Forney Avenue
West Chestnut Street North and south North Franklin Street
West Chestnut Street
[Amended 10-19-1966 by
Ord. No. 1329]
South North Forney Avenue
§ 346-14 HANOVER CODE § 346-14
1:726
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
West Hanover Street
[Amended 2-15-1956 by
Ord. No. 891]
North and south Centennial Avenue
West Hanover Street North and south Meade Avenue
West Hanover Street North and south Second Avenue
West Middle Street [Added
11-10-1965 by Ord. No.
1292]
North and south Centennial Avenue
West Middle Street North and south Forney Avenue
West Middle Street
[Amended 8-21-1957 by
Ord. No. 935]
North and south Meade Avenue
West Middle Street North and south Ruth Avenue
West Middle Street [Added
4-20-1955 by Ord. No. 874]
North and south Second Avenue
West Walnut Street [Added
2-17-1993 by Ord. No.
1933]
East Kilpatrick Avenue
West Walnut Street North and south Fleming Avenue
West Walnut Street [Added
12-19-1979 by Ord. No.
1710]
South South Franklin Street
West Walnut Street [Added
8-21-1992 by Ord. No.
1897]
West Kilpatrick Avenue
Willow Avenue [Added
6-1-1988 by Ord. No. 1845]
North Sunset Drive
Willow Street [Added
4-15-1987 by Ord. No.
1826]
South Allegheny Avenue
Wilson Avenue [Added
4-19-1972 by Ord. No.
1544]
East East Walnut Street
Wilson Avenue [Added
6-27-2018 by Ord. No.
2271]
North Penn Street
Wilson Avenue [Added
8-21-1992 by Ord. No.
1897]
North and south Eisenhower Drive
§ 346-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-14
1:727
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Wilson Avenue [Added
9-26-2018 by Ord. No.
2274]
North and south George Street
Wilson Avenue [Added
6-27-2018 by Ord. No.
2271]
North and south Moul Avenue
Witmer Avenue [Added
10-16-1963 by Ord. No.
1195]
North and south Walnut Street
York Street East East Hanover Street
York Street East Unnamed alley at
entrance to fair
grounds
York Street East and west East Walnut Street
York Street East and west Pleasant Street
York Street West Spring Avenue
§ 346-15. Passing. [Added 7-18-1956 by Ord. No. 910]
Carlisle Street, from the crossing of the Western Maryland Railroad at Third
Street to the Borough line, shall be a no-passing zone, and the driver of a
vehicle proceeding in either direction shall not overtake or pass or attempt
to overtake or pass any other vehicle proceeding in the same direction in
such zone.
§ 346-16. Yield-right-of-way intersections established. [Added
10-6-1965 by Ord. No. 1288; 11-10-1965 by Ord. No. 1292;
10-19-1966 by Ord. No. 1329; 4-17-1968 by Ord. No. 1387;
7-20-1977 by Ord. No. 1685]
The following intersections are hereby declared to be yield-right-of-way
intersections and official yield-right-of-way signs shall be erected in such a
position as to face traffic approaching the first-named street in the direction
or directions hereby indicated. All vehicles approaching the intersection
upon the second-named street in the direction or directions hereby
indicated in each case shall yield the right-of-way to traffic upon the firstnamed
street.
Yield Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
East Chestnut Street North Allewelt Alley
Grant Drive South East Walnut Street
§ 346-14 HANOVER CODE § 346-17
1:728
§ 346-17. Do-not-enter intersections. [Added 12-15-1976 by Ord.
No. 1672]
The following intersections are hereby declared to be do-not-enter
intersections, and official do-not-enter signs shall be erected in such a
position as to face traffic approaching the second-named street upon the
first-named street or alley. All vehicles approaching the intersection upon
the first-named street or alley shall not enter upon the second-named street:
Name of Street At intersection of
First alley south of and parallel to
Pleasant Street
Baltimore Street
Chapter 348
VEHICLES, LARGE AND OVERSIZED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicle impoundment — See Ch. 339.
Abandoned or junked vehicles — See Ch. 342.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 346.
Vehicle weight limits — See Ch. 350.
§ 346-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-17
1:729

ARTICLE I
Large Vehicles
[Adopted 4-25-2018 by Ord. No. 2269]
§ 348-1. Definitions; purpose.
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context in which the word is used clearly indicates otherwise:
LARGE VEHICLES — The following recreational, commercial or private
vehicles, as defined in 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 102, and as amended from time
to time: articulated bus, combination, construction truck, driveawaytowaway
operation, farm equipment, full trailer, house trailer, limousine
(capable of carrying 10 or more passengers), maxi-cube vehicle, mobile
home, motor carrier vehicle, motor home, recreational vehicle or
trailer, semitrailer, stinger-steered automobile or boat transporter, tow
dolly, tow truck, trailer, truck-camper, truck trailer, and truck tractor.
MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle which is self-propelled except a selfpropelled
wheelchair, an electric personal assistive mobility device, or
a vehicle which is propelled solely by human power. Motor vehicles
include large vehicles as defined herein.
NUISANCE — Any condition, structure or improvement which
constitutes a danger or potential danger to the health, safety or welfare
of citizens of the Borough or causes a blighting effect in neighborhoods.
PARK or PARKING — The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading property or passengers.
PERSON — A natural person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation or other legal entity.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle used customarily for human
habitation or recreational activities during tours or vacation periods
including, but not limited to, travel homes, travel trailers, motor homes,
truck campers, tent campers, trailers, boats and trailers, snowmobiles
and trailers, and any other similar vehicle.
PRIVATE VEHICLE — A vehicle used for domestic non-commercial use.
STREET — Any road, avenue, highway, court, cul-de-sac, alley, public
way or public square used as a public thoroughfare within the
municipal limits of the Borough of Hanover.
TRAILER — A vehicle designed to be towed by a motor vehicle.
TRUCK — Any large commercial motor vehicle which is or may be used
for attaching or pulling a trailer. This term shall also refer to but not
be limited to a tractor trailer and/or truck tractor, straight body truck,
flatbed truck, storage truck, refrigerator truck, any large commercial
motor vehicle, dump truck, tow truck, tri-axel vehicle, and/or any heavy
motor vehicle designed for carrying or pulling heavy loads.
§ 348-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 348-1
1:731
§ 348-2. Prohibition; exceptions.
TRUCK TRAILER — Any motor vehicle which attaches to a trailer and
which is primarily used for the transportation of goods, merchandise
and materials, and which, when in combination or on its own, totals 30
feet or more in length. This term is commonly referred to as a "tractor
trailer" or an "18 wheel" vehicle. This term is not meant to include
vehicles which are making local deliveries in permitted areas.
B. Purpose. The Hanover Borough Council has determined that hazardous
and unsafe traffic conditions within the municipal limits of the Borough
exist because large vehicles are often parked on streets in the Borough.
These hazardous and unsafe traffic conditions create a nuisance and
are detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare of the residents
of the Borough of Hanover and others, impede emergency vehicles
(including fire trucks, ambulances, etc.) and interfere with the peaceful
and quiet enjoyment of the residents of Hanover Borough in their
homes and neighborhoods. The Borough Council has determined that
the adoption of this article is necessary to remediate the foregoing.
A. Parking of large vehicles prohibited.
(1) No person shall park, cause to be parked, or permit to be parked
any large vehicle on any street within the municipal limits of the
Borough of Hanover.
(2) No person shall park or leave on private property, streets or other
public property of the Borough, any inoperable motor vehicle or a
motor vehicle without a current license plate/registration and/or
current state inspection and emission sticker.
(3) Nothing in this section shall be intended to prohibit the parking of
any truck or truck trailer or tri-axle vehicle for the purpose of the
delivery or pickup of merchandise, material, or goods provided that
the parking of said vehicle shall terminate immediately upon
conclusion of the delivery or pickup of merchandise, material or
goods.
(4) A large vehicle may be stored, unoccupied, upon private property,
including but not limited to storage on private roads owned by or
leased to the owner of such large vehicle. All such stored large
vehicles must be located on the side or rear of the property on a
crushed stone, black top or concrete surface capable of supporting
the vehicle. All parking areas and access roads or areas that are
created or expanded after the adoption of this article shall be
constructed of a hard, homogeneous, all-weather surface such as
cement or asphalt or equivalent; shall be graded to provide
convenient vehicular access and proper drainage; and shall be
maintained in good and usable condition. All existing parking areas
and access roads or areas shall be constructed and maintained with
an aggregate base, cement or asphalt all-weather surface. The
§ 348-1 HANOVER CODE § 348-2
1:732
§ 348-3. Continuation of provisions; severability.
§ 348-4. Violations and penalties.
parking of large vehicles on any surface or the accessing of parking
areas across any surface that is not constructed in accordance with
these regulations is strictly prohibited.
(5) It shall be unlawful for any recreational vehicle to be occupied for
living purposes within the Borough of Hanover, whether located on
a public street, public property or private property.
B. Exceptions. The regulations set forth in this article shall not apply to:
(1) Emergency vehicles as defined by 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 102.
(2) Borough-owned motor vehicles.
(3) Motor vehicles operated by the United States Postal Service.
(4) Motor vehicles actively engaged in the construction or repair of
streets, curbs, sidewalks, or utilities.
A. The provisions of any ordinances in effect upon the date of passage of
this article which are contradictory to the terms hereof are hereby
revoked and rendered null and void.
B. The provisions of this article, as far as they are the same as those of
ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of this article,
are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and not as new
enactments. The provisions of this article shall not affect any suit or
prosecution pending to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any
offense under the authority of any ordinance in effect at the time of the
passage of this article.
C. The provisions of this article are severable, and if any of its provisions
shall be held to be unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid, such decision
shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of this
article. It is hereby declared as the legislative intent that this article
would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid
provision not been included herein.
A. Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be subject to
a summary criminal proceeding before the magisterial district justice
as provided by the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, as may be
amended from time to time. Upon finding of a violation, a fine shall be
imposed of not less than $100 nor more than $500, together with court
costs and reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Borough of Hanover
in prosecution of the violation. Any person who fails to pay the fines,
court costs and attorney fees within 30 days of the imposition thereof
may be subject to imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed 15
days.
§ 348-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 348-4
1:733
B. For any subsequent offense, a person shall be charged with a
misdemeanor of the third degree and, upon conviction, shall be fined
not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution and
reasonable attorney fees or to imprisonment for not more than 90 days
or both.
C. Each day in which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a
separate violation hereof.
§ 348-4 HANOVER CODE § 348-4
1:734
ARTICLE II
Oversized and/or Overweight Vehicles
[Adopted 8-22-2018 by Ord. No. 2272]
§ 348-5. Effective date.
On or after August 23, 2018, any person desiring to operate a vehicle which
is oversized or overweight, as defined by regulation of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and in § 348-6 of this article
on the streets and highways within the Borough, shall file with the
Department of Public Works an application for a hauling permit and shall
pay the fee for such permit as required by this section, at least 48 hours
in advance of such intended hauling. This article does not apply to statedesignated
routes that lie within the Borough of Hanover. Movement of
oversize or overweight vehicles on state routes within the Borough of
Hanover shall be regulated by a permit issued by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 348-6. Oversized vehicles.
The definition of "oversized vehicle" for the purposes of this article is as
follows:
§ 348-7. Permit required for movement in the Borough of Hanover.
A. Any vehicle in excess of 80,000 pounds gross weight.
B. Any vehicle in excess of 13 feet six inches in height.
C. Any vehicle in excess of eight feet six inches in width.
D. Any vehicle in excess of 75 feet in length.
E. Any vehicle whose dimensions include a combination of Subsections A
through D.
F. The article also recognizes exemptions of Subsections A through D as
listed by regulation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation.
A. To move a vehicle whose dimensions exceed the limitations set in
§ 348-6 hereof, application must be made to the Borough of Hanover for
an oversized vehicle permit.
B. The applicant shall provide to the Borough of Hanover proof of liability
insurance with a coverage limitation of not less than $1,000,000.
C. The applicant shall pay to the Borough of Hanover a $50 permit fee,
plus $0.50 for each 1,000 pounds (or fraction thereof) over and above
80,000 pounds gross vehicle weight and in addition, $100 for each
bridge crossed within the Borough limits.
§ 348-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 348-7
1:735
§ 348-8. Damage to highways.
The permittee shall repair, at his own expense and to the satisfaction of the
Borough, any damage to highways, structures or equipment which occurs
in connection with operations under the permit.
§ 348-9. Hours of operation.
D. Upon receipt of permit fee and proof of insurance, the Borough of
Hanover will provide the applicant with an oversized vehicle permit to
operate upon the streets of the Borough of Hanover. The oversized
vehicle permit will list the name of the applicant, identify the truck and/
or trailer by registration plate number, and list the overall dimensions
and weight of the vehicle. The permit will also list the route, including
origin and destination, through the Borough of Hanover. The permit will
also list any special provisions regarding hours of operation or required
escorts. The permit will be valid for five calendar days after date of
issuance. All permit fees are nonrefundable, moves not completed in
five days will need to be reissued at the Borough's discretion.
E. The permittee is responsible for notifying the utility companies, the
Borough Public Works Department (717-632-3939), and the Borough
Police Department (717-637-5575), at least 48 hours in advance of any
vehicle movement. The permittee is responsible for any fees for
services from the Borough Public Works Department as a result of
moving or raising traffic signals or signs. The permittee is responsible
for any engineering studies deemed necessary by the Borough of
Hanover to allow for safe bridge crossing; the permittee is responsible
for Borough of Hanover Police Department services required as a result
of the movement, as well as for any fees from utility companies for
raising wires.
F. The Borough Public Works Department may require, at its discretion,
that a physical route survey be performed prior to the issuance of a
permit to ensure that a proposed routing can be negotiated safely.
A. Oversized vehicle movements may be conducted within the Borough of
Hanover between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday and
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Saturday, with the
following exceptions:
(1) No movement on the following holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial
Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and
Christmas Day.
(2) No movement during PennDOT designated holiday travel
restriction days [Title 67 Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes,
Section 179.10(7)].
(3) No movement conflicting with any other Borough special events.
§ 348-7 HANOVER CODE § 348-9
1:736
§ 348-10. Definition of escort vehicle.
B. Pursuant to Section 179.10 Paragraph 7(iii) of Title 67, Pennsylvania
Consolidated Statutes, oversized movements will be allowed within the
Borough of Hanover between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
provided that the movement is accompanied by front and rear escort
vehicles, and that additional lighting be in place on all sides and visible
from a distance of 1,000 feet.
A. An escort vehicle shall be a car or light truck, not exceeding 10,000
pounds gross vehicle weight.
B. An escort vehicle shall be equipped with a minimum of two flashing or
revolving amber lights on the roof and will bear signs stating
"OVERSIZE LOAD" visible from the front and rear. Signs shall be five
feet wide and one foot high, with black letters on a yellow background.
C. An escort vehicle shall have two-way radio communication with the
oversized vehicle.
D. Escort vehicles and personnel shall have authority to direct traffic and
be responsible to ensure that traffic disruption is minimal. Escort
personnel shall wear an orange reflective vest and hardhat when
engaged in directing traffic.
E. Escort vehicles are required to carry proof of liability insurance with a
minimum coverage limit of $1,000,000, naming the Borough of Hanover
as an additional insurance, said proof of insurance to be kept on file
with the Borough of Hanover.
F. Escort vehicles shall be required in addition to § 348-9B as follows:
(1) One escort vehicle. For an oversized vehicle over 11 feet in total
width; or for an oversized vehicle in excess of 75 feet in length.
(2) Two escort vehicles. For an oversized vehicle that is over 11 feet in
total width and in excess of 75 feet in length.
(3) An escort vehicle with a height pole. For an oversized vehicle in
excess of 14 feet in total height. The pole car will function as the
front car in the event two escort vehicles are required.
G. When one escort vehicle is required it shall precede the oversized
vehicle on all roadways with one lane of traffic in each direction and
follow the oversized vehicle on all roadways with more than one lane of
traffic in each direction.
H. When two escort vehicles are required, one escort vehicle shall precede
the oversized vehicle and one escort vehicle shall follow the oversized
vehicle.
I. When an escort vehicle with a height pole is required, it will precede
the oversized vehicle at all times.
§ 348-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 348-10
1:737
§ 348-11. Penalties for violation.
§ 348-12. Enforcement.
The duty of enforcing the provisions of this article shall be upon the
Borough of Hanover Police Chief acting through the Police Department.
§ 348-13. Severability.
If any section or subsection of this article is found to be unenforceable or
defective, or found to be unlawful, all other sections or subsections shall
remain in effect and will be enforced.
J. An escort vehicle may be required for any restricted bridge crossing
within the Borough of Hanover.
A. Any oversized vehicle found to be operating within the Borough of
Hanover without an oversize vehicle permit from the Borough shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $300 and not more than $1,000 for
violation of this section, and in addition, the violator shall pay the cost
for applicable permit fees; and shall be held subject to the regulations
and penalties set forth in Chapter 49 of Title 75, Pennsylvania
Consolidated Statutes.
B. Any oversized vehicle in possession of an oversized vehicle permit and
found to be operating in violation of this section or the provisions of the
oversize vehicle permit shall have said permit confiscated by any duly
authorized law enforcement officer, and shall be subject to a fine of not
less than $300 and not more than $1,000 for violation of this section,
and additionally shall be held subject to the regulations and penalties
set forth in Chapter 49 of Title 75, Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes.
C. Except for the penalties outlined in Subsections A and B of this section,
whoever violates any provision of this article or any temporary rule or
regulation made by the Police Chief pursuant thereto, shall upon
conviction thereof, be fined not less than $300 nor more than $1,000
and in default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned for not more than
90 days. However, the maximum amount of fine and imprisonment
imposed shall not be greater than the fine or imprisonment provided for
similar offenses by the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 348-10 HANOVER CODE § 348-13
1:738
Chapter 350
VEHICLE WEIGHT LIMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicle impoundment — See Ch. 339.
Abandoned or junked vehicles — See Ch. 342.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 346.
§ 350-1. Maximum gross weight; enumeration of excluded truck
routes. [Amended 11-21-1962 by Ord. No. 1159; 12-19-1962 by Ord.
No. 1163; 10-16-1963 by Ord. No. 1197; 4-17-1968 by Ord. No.
1386]
The maximum weight of any motor vehicle trailer or semitrailer, together
with the load thereon, is hereby limited to three tons' gross weight on all
public streets, alleys, and parking lots in the Borough of Hanover, except the
following designated streets, which are hereby designated as truck routes:
A. First Ward.
(1) York Street from Broadway to Hanover Borough line.
(2) Broadway from Center Square to Hanover Borough line.
(3) Pleasant Street from York Street to Factory Street.
(4) East Middle Street from York Street to Ridge Avenue.
(5) Factory Street from Pleasant Street to East Middle Street.
(6) Ridge Avenue from Broadway to Hanover Borough line.
(7) Center Street from Ridge Avenue to Hanover Borough line.
(8) Moul Avenue from Ridge Avenue to Grant Drive.
(9) Grant Drive from Broadway to Moul Avenue.
(10) McKinley Avenue from Broadway to Moul Avenue.
(11) Fulton Street from Broadway to Middle Street.
B. Second Ward.
(1) East Chestnut Street from Carlisle Street to Broadway.
(2) Allewelt Alley from Broadway to East Chestnut Street.
(3) Railroad Street from East Chestnut Street to North Street.
(4) Library Place from Railroad Street to Carlisle Street.
§ 348-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-1
1:739
(5) North Street from Railroad Street to Broadway.
(6) Charles Street from North Street to Stock Street.
(7) Stock Street from Carlisle Street to Broadway.
(8) Eisenhower Drive from Carlisle Street to Broadway. [Added
1-26-2000 by Ord. No. 2034]
(9) George Street from Eisenhower Drive to the second or rear
driveway serving the Ridge North Shopping Center off George
Street, parallel to Eisenhower Drive, between the hours of 7:30
a.m. and 4:30 p.m. daily, without exception for local deliveries.
[Added 1-26-2000 by Ord. No. 2034]
C. Third Ward.
(1) Carlisle Street from Center Square to Hanover Borough line.
(2) High Street from Frederick Street to Elm Avenue.
(3) Forney Avenue from Frederick Street to Poplar Street.
(4) North Forney Avenue from Frederick Street to Pine Street.
(5) West Chestnut Street from Carlisle Street to Forney Avenue.
(6) Park Avenue from Carlisle Street to High Street.
(7) Poplar Street from High Street to Hanover Borough line.
(8) Hoffman Avenue from West Chestnut Street to Poplar Street.
(9) Pine Street from High Street to Poplar Street.
(10) Third Street from Carlisle Street to Hanover Borough line.
(11) Elm Avenue from Carlisle Street to Hanover Borough line.
(12) Maple Avenue from High Street to Hanover Borough line.
(13) Commerce Street from Third Street to Maple Avenue.
(14) South Street from Filbert Street to Hanover Borough line.
(15) Diller Road from Hanover Borough line to Filbert Street.
(16) North Franklin Street from Park Avenue to Third Street.
D. Fourth Ward.
(1) Frederick Street from Center Square to Hanover Borough line.
(2) Boundary Avenue from Pleasant Avenue to Hanover Borough line.
(3) Pleasant Avenue from Baltimore Street to Boundary Avenue.
§ 350-1 HANOVER CODE § 350-1
1:740
§ 350-2. Exclusion for local deliveries.
The aforesaid weight limit shall not apply to any motor vehicle, trailer or
semitrailer making local deliveries to residences or business places on said
restricted streets.
§ 350-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-28-2016 by Ord. No.
2251]
Chapter 355
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Building regulations — See Ch. 150.
Housing standards — See Ch. 230.
Plumbing — See Ch. 263.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 286.
Sewer use regulations — See Ch. 290.
(4) Centennial Avenue from Frederick Street to Pleasant Avenue.
(5) Hanover Street from Centennial Avenue to Baltimore Street.
(6) Middle Street from Centennial Avenue to Baltimore Street.
(7) Baltimore Street from Center Square to Hanover Borough line.
E. Fifth Ward.
(1) Middle Street from Baltimore Street to York Street.
(2) Pleasant Street from Baltimore Street to York Street.
A. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall upon summary
conviction before a Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced to pay a
fine of $75, plus $75 for each 500 pounds, or part thereof, in excess of
3,000 pounds over the maximum gross weight or the registered gross
weight, plus costs of prosecution and, in default of payment thereof,
shall be subject to imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed five
days.
B. If the gross weight of any vehicle or combination exceeds the applicable
gross weight allowed under 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4941(a), the fine imposed
under this section shall be doubled.
§ 350-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-3
1:741

ARTICLE I
Use Restrictions
[Adopted 6-17-1992 by Ord. No. 1907; amended in its entirety
12-11-2002 by Ord. No. 2057]
§ 355-1. Purpose and objectives.
§ 355-2. Definitions; word usage.
A. This article sets forth uniform guidelines for imposing mandatory
restrictions on water use within the service area of the Borough of
Hanover/Hanover Municipal Water Works for uniform enforcement of
said restrictions throughout the service area.
B. The objectives of this article are:
(1) To prevent depletion of the raw water supply during dry weather
periods through the use of mandatory, enforceable water use
restrictions.
(2) To provide guidelines to be used as criteria for imposing mandatory
water use restrictions.
(3) To provide for enforcement of mandatory water use restrictions.
(4) To provide penalties for violations of mandatory water use
restrictions.
(5) To provide the procedure for enacting a local water rationing plan.
A. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning. Words, terms and phrases are as
follows:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Hanover, York County, Pennsylvania.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property with a water service hookup.
MANDATORY WATER RESTRICTION — Any use of water from the
Borough of Hanover/Hanover Municipal Water Works distribution
system which is prohibited under the authority of this article.
MUNICIPALITY — Any county, county authority, municipal authority,
city, Borough, township or school district.
NONESSENTIAL WATER USE — Any use of water which when
curtailed does not affect the health or safety of the general public.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole
or partial, of an improved property.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, company,
corporation, municipality, municipal authority, political subdivision or
an agency of federal or state government. The term includes the
§ 355-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-2
1:743
§ 355-3. Implementation.
officers, employees and agents of a partnership, association, company,
corporation, municipality, municipal authority, political subdivision or
an agency of federal or state government.
RAINFALL DEFICIT — The negative difference between the total
amount of rainfall received to date in any calendar year and the amount
of rainfall normally received by the same date in the same calendar
year as measured at the Borough of Hanover/Hanover Municipal Water
Works Filtration Plant in inches.
RAW WATER CAPACITY — The total amount of water supply available
to the water system from such sources as, but not limited to, Sheppard
and Myers Dam, Lawrence Baker Sheppard Dam, wells and water from
Slagle Run, Conewago Township.
RAW WATER CAPACITY TREND — The projected graphic presentation
of the raw water capacity change based on weekly total capacity
readings.
RESERVOIR DROUGHT OPERATION CURVES — A set of curves
defining the different drought operation activities through the year. The
curves define the different enforcement action throughout the year.
SERVICE AREA — The combined geographical area of all municipalities
in which there are customers receiving water supplied by the Borough
of Hanover/Hanover Municipal Water Works.
STATE — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
USER — Any person who withdraws potable water from the water
distribution system owned and operated by the Borough of Hanover/
Hanover Municipal Water Works.
B. The word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive.
A. If the Borough of Hanover/Hanover Municipal Water Works experiences
an impending raw water supply shortage condition, the Borough may
request general conservation of water uses and may impose mandatory
water use restrictions as deemed necessary to reduce or eliminate
nonessential uses of water. Water conservation measures and/or
mandatory water use restrictions shall continue in effect until
terminated by the Borough Council.
B. Basis of decision to impose restrictions.
(1) The decision to impose mandatory water use restrictions shall be
based on the existence of two of the following conditions:
(a) The rainfall deficit in the current calendar year is equal to or
greater than six inches; or
(b) The amount of rainfall received for two consecutive months is
equal to or less than 1/2 the amount normally received.
§ 355-2 HANOVER CODE § 355-3
1:744
§ 355-4. Declaration of shortage; restrictions on nonessential uses.
(c) The total raw water capacity gallonage is equal to or less than
65% of the water supply available to the water system or Stage
II of the reservoir drought operation curve; or
(d) The projected raw water capacity trend line indicates that
emergency Stage III will be reached within a time period of
four calendar months.
(2) The existence of Subsection B(1)(a) or (b) in conjunction with
Subsection B(1)(c) or (d) may constitute adequate reason to impose
mandatory water use restrictions.
A. The Borough of Hanover Council shall be authorized to declare an
imminent shortage situation and impose mandatory water use
restrictions in the service area.
B. The following water uses are declared nonessential, and any one or
more of such nonessential uses may be prohibited within the service
area:
(1) The use of hoses, sprinklers or other means for sprinkling or
watering of shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, plants, vines, gardens,
vegetables, flowers or any other vegetation.
(2) The use of water for watering golf courses; fairways in the initial
phase; tees and greens when Council deems necessary.
(3) The use of water for washing automobiles, trucks, trailers, trailer
houses or any other type of mobile equipment at a residential
property.
(4) The washing of streets, driveways, parking lots, service station
aprons, office buildings, exteriors of homes, sidewalks, apartments
or other outdoor surfaces.
(5) The operation of any ornamental fountain or other structures
making a similar use of water.
(6) The use of water for filling swimming or wading pools.
(7) The operation of any water-cooled comfort air conditioning, which
does not have water-conserving equipment; air-cooled/watercooled
ice machines.
(8) The use of water from fire hydrants for construction purposes, Fire
Department drills or testing fire apparatus, except as deemed
necessary and approved in the interest of public health or safety by
the municipal health officials.
(9) The use of water to flush sewer lines or sewer manholes.
§ 355-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-4
1:745
§ 355-5. Enforcement.
§ 355-6. Violations and penalties.
§ 355-7. Appeals; exceptions.
(10) The use of water for commercial farms or nurseries other than a
bare minimum to preserve plants, crops or livestock.
(11) The serving of water in restaurants, clubs or eating establishments
unless specifically requested by the individual customer.
C. If the state has implemented water restrictions, they will apply if the
water restriction is not covered above (Subsection B) or the state
restriction is more stringent. In no case will the restrictions be less
stringent than in Subsection B.
A. All officials of the Borough of Hanover and Hanover Municipal Water
Works Department employees shall be charged with distributing
information to the general public and reporting observed violations.
The Borough of Hanover Police Department shall be charged with
enforcement of mandatory water use restrictions in effect within the
Borough of Hanover corporate limits.
B. All non-law-enforcement personnel shall report any observed violation
of any mandatory water use restriction to the Borough of Hanover
Police Department. An officer of the Police Department shall be
responsible for issuance of any applicable citations to the violator.
A. First-time violators shall be issued a warning citation by the applicable
law enforcement agency.
B. A second violation shall be punished according to Chapter 1, Article I,
General Penalty, of the Hanover Borough Code.
C. A third violation shall result in termination of water service for a period
not to exceed 48 hours.
A. If compliance with the prohibition of nonessential use of water would
result in extraordinary hardship upon a water user, the water user may
apply for an exemption or variance, which would expire with the
termination of the mandatory water use restrictions, unless otherwise
specified in the exemption or variance. For purposes of this section,
"extraordinary hardship" means a permanent damage to property or
other personal or economic loss which is substantially more severe than
the sacrifices borne by other water users subject to the prohibition of
nonessential use of water.
B. A water user believing he suffers an extraordinary hardship and
desiring to be wholly or partially exempt from the restrictions on the
nonessential use of water shall submit a written request with full
documentation supporting the need for the requested relief to the
§ 355-4 HANOVER CODE § 355-7
1:746
§ 355-8. Interpretation.
The headings in this article are solely for convenience and shall not affect
in the legal interpretation of any provision hereof.
§ 355-9. Rationing plan.
public water supplier responsible for adopting and implementing this
plan. The application shall contain information specifying:
(1) The nature of the hardship claimed and reason for the requested
exemption or variance.
(2) The efforts taken by the applicant to conserve water and extent to
which water use may be reduced by the applicant without
extraordinary hardship.
C. The public water supplier or a designee will review the application and
may request the applicant to provide within a reasonable time
additional information as necessary to review the application. A written
decision will be provided within seven working days when possible, or if
perishable products are involved, within one working day of submission
of an application; or a request will be made for additional information
as necessary to review an application. The evaluation will consider
impacts on public health and safety, food and fiber production and
preservation, pharmaceutical processes, electric generation,
maintenance of employment, measures already taken by the user to
conserve and store water and the ability to further implement
conservation measures. An exemption or variance will be granted only
to the extent necessary to relieve extraordinary hardship.
D. Any person aggrieved by a decision relating to such an exemption or
variance rendered by a public water supplier or designee may file,
within 30 days of the decision, a complaint with the Public Utility
Commission, if the supplier is regulated by the Public Utility
Commission, and in all other instances with the Court of Common Pleas
in the county where the water service is provided, in accordance with 2
Pa.C.S.A. §§ 551 through 555 and 751 through 754 (relating to the Local
Agency Law).
E. An appeal from an initial decision of the public water supplier or
designee will not act as a supersedes, stay or injunction of that decision.
F. An exemption or variance may be modified or rescinded by the public
water supplier if public health, safety and welfare require further
reduction in water use.
G. An exemption or variance granted to a water user for a specific
property, purpose or person is not transferable to another property,
purpose or water user without prior written approval from the public
water supplier.
§ 355-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-9
1:747
§ 355-10. Effective date; amendments.
This article shall become effective the 11th day of December 2002. The
Borough reserves the right to make changes from time to time as, in its
opinion, may be desirable or beneficial and to amend this article in such
manner and at such times, as in its opinion, may be desirable.
A. The Emergency Management Services Code (35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7101 et
seq.) does not allow the Borough of Hanover/Hanover Municipal Water
Works to take actions, such as water rationing, to deal with natural
resource shortages on their own. The Code provides for the governor to
declare such an emergency.
B. Water rationing is a severe action dictated at the local level due to
seriously depleted water supplies that threaten public health and safety
and the general welfare of the impacted community.
C. A stand-alone local water rationing plan for the service area of the
Borough of Hanover/Hanover Municipal Water Works has been
prepared as a separate document.
D. If the Governor has the service area of the Borough of Hanover/
Hanover Municipal Water Works under a proclamation, a written
request will be made to the Commonwealth Drought Coordinator to
consider and approve implementing the rationing plan.
E. If a Governor's proclamation does not cover the service area of the
Borough of Hanover/Hanover Municipal Water Works, the following
procedure will be followed:
(1) A request will be made to the Commonwealth Drought Coordinator
who will determine whether or not the request, together with other
available information, establishes the existence of a water shortage
emergency that will require the Governor to issue a proclamation
declaring a state of local drought or water shortage emergency for
the affected area, and will make a recommendation to PEMA.
(2) If PEMA concurs in the existence of a local water shortage
emergency, PEMA will submit to the Governor a proposed
proclamation to declare a state of local drought or water shortage
emergency for the affected area described in the proclamation.
(3) After the Governor signs the proclamation, PEMA will notify the
Commonwealth Drought Coordinator that the plan may be
approved and put into effect.
§ 355-9 HANOVER CODE § 355-10
1:748
ARTICLE II
Water Rates
[Adopted 4-30-1993 by Ord. No. 1935]
§ 355-11. Rates outside Borough. [Amended 12-7-1994 by Ord. No.
1971; 3-24-2010 by Ord. No. 2159; 12-22-2010 by Ord. No. 2172;
12-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2195; 3-25-2015 by Ord. No. 2215]
Beginning April 9, 2015, the water rates for sales of water and consumption
charges outside the municipal boundaries of the Borough of Hanover shall
be as set forth below in accordance with Supplement No. 29 to Water-
Pa. - PUC No. 3. In addition, the following provisions contained in said
supplement are hereby adopted in their entirety:
A. Schedule of meter rates.
(1) Application. This schedule is applicable to all metered customers
located outside the corporate limits of the Borough of Hanover.
(2) Base charges.
Size of Meter
(inches) Charge per Quarter
5/8 $26.55
3/4 $36.72
1 $57.09
1 1/2 $108.12
2 $169.14
3 $362.64
4 $617.25
6 $1,279.26
8 $1,839.45
(3) The quarterly water rates for sale of water consumption charges
outside the municipal boundaries of the Borough of Hanover shall
be as follows:
Consumption Charge Rate Per 1,000 Gallons
Residential $3.8540
Commercial $3.4450
Industrial - small $3.6070
Industrial - large $3.2110
Public $3.4450
§ 355-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-11
1:749
§ 355-12. Rates within Borough. [Amended 12-7-1994 by Ord. No.
1971; 1-18-1995 by Ord. No. 1972; 2-26-2003 by Ord. No. 2066;
12-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2087; 3-24-2010 by Ord. No. 2158;
12-28-2011 by Ord. No. 2179; 12-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2194;
3-25-2015 by Ord. No. 2214]
(4) Temporary disconnections. For services that are temporarily
disconnected, the base charge will apply for the period of
disconnection up to one year after disconnecting.
(a) If the customer request for restoration of service requires the
Water Works to incur overtime or holiday costs, the Water
Works reserves the right to bill the customer for additional
costs incurred. In addition, in instances where it becomes
necessary to remove and reinstall a meter, the minimum
charge will be $60.
(b) There shall be a minimum service charge of $35 for connecting
or disconnecting a meter where service is furnished on a
temporary basis. In instances where it becomes necessary to
remove and reinstall a meter, the minimum charge will be $60.
B. Fire service rates.
(1) Schedule of private fire service rates.
Type of Service Charge per Quarter
Hydrant $112.04
4-inch connection to the street
main
$42.03
6-inch connection to the street
main
$122.04
8-inch connection to the street
main
$261.87
10-inch connection to the street
main
$467.73
12-inch connection to the street
main
$597.27
(2) Schedule of public fire service rates.
Type of Service Charge per Quarter
Hydrant $69.39
A. Base rates and consumption charges.
(1) From and after the first billing period of 2013, the quarter annual
base rates for connections to the municipal water system of the
§ 355-11 HANOVER CODE § 355-12
1:750
Borough of Hanover for those properties/customers located within
the municipal boundaries of the Borough shall be as follows:
Size of Meter
(inches) Charge per Quarter
5/8 $26.55
3/4 $36.72
1 $57.09
1 1/2 $108.12
2 $169.14
3 $362.64
4 $617.25
6 $1,279.26
8 $1,839.45
(2) Effective April 9, 2015, the charge for the consumption of water
from the municipal water system of the Borough of Hanover for
those properties/customers located within the municipal
boundaries of the Borough shall be as follows: $3.16 per 1,000
gallons of water used, which charge shall be added to the
applicable base charge set forth in Subsection A(1) above.
[Amended 12-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2194]
(3) Temporary disconnections. For services that are temporarily
disconnected, the base charge will apply for the period of
disconnection up to one year after disconnecting.
(a) If the customer request for restoration of service requires the
Water Works to incur overtime or holiday costs, the Water
Works reserves the right to bill the customer for additional
costs incurred. In addition, in instances where it becomes
necessary to remove and reinstall a meter, the minimum
charge will be $60.
(b) There shall be a minimum service charge of $35 for connecting
or disconnecting a meter where service is furnished on a
temporary basis. In instances where it becomes necessary to
remove and reinstall a meter, the minimum charge will be $60.
B. Effective April 9, 2015, the quarterly fire service rates within Hanover
Borough shall be as follows:
Type of Service Charge per Quarter
Fire sprinkler service and fire hose
connections:
4-inch connection to the street
main
$35.61
§ 355-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-12
1:751
§ 355-13. Approval. [Amended 12-7-1994 by Ord. No. 1971]
All PUC regulations affecting the water rate approved by the Pennsylvania
PUC by its order of December 1, 1994, are hereby approved.
§ 355-14. Responsibility for payment. [Added 12-7-1994 by Ord. No.
1971]
Every owner of a developed property shall be responsible for paying the
water and sewer service fees for each unit under his control. The amount
of such shall be as determined by Hanover Borough from time to time by
ordinance.
Type of Service Charge per Quarter
6-inch connection to the street
main
$103.44
8-inch connection to the street
main
$221.97
10-inch connection to the street
main
$396.45
12-inch connection to the street
main
$534.39
Private hydrants:
Standard fire hydrant $103.44
§ 355-12 HANOVER CODE § 355-14
1:752
Chapter 364
YARD SALES; AUCTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advertising materials — See Ch. 120. Signs — See Ch. 298.
§ 364-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings and definitions:
PRIVATE AUCTION BY NONPROFESSIONAL AUCTIONEERS — The display
for sale, barter or exchange of an assortment of any new or used furniture,
sporting goods, fixtures, vehicles, equipment, food, clothing, metal, glass,
paper, rubber, synthetics, household goods or rummage conducted upon
private premises and conducted by the owner, resident or other
nonprofessional auctioneer, whether compensated or not.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling house, building or other structure
designed or used, either wholly or in part, for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant,
and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, garage,
basement steps or vestibule belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling
house or other structure.
PRIVATE SALES — The display for sale, barter or exchange of an
assortment of any new or used furniture, sporting goods, fixtures, vehicles,
equipment, food, clothing, metal, glass, paper, rubber, synthetics, household
goods or rummage conducted upon private premises, otherwise known as
"yard sales." The sale of singular items on a nonrecurring basis, such as
an automobile, truck, trailer, boat, outboard motor, tractor, garden tractor,
power mower, snowblower and other similar large items, is not included in
the foregoing definition.
§ 364-2. Compliance required.
No private sale or private auction shall be conducted within the Borough of
Hanover except in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 364-3. Permit required.
No private sale or private auction shall be conducted within the Borough
of Hanover unless a permit shall have first been issued by the Borough
Secretary permitting same.
§ 355-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 364-4
1:753
§ 364-4. Hours and duration of sales.
Private sales or private auctions conducted within the Borough of Hanover
shall be between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and sunset on the days for which a
permit is issued. No permit shall be issued for more than two consecutive
days. Sales and auctions shall be conducted on weekdays, Sunday excluded.
§ 364-5. Refrigerators and iceboxes.
No refrigerator or icebox having a capacity of 1 1/2 cubic feet or more, with
an attached lid or door which may be opened and fastened shut by means
of an attached latch, lock or other similar device, shall be displayed, offered
for sale or sold at a private auction unless the attached lid or door shall first
be removed and detached therefrom or secured in such a manner that the
door cannot be closed.
§ 364-6. Applicability.
Nothing herein contained shall apply to a sale held under a judicial order,
judgment or decree, or a writ issuing out of any court, or sale to enforce any
lawful lien or power of sale.
§ 364-7. Issuance of permit; signs.
Upon the filing of a written application with the Borough Secretary stating
the date and place where the private sale or private auction is to be
conducted and the type of merchandise to be sold, together with the filing
fee, the Borough Secretary shall issue a sale permit authorizing same; and
the sale sign shall be displayed on the date of the sale in the proximity of
the material being offered and in clear view from the street.
§ 364-8. Permit fee. [Amended 7-12-2000 by Ord. No. 2040]
There shall be a fee for the issuance of said permit as established by the
Borough Council from time to time.
§ 364-9. Number of permits allowed. [Amended 4-25-2007 by Ord.
No. 2124]
No person, firm or corporation shall be issued more than two permits in a
calendar year for any one location.
§ 364-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall pay a fine not exceeding $100 or be imprisoned in the county
jail for a term not exceeding 30 days, or both.
§ 364-4 HANOVER CODE § 364-10
1:754
Chapter 370
ZONING
Appendix
Chapter A400
ENUMERATION OF STREET, SEWER AND LAND
ORDINANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 286.
Sewer use regulations — See Ch. 290.
Street openings and excavations — See Ch.
313.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 316.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
320.
Zoning — See Ch. 370.
Sewer agreements — See Ch. A404.
§ A400-1. Opening and adoption (acceptance) of streets and alleys.
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
Klinefelter's Alley 9-4-1888
Frederich Street 12-4-1888
Abbottstown Street 1-7-1890
Hanover Street 18 9-4-1891
High Street 19 10-2-1891
Frederich Street 22 10-17-1891
Carlisle Street 23 8-5-1891
Centennial Avenue 28 10-7-1892
Locust Street 31 10-26-1892
Walnut Street 37 2-3-1893
Certain alleys 50 9-14-1893
Middle Street 54 11-18-1893
Spring Avenue 55 11-6-1893
Fulton Street 58 3-14-1894
Opening of alley 62 6-11-1894
McSherrystown Street 63 6-11-1894
Baer Avenue 94 12-21-1897
Stock Street 95 12-21-1897
§ 364-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A400-1
1:755
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
Acceptance of alley 98 2-6-1899
West Middle Street 102 9-5-1900
Ridge Avenue 109 6-7-1904
Factory Street 114 8-2-1904
High Street 115 5-12-1904
North Street 118 9-6-1904
Locust Street 128 3-5-1906
Franklin Street 136 3-7-1907
Terrace Avenue 137 5-6-1907
Pine Street 143 7-1-1907
Broadway 144 9-6-1907
Abbottstown Street 145 9-6-1907
Spruce Street 148 10-7-1907
Opening of alley 182 11-1-1909
West Hanover Street 189 6-30-1910
Second Avenue 191 6-30-1910
McAllister Street 194 10-14-1910
Mt. Vernon Avenue 203 7-7-1911
Beck Mill Road 206 8-4-1911
South Franklin Street 207 8-4-1911
Fourth Street 214 7-5-1912
Eichelberger Street 219 10-4-1912
McCosh Street 227 5-2-1913
Opening and acceptance of alley 230 8-1-1913
Alley opening 238 11-7-1913
Highland Avenue 239 12-5-1913
Charles Street 247 7-3-1914
West Walnut Street 268 9-3-1915
Sprenkle Avenue 284 6-2-1912
Ruth Avenue 285 8-4-1916
McCosh Street 294 2-21-1917
Jackson Street 345A 10-4-1918
Meade Avenue 361 11-1-1923
Highland Avenue 375 5-22-1925
Elm Avenue 404 7-25-1927
Highland Avenue 429 4-18-1929
§ A400-1 HANOVER CODE § A400-1
1:756
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
Potomac Avenue 440 8-15-1929
Elm Avenue 441 8-15-1929
Acceptance of unnamed alleys 442 9-2-1929
Portion of Hanover Street 443 1-6-1930
Portion of Hanover Street 444 1-6-1930
Second Avenue 449 5-15-1930
Centennial Avenue 453 7-3-1930
Kilpatrick Avenue 482 4-20-1933
Hoffman Avenue 501 10-5-1934
Terrace Avenue 505 10-16-1935
Portions of East Walnut Street,
Jackson Avenue, Witmer Street,
Hollywood Avenue and Keagy
Avenue
506 10-16-1935
North Franklin Street 514 10-5-1936
North Franklin Street 516 11-18-1936
West Middle Street 518 12-16-1936
Princess Street 522 4-28-1937
Elm Avenue 526 6-16-1937
Park Avenue 530 (No date)
North Street 531 7-21-1937
Unnamed alley 533 8-18-1937
West Middle Street 536 11-17-1937
Forney Avenue 543 3-16-1938
Forney Avenue 544 5-18-1938
Fleming Avenue 545 5-18-1938
Elm Avenue 549 12-21-1938
Potomac Avenue 555 6-21-1939
Amendment to Ord. No. 443
(Hanover Street)
557 7-19-1939
Allegheny Avenue, etc. 586 4-16-1941
Fleming Avenue 590 6-18-1941
Second Avenue 591 8-20-1941
Young Circle 596 11-19-1941
Unnamed alley 631 5-17-1944
Unnamed alley 635 4-18-1945
Clearview Road 662 10-15-1947
§ A400-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A400-1
1:757
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
Fifth Street 663 10-15-1947
Ridge Avenue 664 10-15-1947
Washington Avenue 672 4-21-1948
Monroe Street 673 4-21-1948
Krug Avenue 676 5-19-1948
Sherwood Street, Eichelberger
Street and DeGuy Avenue
680 7-21-1948
Diller Road and Spruce Street 681 8-25-1948
Diller Road 684 12-15-1948
Hamilton Street 688 3-16-1949
West Middle Street 689 3-16-1949
Maple Avenue 691 4-20-1949
Hartman Avenue 709 10-19-1949
Allegheny Avenue and Penn Street 712 1-18-1950
North Stephen Place 719 4-19-1950
Meade Avenue and Second
Avenue
727 6-1-1950
Pleasant Avenue 760 7-18-1951
East Walnut Street 761 7-18-1951
Stock Street (Amends Ord. No.
95)
763 8-15-1951
George Street, McKinley Avenue,
etc.
801 5-15-1953
Diller Road 814 12-16-1953
Lee Street and Paul Street 818 2-17-1954
Street openings and adoptions
(Amendment)
875 6-15-1955
Poplar Street 878 6-28-1955
Street openings and adoptions
(Amendment)
879 8-17-1955
Diller Road 901 5-16-1956
West Middle Street 912 8-1-1956
George Street 926 4-17-1957
Kuhn Drive 940 11-20-1957
East Walnut Street and Keagy
Avenue (Amendment)
952 3-19-1958
Lee Street and Paul Street 959 7-16-1958
§ A400-1 HANOVER CODE § A400-1
1:758
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
Monroe Street and West Walnut
Street
962 8-5-1958
Allegheny Avenue and Oak Street
(Amends Ord. No. 586)
967 8-27-1958
Elm Avenue 968 8-27-1958
North Stephen Place 971 9-17-1958
Potomac Avenue (Amends Ord.
No. 555)
972 9-17-1958
McCosh Street 974 9-17-1958
Chestnut Street 978 12-17-1958
West Walnut Street (Amends Ord.
No. 962)
979 12-17-1958
McCosh Street (Amendment) 994 5-4-1959
Rudisill Avenue 999 7-15-1959
Clearview Road (Amendment) 1000 7-15-1959
Eichelberger Street (Amendment) 1001 7-15-1959
East Walnut Street and Keagy
Avenue (Amendment)
1005 8-6-1959
Fleming Avenue 1011 8-19-1959
Moul Avenue and Fame Avenue 1028 2-17-1960
Charles Street 1049 9-21-1960
McCosh Street, etc. 1056 10-19-1960
Kuhn Drive, etc. 1061 11-23-1960
Hamilton Street 1052 3-15-1961
Krug Avenue (Amendment to Ord.
No. 676)
1083 3-15-1961
Penn Street 1087 4-5-1961
Penn Street (Amendment to Ord.
No. 1087)
1091 7-12-1961
Penn Street 1092 7-12-1961
George Street 1093 7-12-1961
West Hanover Street 1095 7-19-1961
Juniper Lane 1098 8-2-1961
Washington Avenue 1111 10-18-1961
Jackson Avenue 1112 10-18-1961
Jackson Avenue 1116 11-15-1961
Keagy Avenue, etc. 1124 1-10-1962
§ A400-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A400-1
1:759
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
Fame Avenue 1146 7-18-1962
Forney Avenue 1156 10-3-1962
Grant Street, etc. 1158 11-21-1962
Filbert Street 1182 7-17-1963
Unnamed alleys 1184 8-7-1963
Filbert Street (Amends Ord. No.
1182)
1187 8-21-1963
Penn Street 1189 9-4-1963
George Street 1190 9-4-1963
West Clearview Road 1193 10-9-1963
Four alleys 1204 11-20-1963
Shafer Drive 1208 12-18-1963
High Street 1209 12-18-1963
Sunset Avenue, etc. 1221 4-15-1964
Queen Street 1222 4-15-1964
Poplar Street, etc. 1225 5-6-1964
Fifth Street 1230 6-3-1964
Penn Street 1237 8-5-1964
Orchard Street 1238 8-5-1964
Unnamed alley 1246 11-4-1964
East Walnut Street 1251 12-16-1964
Forney Avenue 1255 1-6-1965
George Street 1268 5-5-1965
Randolph Street 1273 6-16-1965
Randolph Street 1280 8-18-1965
Three alleys 1284 9-15-1965
Three alleys 1314 7-6-1966
Unnamed alley 1320 8-17-1966
Fifth Street 1324 10-5-1966
Eichelberger Street (Amends Ord.
No. 680)
1326 10-5-1966
Fame Avenue 1327 10-19-1966
McCosh Street (Amendment) 1332 11-2-1966
Hartman Avenue 1337 1-4-1967
Eichelberger Street 1352 7-19-1967
§ A400-1 HANOVER CODE § A400-1
1:760
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
Dart Drive and Eichelberger
Street
1355 8-5-1967
McCosh Street, Elm Avenue and
Oak Street
1357 8-7-1967
Boundary Avenue 1361 9-15-1967
Eichelberger Street 1365 10-9-1967
East Elm Avenue 1395 6-5-1968
Unnamed alleys 1403 8-7-1968
High Street 1406 10-2-1968
Unnamed alley 1409 10-31-1968
Unnamed alley 1412 11-20-1968
College Avenue 1438 5-7-1969
Washington Avenue (Repeals Ord.
No. 672)
1442 5-21-1969
Wilson Avenue 1443 5-21-1969
Philadelphia Street 1446 7-16-1969
Washington Avenue 1450 8-6-1969
Holly Court, Barberry Drive and
DeGuy Avenue
1452 8-6-1969
Dart Drive 1453 8-20-1969
Washington Avenue (Amends Ord.
No. 1450)
1475 4-15-1970
Two unnamed alleys 1483 9-2-1970
East Walnut Street 1485 9-16-1970
Trudi Court 1493 12-16-1970
East Walnut Street 1507 5-19-1971
Portion of Brandywine Lane 1520 9-15-1971
Portion of George Street 1521 9-15-1971
Weet Avenue, McCosh Street and
Charles Street
1522 9-15-1971
West Clearview Road 1523 9-15-1971
Unnamed alley 1525 9-15-1971
Primrose Lane 1529 10-6-1971
High Street, Keith Drive and
Savoy Drive
1530 10-6-1971
Kuhn Drive 1555 9-20-1972
§ A400-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A400-1
1:761
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
Redwood Lane, West chestnut
Street, Moul Avenue and East
Middle Street
1556 9-20-1972
Unnamed alley 1571 4-18-1973
Gail Avenue 1580 5-2-1973
Railroad Street 1582 5-2-1973
Clearview Road 1598 9-19-1973
High Street 1599 9-19-1973
Eisenhower Drive 1611 4-3-1974
Dart Drive 1616 5-15-1974
Kindig Lane 1627 5-7-1975
Hamilton Street 1629 5-7-1975
Ridge Avenue 1630 5-7-1975
Hamilton Street 1631 5-7-1975
Gay Street 1632 5-21-1975
Eisenhower (Amends Ord. No.
1611)
1641 8-6-1975
West Hanover Street 1656 4-21-1976
Unnamed alley 1658 4-21-1976
Kindig Lane (Amends Ord. No.
1627)
1660 4-21-1976
Clearview Road 1667 8-4-1976
South Forney Avenue 1668 8-4-1976
Primrose Lane 1669 8-4-1976
South Franklin Street 1702 4-18-1979
Dart Drive (Amends Ord. No.
1616)
1703 5-16-1979
Academy Street 1744 9-1-1982
North Franklin Street 1753 2-16-1983
Hartman Avenue 1775 4-4-1984
Kilpatrick Avenue 1785 9-5-1984
Barberry Drive 1799 5-1-1985
Honeysuckle Court 1800 5-1-1985
Dart Drive 1806 9-18-1985
Second Avenue (Amends Ord. No.
591)
1815 10-15-1986
Unnamed alley 1827 4-15-1987
§ A400-1 HANOVER CODE § A400-1
1:762
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
Philadelphia Street 1832 8-5-1987
Ash Drive 1877 8-1-1990
Spruce Drive 1878 8-1-1990
Hemlock Court 1879 8-1-1990
Washington Avenue 1880 8-1-1990
Georgetown Circle 1881 8-1-1990
Barnhart Drive 1888 12-19-1990
Dart Drive (Amends Ord. No.
1453)
1909 8-19-1992
Portions of East Walnut Street,
Jackson Avenue, Witmer Street,
Hollywood Avenue and Keagy
Avenue (Amends Ord. Nos. 506
and 952)
1913 10-21-1992
Hedgerow Court 1919 12-16-1992
Steeplechase Court 1920 12-16-1992
Redcoat Court 1921 12-16-1992
Huntsman Court 1922 12-16-1992
DeGuy Avenue 1923 12-16-1992
George Street 1924 12-16-1992
Aspen Court 1926 12-16-1992
Dart Drive 1927 12-30-1992
Wilson Avenue 1928 12-30-1992
Foxleigh Drive 1929 12-30-1992
Poplar Street 1942 12-1-1993
Sycamore Lane 1943 12-1-1993
Jeremy Drive 1944 12-1-1993
Filbert Street 1945 12-1-1993
Spring Avenue 1946 12-1-1993
Fulton Street 1947 12-1-1993
Kilpatrick Avenue 1948 12-1-1993
Kennedy Court 1949 12-1-1993
Dart Manor Court 1950 12-1-1993
Primrose Lane 1951 12-1-1993
Northridge 1952 12-1-1993
Brandy Court 1953 12-1-1993
Clearview Road 1954 12-1-1993
§ A400-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A400-1
1:763
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
Cherry Tree Court 1955 12-1-1993
Pennsylvania Avenue 1956 12-1-1993
George Street 1957 12-1-1993
Radio Road 1958 12-1-1993
North Franklin Street 2025 8-11-1999
Remaining street shall be used as
paved cartway (Amends Ord. No.
971)
2110 8-9-2006
Wilson Avenue 2185 5-23-2012
Pennsylvania Avenue 2187 6-27-2012
Twenty-foot-wide public alley 2241 12-23-2015
Blossom Drive 2241 12-23-2015
Grant Drive 2241 12-23-2015
Spencer Drive 2241 12-23-2015
Washington Avenue 2241 12-23-2015
Stonecroft Drive 2250 8-24-2016
§ A400-2. Improving streets and alleys.
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
York Street and Baltimore Street:
sidewalk paving
5-5-1838
York Street and Baltimore Street:
sidewalk paving
5-2-1839
Carlisle Street: sidewalk paving 9-22-1841
Carlisle Street: sidewalk paving
(Amendment)
7-23-1851
Baltimore Street: sidewalk paving 2-11-1853
Carlisle, Frederich, Pigeon and
Baltimore Streets: sidewalk
paving
2-4-1854
Carlisle Street, Frederich Street,
Baltimore Street and Broadway:
gutter paving
7-19-1856
Baltimore Street and, generally,
sidewalks and gutters
6-20-1872
York Street: widening 9-4-1888
Frederich Street: widening and
straightening
12-4-1888
§ A400-1 HANOVER CODE § A400-2
1:764
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
Poplar Street: widening 7-2-1889
Franklin Street: widening 11-5-1889
Abbottstown Street: widening,
straightening
1-7-1890
Abbottstown Street: grade 1 5-5-1890
Poplar Street: grade 2 5-5-1890
High Street: grade 3 6-2-1890
Franklin Street: grade 4 6-2-1890
McSherrystown Street: grade 5 7-7-1890
Park Avenue: grade 7 8-4-1890
Walnut Avenue: grade 8 8-4-1890
Locust Street: grade 9 8-4-1890
Hanover Street: widening 17 9-4-1891
Frederich Street: widening 22 10-17-1891
Carlisle Street: widening 23 8-5-1891
Carlisle Street: grade 24 9-3-1892
Centennial Avenue: widening 28 10-7-1892
High Street: grade 30 10-4-1892
Franklin Street: extension 35 12-2-1892
Carlisle Street: grade 42 5-1-1893
Middle Street: extension 54 11-18-1893
Frederich Street: grade 61 5-7-1894
Fulton Street: grade 64 6-12-1894
McSherrystown Street: grade 65 8-6-1894
Middle Street: grade 66 9-3-1894
Chestnut street: extension 71 4-1-1895
Chestnut Street: grade 73 5-6-1895
Spring Avenue: grade 74 5-6-1895
Chestnut Street: grade 75 5-6-1895
Spring Avenue: grade 76 5-6-1895
Centennial Avenue: grade 92 7-21-1896
Baer Avenue: extension 94 12-21-1897
Stock Street: extension 95 12-21-1897
Fulton Street: extension 96 9-13-1898
Hanover Street: extension 97 9-13-1898
Fulton Street: grade 99 12-12-1899
§ A400-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A400-2
1:765
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
Fulton Street: grade (Amendment) 100 6-4-1900
Paving bonds 106 12-9-1901
Ridge Avenue: grade 110 6-7-1904
High Street: grade 116 8-12-1904
North Street: grade 119 9-6-1904
Factory Street: grade 120 10-4-1904
Grade of alley 126 6-5-1905
Ruth Avenue: grade 127 8-7-1905
Locust Street: grades 129 3-5-1906
Franklin Street: extension 136 3-7-1907
Terrace Avenue: grade 138 5-6-1907
Pine Street: grade 142 7-1-1907
Broadway and Abbottstown
Street: grades and curblines
146 9-17-1907
Spruce Street: grades 149 10-7-1907
High street: grade changed 155 6-1-1908
East Middle Street: sidewalk
grade changed
156 6-29-1908
Center Square: curbline and
sidewalks
157 6-29-1908
Center Square: grading and
paving
158 6-29-1908
Carlisle Street: curblines and
grades
168 5-27-1909
Carlisle Street: width and grade 169 5-27-1909
Baltimore Street: curblines and
grades
170 5-27-1909
Baltimore Street: width and grade 171 5-27-1909
Baltimore Street: grading and
paving
172 5-31-1909
Amendment to Ord No. 169 173 6-7-1909
Amendment to Ord. No. 171 175 6-10-1909
West Chestnut Street: width of
sidewalks
177 7-19-1909
West Hanover Street: grades 190 6-30-1910
Second Avenue: grades 192 6-30-1910
Mt. Vernon Avenue: grade 204 7-7-1911
Beck Mill Road: widening 206 8-4-1911
§ A400-2 HANOVER CODE § A400-2
1:766
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
Frederich Street: grade (Amends
Ord. No. 61)
209 9-1-1911
Fourth Street: grade 215 7-5-1912
York Street: improvements 223 3-14-1913
York Street: improvements 224 4-14-1913
Frederich Street: improvements 228 5-2-1913
Frederich Street: improvements 229 6-4-1913
Stock Street: sidewalks and
roadway
231 9-12-1913
Abbottstown Street: curblines 242 4-24-1914
Abbottstown Street:
improvements
243 6-5-1914
Baltimore Street: curbs and width
of driveway
244 6-5-1914
Charles Street: extension 247 7-3-1914
Charles Street: grades and
curblines
248 8-7-1914
Bond issue: street paving 249 9-4-1914
Eichelberger Street:
improvements
253 10-2-1914
George Street: extension 254 10-2-1914
George Street: grades and
curblines
255 10-2-1914
South Franklin Street:
improvements
257 1-4-1915
High Street: improvements 259 4-6-1915
Baltimore Street: improvements 260 4-6-1915
Baltimore Street: curbline 261 5-28-1915
Amendment to Ord. No. 261 264 7-9-1915
West Walnut Street: extension and
grades
268 9-3-1915
Frederich Street: improvements 273 3-16-1916
High Street: improvements 281 5-5-1916
Frederich, High and Third
Streets: improvements
283 6-2-1916
High and Third Streets: width of
highway
286 5-4-1916
Frederich Street: improvements 292 2-21-1917
§ A400-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A400-2
1:767
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
McCosh Street: extension 294 2-21-1917
Walnut Street: extension 299 7-19-1917
Frederich, High and Third
Streets: improvements
304 5-10-1918
Improvement of state highway
requested
305 5-10-1918
Street paving loan 312 3-2-1919
Carlisle Street: specifications 314 4-4-1919
Carlisle Street: improvements 315 5-9-1919
Broadway: specifications 316 5-2-1919
East Middle Street: specifications 317 4-4-1919
Street paving bonds 318 4-4-1919
Broadway: improvements 320 6-6-1919
East Middle Street: improvements 321 5-5-1919
Third Street: widening 344 2-2-1922
West Hanover Street: extension 347 9-7-1922
Improvements in unnamed alley 356 8-2-1923
Baer Avenue 357 8-2-1923
Highland Avenue: extension 375 5-22-1925
Third Street: lines and widths 377 7-16-1925
South Street: specifications 387 5-20-1926
Charles Street: extension 394 5-26-1916
High Street: extension 403 7-28-1927
Elm Avenue: width 404 7-28-1927
Third Street: location of sidewalks 408 9-15-1927
East Chestnut Street: paving 415 3-16-1928
Broadway: specifications 421 8-16-1928
Carlisle Street: specifications 422 8-16-1928
Allegheny Avenue: specifications 423 8-16-1928
West Chestnut Street: paving 427 3-21-1929
Highland Avenue: extension 429 4-18-1929
Potomac Avenue: specifications 440 8-15-1929
Elm Avenue: specifications 441 8-15-1929
Third Street: paving 448 5-15-1930
Third Street: specifications 451 6-24-1930
§ A400-2 HANOVER CODE § A400-2
1:768
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
Third Street: improvement
requested
452 6-24-1930
Centennial Avenue: extension 453 7-3-1930
Carlisle Street: specifications 464 7-16-1931
Carlisle Street: underground
pipes
465 7-16-1931
Carlisle Street: improvement
requested
466 8-3-1931
West Middle Street: extension 468 10-15-1931
Kilpatrick Avenue: specifications 482 4-20-1933
Improvement of Route 66007:
specifications
496 4-18-1934
Terrace Avenue: specifications 505 10-16-1935
Broadway: street improvements 512 9-16-1936
Elm Avenue: specifications 526 6-16-1937
Park Avenue: specifications 530 (No date)
North Street: widening and
specifications
531 7-21-1937
West Middle Street: specifications 536 11-17-1937
Forney Avenue: specifications 543 3-16-1938
Forney Avenue: specifications 544 5-18-1938
Fleming Avenue: specifications 545 5-18-1938
Elm Avenue: specifications 549 12-21-1938
Potomac Avenue: specifications 555 6-21-1939
Fleming Avenue: specifications 590 6-18-1941
Second Avenue: specifications 591 5-20-1941
Young Circle: specifications 596 11-19-1941
Broadway and York Street:
approval of improvement plans
616 9-9-1942
Unnamed alley: specifications 631 5-17-1944
Unnamed alley: specifications 635 4-18-1945
East Middle Street: paving 650 9-18-1946
Keystone Avenue: designation 652 11-20-1946
Clearview Road: specifications 662 10-15-1947
Fifth Street: specifications 663 10-15-1947
Ridge Avenue: specifications 664 10-15-1947
Washington Avenue: specifications 672 4-21-1948
§ A400-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A400-2
1:769
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
Monroe Street: specifications 673 4-21-1948
Krug Avenue: specifications 676 5-19-1948
Sherwood Street, Eichelberger
Street and DeGuy Avenue:
specifications
680 7-21-1948
Diller Road and Spruce Street:
specifications
681 8-25-1948
Diller Road: specifications 684 12-15-1948
Hamilton Street: specifications 685 3-16-1949
West Middle Street: specifications 689 3-16-1949
Maple Avenue: specifications 691 4-20-1949
East Walnut Street: widening 695 5-18-1949
East Middle Street: paving 698 7-20-1949
Fulton Street: paving 699 7-20-1949
North Stephen Place:
specifications
719 4-19-1950
Locust Street: paving 725 5-17-1950
Clearview Road: paving 732 8-4-1950
Pleasant Avenue: specifications 760 7-18-1951
East Walnut Street: specifications 761 7-18-1951
Stock Street: specifications
(Amends Ord. No. 95)
763 8-15-1951
Stock Street: specifications
(Amends Ord. No. 231)
764 8-15-1951
Stock Street: grade 765 8-15-1951
Stock Street: paving 766 8-15-1951
East Hanover Street: paving 780 4-16-1952
Diller Road: paving 786 6-4-1952
Elm Avenue: construction 791 11-19-1952
Third and High Streets:
construction plans approved
792 1-7-1953
Frederich Street: construction
plans approved
793 1-7-1953
Baltimore Street: construction
plans approved
794 1-7-1953
Carlisle Street: construction plans
approved
795 1-7-1953
§ A400-2 HANOVER CODE § A400-2
1:770
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
Carlisle Street: improvement
plans approved
807 7-15-1953
East Middle Street: paving 822 3-17-1954
Carlisle Street: specifications
(Amendment)
877 6-15-1955
Poplar Street: specifications;
paving and grading
878 6-28-1955
McKinley Avenue: paving 880 9-21-1955
West Middle Street: widening 894 4-18-1956
Sherwood Street: paving 895 4-18-1956
Diller Road: specifications 901 5-16-1956
North Stephen Place: paving 902 5-16-1956
Allegheny Avenue: paving 903 5-16-1956
East Walnut Street: paving 906 6-20-1956
Park Avenue: paving 907 6-20-1956
West Middle Street: paving 913 8-1-1956
Ridge Avenue: paving 914 8-15-1956
Young Circle: paving 941 11-20-1957
Broadway: width (Amendment) 942 11-20-1957
Pleasant Street: paving 943 11-20-1957
York Street: specifications
(Amends Ord. No. 223)
944 11-20-1957
Frederich Street: specifications
(Amends Ord. No. 228)
945 11-20-1957
Lee Street and Paul Street:
specifications
959 7-16-1958
Monroe Street and West Walnut
Street: specifications
962 8-5-1955
Sprenkle Street: specifications
(Amends Ord. No. 522)
963 8-5-1955
Monroe Street, etc.: paving 964 8-5-1955
Elm Avenue, Allegheny Avenue
and Oak Street: paving
969 8-27-1955
North Stephen Place:
specifications
971 9-17-1958
Potomac Avenue: specifications
(Amends Ord. No. 555)
972 9-17-1958
North Stephen Place and Potomac
Avenue: paving
973 9-17-1958
§ A400-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A400-2
1:771
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
McCosh Street: specifications 974 9-17-1958
Chestnut Street: specifications 975 12-17-1958
West Walnut Street: specifications
(Amends Ord. No. 962)
979 12-17-1958
Clearview Road, etc.: paving 1002 7-15-1959
Street location 1004 8-6-1959
East Walnut Street and Keagy
Avenue (Amendment)
1005 8-6-1959
Locust Street: grade
(Amendment)
1006 8-6-1959
East Walnut Street and Fleming
Avenue: paving
1007 8-6-1959
Fleming Avenue: specifications 1011 8-19-1959
Rudisill Avenue: paving (Amends
Ord. No. 1002)
1012 8-19-1959
Spring Avenue: grades and paving 1020 11-18-1959
Forney Avenue: paving 1022 12-16-1959
Hoffman Avenue: paving 1023 12-16-1959
Moul Avenue and Faine Avenue:
specifications
1028 2-17-1960
McAllister Street, etc.: paving 1041 6-1-1960
Paving unnamed alley 1046 7-20-1960
Charles Street: paving 1050 9-21-1960
Moul Avenue: paving 1051 9-21-1960
DeGuy Avenue, etc.: paving 1069 2-15-1961
Third Street, etc.: paving 1070 2-15-1961
Krug Avenue: paving 1071 2-15-1961
Hamilton Street: paving 1084 3-15-1961
Moul Avenue: water main
construction
1089 4-19-1961
Juniper Lane: paving 1099 8-2-1961
Moul Avenue: paving 1100 8-2-1961
Moul Avenue: paving 1103 8-16-1961
Moul Avenue: water main
construction
1104 8-16-1961
Oak Street: paving 1107 10-3-1961
DeGuy Avenue, etc.: paving 1108 10-3-1961
Paving unnamed alleys 1113 10-18-1961
§ A400-2 HANOVER CODE § A400-2
1:772
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
Jackson Avenue: paving 1117 11-15-1961
Keagy Avenue, etc.: paving 1125 1-10-1962
Grant Drive: water main
construction
1140 5-16-1962
Spruce Street, etc. paving 1147 7-18-1962
East Walnut Street: paving 1154 9-5-1962
Forney Avenue: paving 1157 10-3-1962
South Franklin Street: paving 1176 4-17-1963
Filbert Street: paving 1183 7-17-1963
Paving unnamed alleys 1185 8-7-1963
North Franklin Street, etc.: paving 1186 8-7-1963
Penn Street, etc.: paving 1191 9-4-1963
West Clearview Road: paving 1194 10-9-1963
Paving of four alleys 1205 11-20-1963
Krug Avenue, etc.: paving 1226 5-6-1964
Fifth Street: paving 1231 6-3-1964
Orchard Street: paving 1239 8-5-1964
Penn Street: paving 1240 8-5-1964
Fulton Street: paving 1241 8-5-1964
Paving of alley 1247 11-4-1964
Forney Avenue: specifications 1255 1-6-1965
Randolph Street: specifications 1273 6-16-1965
Randolph Street: paving 1274 6-16-1965
Factory Street, etc.: paving 1278 7-21-1965
Randolph Street: paving 1281 9-1-1965
Randolph Street: paving
(Amendment)
1282 9-1-1965
Paving of three alleys 1285 9-15-1965
George Street: paving 1304 4-20-1966
Princess Street: paving 1309 6-14-1966
Improvement of three alleys 1315 7-6-1966
Paving of alley 1321 8-17-1966
Fifth Street: specifications 1324 10-5-1966
Fifth Street: paving 1325 10-5-1966
Eichelberger Street: specifications
(Amends Ord. No. 680)
1326 10-5-1966
§ A400-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A400-2
1:773
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
Fame Avenue: extension and
specifications
1327 10-19-1966
Fame Avenue: paving 1328 10-19-1966
McCosh Street: Amendment) 1332 11-2-1966
Hartman Avenue: extension 1337 1-4-1967
Eichelberger Street: paving 1353 7-19-1967
Dart Drive and Eichelberger
Street: paving
1356 8-5-1967
Boundary Avenue: paving 1360 8-16-1967
Eichelberger Street: paving 1366 10-9-1967
Penn Street and Elm Avenue:
paving
1396 6-5-1968
Unnamed alleys: paving 1404 8-7-1968
High Street: paving 1407 10-2-1968
Unnamed alley: paving 1410 10-31-1968
Unnamed alley: paving 1413 11-20-1968
College Avenue: paving 1439 5-7-1969
Washington Avenue and Wilson
Avenue: paving
1445 6-18-1969
Philadelphia Street: paving 1447 7-16-1969
East Walnut Street: specifications 1448 7-16-1969
East Walnut Street: paving 1449 7-16-1969
Washington Avenue: paving 1451 8-6-1969
Dart Drive: paving 1454 8-20-1969
McCosh Street: paving 1482 8-5-1970
Two unnamed alleys: paving 1484 9-2-1970
East Walnut Street: paving 1508 5-19-1971
East Walnut Street: paving 1513 6-2-1971
East Walnut Street: paving 1516 7-21-1971
West Clearview Road: paving 1524 9-15-1971
Unnamed alley: paving 1526 9-15-1971
Unnamed alley: paving 1572 4-18-1973
Gail Avenue: paving 1581 5-2-1973
Railroad Street and Bank Lane:
paving
1583 5-2-1973
High Street: paving 1600 9-19-1973
East Walnut Street: paving 1617 5-15-1974
§ A400-2 HANOVER CODE § A400-2
1:774
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
Ridge Avenue: paving 1633 7-2-1975
Hamilton Street: paving 1634 7-16-1975
Hamilton Street: paving 1638 7-16-1975
Gay Street: paving 1636 7-16-1975
Eisenhower Drive: paving 1635 7-16-1975
West Hanover Street: paving 1657 4-21-1976
Unnamed alley: paving 1659 4-21-1976
Kindig Lane 1661 4-21-1976
Dart Drive 1662 4-21-1976
Hartman Avenue: paving 1697 12-6-1978
Ridge Avenue: paving 1729 8-5-1981
Carlisle Street and Baltimore
Street: improvements
1730 8-5-1981
Eichelberger Street: paving 1757 9-7-1983
Kilpatrick Avenue: improvements 1786 9-5-1984
Hartman Avenue: improvements 1787 9-5-1984
York Street: improvements
(amends Ord. No. 223)
1803 6-19-1985
Dart Drive: improvements 1807 9-18-1985
Second Avenue: improvements 1819 10-15-1986
Philadelphia Street:
improvements
1833 8-5-1987
Pine Street: grade (amends Ord.
No. 142)
1979 11-15-1995
§ A400-3. Vacating streets and alleys.
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
Unnamed alley 300 2-1-1918
Unnamed alley 329 12-26-1919
Unnamed alley 455 10-16-1930
Unnamed alley 532 8-18-1937
Portion of Hanover Street 627 10-20-1943
Dewey Avenue and unnamed alley 660 7-16-1947
Unused lane 675 5-19-1948
Szwoyer's Alley 698 6-15-1949
Portion of North Stephen Place 702 8-17-1949
Portion of Feltz's Lane 703 9-21-1949
§ A400-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A400-3
1:775
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
Portion of Elm Avenue 733 8-4-1950
Portion of Penn Street 734 8-4-1950
Portion of McKinley Avenue 735 8-4-1950
Portion of Diller Road 785 6-4-1952
Portion of Commerce Street and
unnamed alley
810 9-16-1953
Unnamed alley 908 6-20-1956
Unnamed alley 918 12-19-1956
Unnamed alley 965 8-20-1958
Unnamed alley 997 6-1-1959
Unnamed alley 998 6-17-1959
Unnamed alley 1008 8-19-1959
Unnamed alley 1009 8-19-1959
Portion of Rudisill Avenue 1010 8-19-1959
Unnamed alley 1015 10-21-1959
Unnamed alley 1016 10-21-1959
Unnamed alley 1018 11-18-1959
Coulson Alley 1019 11-18-1959
East Walnut Street 1037 3-16-1960
Unnamed alley 1048 8-17-1960
Willow Street, etc. 1060 11-16-1960
Unnamed alley 1101 8-2-1961
Unnamed alley 1105 9-20-1961
Unnamed alley 1106 9-20-1961
Unnamed alleys 1114 10-18-1961
Hollywood Avenue 1149 8-1-1962
Witmer Street 1150 8-1-1962
Unnamed alley 1151 8-1-1962
Sycamore Lane 1166 12-19-1962
Philadelphia Street, etc. 1175 3-20-1963
Unnamed street 1177 5-1-1963
Kendig Lane, etc. 1192 10-2-1963
Five alleys 1200 11-6-1963
Unnamed alley 1220 4-15-1964
North Stephens Place 1266 4-21-1965
Unnamed alley 1294 12-1-1965
§ A400-3 HANOVER CODE § A400-3
1:776
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
Unnamed alleys 1297 1-9-1966
Unnamed alley 1307 5-18-1966
Unnamed alley 1330 10-19-1966
Unnamed alleys 1351 7-5-1967
Unnamed alley 1383 2-21-1968
Unnamed alley 1391 6-5-1968
Elm Avenue and unnamed alley 1397 6-5-1968
Unnamed alley 1415 12-18-1968
Unnamed alley 1430 2-19-1969
Portion of Bellview Street 1433 4-16-1969
Unnamed alley 1434 4-16-1969
Unnamed alley 1531 11-17-1971
Portion of old Kendig Lane 1534 12-15-1971
Mount Vernon Avenue and
unnamed alley
1565 1-17-1973
Three unnamed alleys 1591 7-18-1973
Two unnamed alleys 1609 2-20-1974
Proposed unnamed street (Forney
Avenue on certain plan of lots)
1610 2-20-1974
Portion of Old Eichelberger Street 1640 8-7-1975
Unnamed alley 1664 4-21-1976
Krug Avenue 1666 8-4-1976
Unnamed alley 1671 9-15-1976
Unnamed alley 1680 2-16-1977
Portion of cul-de-sac at
intersection Gay Street and
O'Bold Avenue
1690 10-19-1977
Unnamed alley 1694 2-15-1978
Potomac Avenue 1713 1-16-1980
Hamilton Street 1763 11-2-1983
Unnamed alley 1771 2-15-1984
Doss Alley 1805 9-4-1985
Forney Avenue 1824 2-18-1987
Unnamed alley 1840 4-6-1988
Linden Avenue 1841 4-6-1988
Unnamed alley 1856 5-17-1989
Monroe Street 1863 12-6-1989
§ A400-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A400-3
1:777
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
Unnamed alley 1870 1-17-1990
Unnamed alley 1899 10-16-1991
Unnamed alley 1936 5-5-1993
Portion of Jeremy Drive 1966 7-20-1994
Unnamed alley 1988 8-21-1996
Highland Avenue 2003 7-16-1997
Portion of East Chestnut Street
and portion of Gail Street
2022 4-28-1999
Unnamed alley 2090 12-22-2004
Unnamed alley 2094 11-9-2005
Unnamed alley right-of-way 2126 11-14-2007
First alley north of and parallel
with Frederick Street
2166 11-10-2010
Portion of Wilson Avenue 2184 3-28-2012
Unnamed alley 2248 7-27-2016
Portion of East Walnut Street and
all or a portion of 4 alleys
2261 8-23-2017
§ A400-4. Sanitary sewer and storm sewer construction.
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
Purchase of sewer system 213 4-26-1912
Sewer construction 262 5-28-1915
Sewer system acquisition 269 12-17-1915
Amendment to Ord. No. 269 270 1-28-1916
Sewer assessments 272 3-3-1916
Sewer system extension
acquisition
275 3-16-1916
Sewer bonds 276 3-16-1916
West Walnut Street 279 4-14-1916
East Middle Street 280 5-5-1916
Sewer extension 282 6-2-1916
Sewer construction on various
streets
288 9-7-1917
West Middle Street and Second
Avenue
322 5-5-1919
Pine Street 323 5-5-1919
Eichelberger Street 327 6-14-1919
§ A400-3 HANOVER CODE § A400-4
1:778
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
North Street 369 10-16-1924
Agricultural Street 379 11-19-1925
Sewer loan 396 9-16-1926
East Hanover Street 401 5-19-1927
George Street and Highland
Avenue
405 8-18-1927
Sewer system extension 409 9-15-1927
Sewer plant 416 4-19-1928
Sewer system extension 419 5-17-1928
Sewer bonds sinking fund 420 7-24-1928
Ridge Avenue 428 3-21-1929
George Street 431 5-16-1929
Moul Avenue 432 5-16-1929
Third Street 446 2-21-1930
Forney Avenue, West Walnut
Street and Meade Avenue
456 11-20-1930
Allegheny Avenue, Eichelberger
Street and Potomac Avenue
458 1-15-1931
Elm Avenue and Carlisle Street 459 1-15-1931
West Walnut Street and Second
Avenue
460 3-19-1931
Sewage pump station and line 461 6-1-1931
Pleasant Street and Fulton Street 462 6-1-1931
Sewer station, Elm Avenue, High
Street, Maple Avenue, Commerce
Street and Linden Avenue: sewer
construction
463 7-3-1930
Terrace Avenue, East Hanover
Street, Pleasant Street and Spring
Avenue
467 8-3-1931
South Street and alley 473 1-27-1932
Beck Mill Road and South
Franklin Street
476 5-18-1932
Sewer station 477 5-18-1932
McKinley Avenue and Broadway 483 4-27-1933
Sewer station; lines 484 4-27-1933
Sewer loan (increase of
indebtedness)
486 10-4-1933
§ A400-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A400-4
1:779
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
East Walnut Street 487 11-27-1933
North Street, Charles Street and
George Street
485 12-13-1933
Sewer bonds issue 495 3-21-1934
Grant agreement with U.S.
Government
497 7-18-1934
Ratifying adoption of Ord. No. 497 498 8-7-1934
Terrace Avenue 507 1-6-1936
West Middle Street 510 4-15-1936
West Middle Street 515 10-28-1936
Fleming Avenue 517 12-16-1936
Forney Avenue and West Middle
Street
523 4-28-1937
Filbert Street and Princess Street 525 6-16-1937
Sewer station and line 528 7-21-1937
Broadway, Hollywood Avenue,
Hollywood Square and East
Walnut Street
529 7-21-1937
Pleasant Street and Factory Street 534 8-31-1937
Centennial Avenue 535 10-20-1937
Broadway 537 1-3-1938
Elm Avenue 538 1-19-1938
Fleming Avenue 546 7-20-1938
Fleming Avenue 547 7-20-1938
McKinley Avenue, Moul Avenue
and Ridge Avenue
552 3-15-1939
Poplar Street 558 5-16-1939
Poplar Street 559 9-1-1939
Forney Avenue and Hartman
Avenue
560 9-20-1939
Baltimore Street 561 10-18-1939
Maple Avenue 569 4-17-1940
Potomac Avenue 570 4-17-1940
Baltimore Street: release of sewer
line
571 6-19-1940
Forney Avenue 572 6-19-1940
Forney Avenue and unnamed
alley: surface drain construction
573 6-19-1940
§ A400-4 HANOVER CODE § A400-4
1:780
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
Surface drain construction on
unnamed alley
574 6-19-1940
Unnamed alley 576 11-20-1940
Penn Street 578 1-27-1941
George Street 582 3-19-1941
Pine Street 585 4-16-1941
Allegheny Avenue and Stephen
Place
587 4-16-1941
South Franklin Street 588 5-21-1941
Second Avenue 592 8-20-1941
Sewer line and pump construction
agreement
594 10-14-1941
Maple Avenue 595 10-15-1941
Fleming Avenue 597 11-19-1941
Cherry Street and Young Circle 599 12-17-1941
Spruce Street 603 2-18-1942
Construction of culvert and
surface drains
609 7-8-1942
Construction of culvert 610 7-8-1942
Forney Avenue: storm drain
construction
611 7-7-1942
Meade Avenue: surface drain
construction
612 7-7-1942
Hollywood Square and East
Walnut Street
614 7-22-1942
Poplar Street 615 7-22-1942
Baer Avenue 621 4-21-1943
Summit Avenue 638 9-19-1945
Ridge Avenue 645 5-15-1946
East Walnut Street 647 8-21-1946
Monroe Street 648 8-28-1946
West Hanover Street 653 12-18-1946
Moul Avenue 657 4-16-1947
Allegheny Avenue and Oak Street 661 8-20-1947
Jackson Avenue 665 11-19-1947
Filbert Street 666 11-19-1947
East Hanover Street 667 1-21-1948
§ A400-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A400-4
1:781
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
Elm Avenue, Carlisle Sheet and
unnamed alleys
671 3-17-1948
Fifth Street and Krug Avenue 677 5-19-1948
Diller Road and Spruce Street 682 8-25-1948
Allegheny Avenue 683 11-24-1948
Unnamed alley 692 4-20-1949
Clearview Road 693 4-20-1949
Diller Road 694 4-20-1949
South Street 697 6-15-1949
Elm Avenue 704 9-21-1949
Elm Avenue 705 9-21-1949
Allegheny Avenue 706 9-21-1949
Penn Street and Elm Avenue 714 3-15-1950
North Stephen Place 720 4-19-1950
Meade and Second Avenues 728 6-1-1950
Westminster Avenue, Boundary
Avenue and Beck Mill Road
729 6-1-1950
Diller Road 737 8-30-1950
Highland Avenue 738 10-18-1950
Clearview Road 757 4-11-1951
Pleasant Street 788 6-15-1952
Carlisle Street 511 9-16-1953
Fleming Avenue 832 7-21-1954
Fleming Avenue 865 2-16-1955
Charles Street, etc. 866 2-16-1955
Rudisill Avenue, Eichelberger
Street and Sherwood Street
871 3-16-1955
Stephen Place 881 9-21-1955
Elm Avenue: storm and sewer
construction
929 5-15-1957
Plaza Park Development 956 5-21-1958
Plaza Park Development 958 6-19-1958
Clearview Road 970 9-4-1958
Moul Avenue, etc. 1042 6-1-1960
Moulstown Road 1043 6-15-1960
Charles Street 1053 9-21-1960
Penn Street 1088 4-5-1961
§ A400-4 HANOVER CODE § A400-4
1:782
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
Grant Drive, etc. 1094 7-12-1961
West Hanover Street 1097 7-19-1961
Juniper Lane 1102 8-2-1961
Factory Street: storm sewer 1115 10-18-1961
Construction at various locations 1126 1-24-1962
Washington Avenue 1137 5-2-1962
Third street 1148 7-18-1962
Poplar Street 1188 8-21-1963
East Middle Street, etc. 1227 5-6-1964
Grant Drive and East Walnut
Street
1260 3-3-1965
DeGuy Avenue 1265 4-21-1965
George Street 1269 5-5-1965
Carlisle Street: sewer ejector
system
1270 5-5-1965
Carlisle Street 1276 7-7-1965
Randolph Street 1279 8-18-1965
Kuhn Drive 1287 10-6-1985
Unnamed alley 1305 4-20-1966
Hartman Avenue 1338 1-4-1967
McCosh Street 1354 8-2-1967
Eichelberger Street: storm sewer 1363 9-20-1967
Eichelberger Street 1384 9-20-1967
Eichelberger Street 1367 10-18-1967
Unnamed alleys and Eichelberger
Street: storm sewers
1368 10-18-1967
East Philadelphia Street and lands
of Cam Industries
1393 6-5-1968
Dart Drive, extension 1405 9-18-1968
Diller Road 1418 12-18-1968
Maple Avenue and unnamed alley:
stormwater system
1473 4-15-1970
East Walnut Street 1474 4-15-1970
McCosh Street 1480 8-5-1970
Washington Avenue 1481 8-5-1970
East Walnut Street 1509 5-19-1971
Lands of Hanover Park Associates 1533 11-17-1971
§ A400-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A400-4
1:783
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
Moul and McKinley Avenues to
Ridge Avenue
1560 12-20-1972
Eisenhower Drive 1612 4-3-1974
Kindig Lane 1628 5-7-1975
Eisenhower Drive 1637 7-16-1975
Hanover street 1647 11-5-1975
Maple Avenue and Krug Avenue:
storm sewer system
1663 4-21-1976
Hartman Avenue 1776 4-4-1984
§ A400-5. Land acquisition and sale.
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
Sewage pump station and line 461 6-1-1931
Sewer station -- Elm Avenue, High
Street, Maple Avenue, Commerce
Street and Linden Avenue: sewer
construction
463 7-3-1930
Sewer station 477 5-18-1932
Sewer station; lines 484 4-27-1933
Sewer station and line 528 7-21-1937
West Middle Street 689 3-16-1949
East Walnut Street 695 5-18-1949
Boundary, Meade and Second
Avenues: sewer construction;
acquisition of right-of-way
728 6-1-1950
Armory land 740 10-27-1950
Armory land (Amendment) 744 1-17-1951
Land acquisition authorized 783 5-8-1952
Acceptance of deed authorized 883 10-11-1955
West Middle Street 894 4-18-1956
Landfill 904 5-16-1956
Acceptance of deed authorized 925 4-3-1957
Acceptance of deed authorized 1035 2-24-1960
Acceptance of deed authorized 1045 7-6-1960
Acceptance of deed authorized 1143 6-20-1962
Acceptance of deed authorized 1249 11-4-1964
Sale of tract authorized 1258 2-17-1965
§ A400-4 HANOVER CODE § A400-5
1:784
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
Acceptance of deed authorized 1259 2-17-1965
Transfer of tract authorized 1263 4-7-1965
Acceptance of deed authorized 1264 4-7-1965
Purchase of three tracts;
acceptance of deed authorized
1296 1-19-1966
Acceptance of deed authorized 1301 3-2-1966
Acceptance of deed authorized 1306 5-18-1966
Acceptance of deed authorized 1322 9-7-1966
Acceptance of deed authorized 1343 2-1-1967
Acceptance of deed authorized 1349 6-7-1967
Sale of tract authorized 1362 9-20-1967
Acceptance of deeds authorized 1372 11-15-1967
Acceptance of deed authorized 1380 1-17-1968
Sale of tract authorized 1388 5-1-1968
Sale of tract authorized 1392 6-5-1988
Acceptance of deeds authorized 1394 6-5-1988
Sale of tract authorized 1440 5-21-1969
Acceptance of deed authorized 1504 3-22-1971
Acceptance of deed authorized 1515 6-21-1971
Acceptance of deeds authorized 1517 8-31-1971
Sale of two tracts authorized 1519 9-15-1971
Acceptance of deeds authorized 1527 10-6-1971
Acquisition of real estate on East
Chestnut Street
1532 11-17-1971
Authorization to purchase 42-44
Frederick Street
1596 8-1-1973
Repeal of Ord. No. 1596 1602 12-5-1973
Authorization to purchase 42-44
Frederick Street
1603 12-5-1973
Authorization to purchase tract;
acceptance of deed
1621 11-6-1974
Sale of tract situate on the west
corner of Center Square and
Carlisle Street
1626 12-18-1974
Sale of Carlisle Street parking lot,
Frederick Street parking lot and
East Chestnut Street parking lot
1649 12-17-1975
§ A400-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A400-5
1:785
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
Acquisition by eminent domain of
property at 100-102 Broadway
1681 6-1-1977
Authorization to purchase 200
through 202, 204 and 206 East
Chestnut Street
1756 7-6-1983
Sale of Lot No. 2 of the Commons 1758 9-21-1983
Acquisition of real estate on
Second Street
1761 11-2-1983
Acquisition of real estate in
Conewago Township
1762 11-2-1983
Acquisition of easements on
Frederick Street
1764 11-16-1983
Authorization to purchase railway 1766 12-21-1983
Authorization to purchase Tax
Parcel No. 292
1839 3-16-1988
Authorization to purchase real
estate in Conewago Township
1855 4-5-1989
Authorization to purchase 12
through 14 York Street
1874 4-18-1990
Sale of Lot Nos. 24, 25 and 26 of
the Commons
1876 8-1-1990
Authorization to purchase Tax
Parcel No. 146, Map No. 6
1900 11-6-1991
Sale of a certain tract of land
known as Youngs Woods to the
Township of Penn
1991 10-16-1996
Acquisition by eminent domain of
certain property on Maul Avenue
and Filbert Street
2118 12-29-2006
§ A400-6. Annexations.
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
Heidelberg Township, portion of 7-27-1870
Heidelberg Township, portion of 3-15-1877
Midway District 352 2-15-1923
Clear View District 353 2-15-1923
New Baltimore District
[Superseded 7-16-1925 by Ord.
No. 376]
354 3-16-1923
New Baltimore District 376 7-16-1925
§ A400-5 HANOVER CODE § A400-6
1:786
Name Ord. No. Adoption Date
Part of "Forney Addition" 553 3-15-1939
Section of Penn Township 953 3-31-1958
Part of Penn Township 1062 11-23-1960
Part of Penn Township 1064 12-21-1960
Part of Penn Township 1065 12-28-1960
Part of Conewago Township 1243 8-8-1964
Chapter A401
FEES
§ A400-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A400-6
1:787

ARTICLE I
Miscellaneous Fees
[Adopted 1-20-1993 by Res. No. 607]
§ A401-1. (Reserved)155
§ A401-2. Zoning fees. [Added 2-26-2003 by Res. No. 806]
Application for a permit shall be accompanied by a permit fee as established
by the Hanover Borough Council from time to time. Fees for variance/
special exception requests, Zoning Books and Zoning Maps are as
follows.156
§ A401-3. Solid waste fees. [Added 12-22-2003 by Res. No. 817;
amended 12-28-2011 by Res. No. 985; 11-26-2013 by Res. No. 1061;
1-25-2017 by Res. No. 1180; 12-19-2018 by Res. No. 1238]
As of January 1, 2019, the rates for collection of municipal waste and
recyclables, the tipping fees at the Borough transfer station and the fees for
special pickups shall be as follows:
A. Residential refuse rates for one- and two-family dwelling units shall be
$70.50 per quarter per dwelling unit for a maximum pickup of three
thirty-gallon containers per unit per pickup. Any additional refuse to be
collected which exceeds the maximum set forth above at either rate
may be disposed of by obtaining disposable tags for a unit cost of $4 per
tag, which includes the total cost of tag and disposal of refuse; tagged
containers shall be placed at the normal point of pickup and may be
used in such quantities and at such times as are convenient to the
customer; only tags obtained from the Borough of Hanover may be used
for refuse in excess of the maximum set forth at either of the base rates
above.
B. Residential refuse rates for dwellings of three or more units shall be
$73.50 per quarter per dwelling unit for a maximum of three thirtygallon
containers per unit per pickup. Additional refuse to be collected
which exceeds these maximums shall be handled through use of the
same tag system and cost as set forth in Subsection A above.
C. Commercial refuse container rates for one pickup per week shall be at
the quarterly rates listed below:
155. Editor's Note: Former § A401-1, Fire box services and alley vacations, was superseded
12-23-2015 by Res. No. 1121. See Art. II, Fee Schedule.
156. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, providing the fee for variance/special exception
requests, which immediately followed this paragraph, was superseded 1-25-2017 by Ord.
No. 1178. Former Subsections B through F, providing the fees for a home occupation
request, rezoning petition request, certificate of occupancy, purchase of a Zoning book
and purchase of a Zoning Map, respectively, which immediately followed former
Subsection A, were superseded 12-23-2015 by Res. No. 1121. See Art. II, Fee Schedule.
§ A401-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-3
1:789
§ A401-4. Sign permit and licensing fees. [Added 10-12-2011 by
Res. No. 971]
Each person, firm, corporation or association erecting a sign which is
subject to the terms of the Hanover Borough Sign Ordinance of 1975 (as
amended) (hereinafter the "Ordinance")158 and not exempt from the permit
Number of Cubic Yards
2 2.75 3 3.5 4 6 8
Rate $311.22 $397.28 $446.42 $516.88 $577.46 $811.85 $1,015.56
D. Rates for additional weekly pickups of commercial containers shall be
at the quarterly rates as set forth on the sheets attached.157
E. Commercial minimum three cans per week refuse service rates shall be
at the quarterly refuse rates listed below:
Number of Pickups per Week
1 2 3 4 5
Rate $73.50 $110.25 $147 $183.75 $220.50
F. The charges for the weekly collection of additional thirty-gallon cans
shall be at the quarterly rates as set forth on the sheets attached.
G. Refuse compactor pull fee rates per pickup are as follows:
(1) Borough-owned: $250 plus charge for disposal weight.
(2) Self-owned: $105 plus charge for disposal weight.
H. The disposal rates for the Hanover Borough Transfer Station are set as
follows:
(1) Minimum disposal cost of any load 500 pounds or less is $30 per
load. For loads exceeding 500 pounds the rate shall be the York
County Solid Waste disposal fee plus the Borough of Hanover
operation fee of $19. For commercial waste haulers, the rate per
load shall be the York County Solid Waste disposal fee, plus the
Borough of Hanover operation fee of $16.
I. The fee for special on-site pickup service will be the minimal disposal
fee of $30 for items 500 pounds or less plus the rate for one hour special
labor as set by Hanover Borough Council from time to time by
resolution. For all special on-site pickup service over 500 pounds the
rate shall be set at the said special labor rate per hour, plus the cost to
dispose of materials collected.
157. Editor's Note: Said rates are included at the end of this chapter.
158. Editor's Note: See Ch. 298, Signs; Street Encroachments.
§ A401-3 HANOVER CODE § A401-4
1:790
and licensing requirements thereof or the fees required thereby shall pay
the following fees:
§ A401-5. Sewer rentals and charges within Borough. [Added
12-28-2011 by Res. No. 986; amended 11-28-2017 by Res. No. 1194;
12-19-2018 by Res. No. 1236]
As of January 1, 2019, the sewer rentals and charges for the collection
and treatment of sewage discharged or to be discharged into the sanitary
sewers and sewer system for all users located within the boundaries of the
Borough shall be at the rates set forth below:
A. Permit fee. Every applicant for a sign permit shall pay to the Borough a
permit fee of $30 at the time such permit is granted for each sign for
which a permit is obtained.
B. Annual license fee. All signs now existing or permitted and/or erected
subsequent hereto shall be subject to inspection annually as set forth in
the Ordinance. Each person, firm, corporation or association owning or
using a sign subject to the terms of the Ordinance and not exempt from
the permit or licensing requirements thereof shall pay an annual
licensing/inspection fee of $5 for each sign, which fee shall apply to the
calendar year or portion thereof during which such sign is erected or in
place.
C. Both the permit and licensing fees required hereby shall be paid at the
offices of the Hanover Borough at such time and in such names as
prescribed by the Secretary of the Borough.
A. For collection and treatment of sanitary sewage discharged into the
sewer system shall be a quarterly charge, payable upon receipt of the
bill therefore, and based upon the water used by the property in
accordance with the following rate schedule:
(1) First 7,000 gallons or less per quarter (minimum): $59.40.
(2) Next 18,000 gallons per quarter (charge per thousand gallons):
$7.43.
(3) Next 25,000 gallons per quarter (charge per thousand gallons):
$7.32.
B. The Borough of Hanover, York County, Pennsylvania, hereby establishes
the following rate for quarterly use of garbage grinding units that
dispose into the sanitary system:
(1) Charge per unit per quarter: $3.30.
§ A401-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-6
1:791
§ A401-6. Sewer rentals and charges outside of Borough. [Added
12-28-2011 by Res. No. 987; amended 11-28-2017 by Res. No. 1195;
12-19-2018 by Res. No. 1237]
As of January 1, 2019, the sewer rentals and charges for the collection
and treatment of sewage discharged or to be discharged into the sanitary
sewers and sewer system for all users located outside the boundaries of the
Borough in Penn Township shall be at the rates set forth below:
§ A401-7. Engineering review and inspection fees. [Added
8-26-2015 by Ord. No. 2233]
A. For collection and treatment of sanitary sewage discharged into the
sewer system shall be a quarterly charge, payable upon receipt of the
bill therefore, and based upon the water used by the property in
accordance with the following rate schedule:
(1) First 7,000 gallons or less per quarter (minimum): $40.98.
(2) All water over 7,000 gallons per quarter (charge per thousand
gallons): $3.85.
A. Purpose. For the purpose of recovering costs, the Borough of Hanover
shall impose a fee for the review of plans, drawings, structures,
construction work and other such information, material, and
improvements to real property as the Borough of Hanover, under the
terms of the Code of the Borough of Hanover, may require for the
issuance or approval of various permits, licenses and agreements, by
engineers, inspectors, or persons of similar qualifications and
performing similar duties.
B. Fees imposed.
(1) The following fee schedule is hereby imposed by the Borough of
Hanover and shall apply to the review of plans, drawings,
structures, construction work and other similar information,
material and improvements to real property by the listed officials/
persons:
(a) Review by the Borough Engineer shall be billed at a rate of $80
per hour, or fraction thereof.
(b) Review by staff member of Borough Engineering Department
shall be billed at a rate of $65 per hour, or fraction thereof.
(c) Review by the appropriate Borough Inspector, unless
otherwise exempted or associated with a separate permit or
license fee as established in the Code of the Borough of
Hanover, shall be billed at a rate of $45 per hour, or fraction
thereof.
(d) Review by an independent firm, corporation, or otherwise
contracted individual or individuals possessing similar
§ A401-6 HANOVER CODE § A401-7
1:792
§ A401-8. Subdivision and land development fees. [Added 8-26-2015
by Res. No. 1104]
§ A401-9. Community Room rental fee. [Added 8-26-2015 by Res.
No. 1106]
The following fee shall be charged to any individual, organization,
corporation, or other user for the use of meeting space or a "community
qualifications and performing similar duties of the Borough
Engineer, Engineering Department, and/or Inspector shall be
billed to the party at the same rate and amount as invoiced to
the Borough by said firm, corporation, or otherwise contracted
individual.
(2) The Borough Council shall hereby have the authority to adjust the
herein established fee schedule from time to time by resolution.
C. Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to the general
review of plans, drawings, structures, construction work and other
similar information, material, and improvements to real property as
required by the Borough that are not otherwise exempt by the Code of
the Borough of Hanover or otherwise separately covered by a license or
permit approval process and fee as explicitly stated in the Code of the
Borough of Hanover.
A. The fee for subdivision plan review (excluding sketch plans) shall be
$400 per plan plus an additional $50 per lot/dwelling unit, provided that
said fee shall not exceed $2,600 in total.
B. In the event that a preliminary subdivision plan is required, the
following reduced fee shall be charged for the review of a final
subdivision plan, provided that a copy of the approved preliminary plan
is presented with the final plan: $400 per plan, plus an additional $30
per lot/dwelling, provided that said fee shall not exceed $2,600 in total.
C. The fee for residential land development plan review shall be $400 per
plan plus an additional $50 per dwelling unit, provided that said fee
shall not exceed $2,600 in total.
D. (Reserved)159
E. The fee for the review of plans proposing an accessory building on a lot
with an existing principal building, which does not involve a new access
onto the street, shall be $400 per plan regardless of square footage.
F. (Reserved)160
159. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, concerning fees for review of other land development
plans, was superseded 12-23-2015 by Res. No. 1121. See Art. II, Fee Schedule.
160. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, providing the fee for a copy of the Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance, was superseded 12-23-2015 by Res. No. 1121. See Art. II,
Fee Schedule.
§ A401-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-9
1:793
room" at the Hanover Borough Municipal Building, provided that no such
fee shall be charged to nonprofit organizations which provide the Borough
with such necessary paperwork and documentation as the Borough deems
appropriate to verify said nonprofit status. Said fee shall be adjusted from
time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.
§ A401-10. Equipment rental fees. [Added 8-26-2015 by Res. No.
1107; amended 12-23-2015 by Res. No. 1122; 12-28-2016 by Res.
No. 1177; 12-27-2017 by Res. No. 1202; 12-19-2018 by Res. No.
1235; 12-23-2019 by Res. No. 1278]
The following hourly rates shall be charged for the rental of Boroughowned
equipment for services performed by the Borough of Hanover, with
a minimum four-hour rental period, with the exception of Special Refuse
Pickups, effective upon enactment of this resolution.
Equipment Rentals - (Nonoperated)
Equipment Hourly Rate
125 CFM compressor $35
Concrete saw - walk behind $45
Chain saw $15
Whacker $15
Vibratory plate compactor $20
Backhoe/Hoe-Pac $65
Front-end loader tractor $60
Loader (rubber-tired) $75
Dump truck (26,000 pounds) $80
Dump truck (16,500 pounds) $40
Utility truck $25
Flatbed truck $35
Street sweeper $40
Roller (3 to 5 ton) $25
Portable sewer rodder $12
Tank truck $35
Brush chipper
Residential $40
Commercial $85
Farm tractor w/mower $65
3-inch pump $20
A. Community Room fee: per meeting/event (not to exceed eight hours):
$40.
§ A401-9 HANOVER CODE § A401-10
1:794
Equipment Rentals - (Nonoperated)
Equipment Hourly Rate
4-inch pump $20
10-inch pump $30
Pickup truck $15
Van $15
Sewer jet $25
Jet vacuum $75
Welding truck $30
Boring machine $40
Small tapping machine $40
Large tapping machine $60
Paver $35
Jackhammer $20
Bomag roller $30
Front-end refuse truck $45
Rear-end refuse truck $45
Roll-off truck $25
Mini-cam $54
TV truck $100
Push mower $15
Power drill $15
Demo saw $30
Vac trailer 62.50
§ A401-11. Tapping fees imposed.
The tapping fees imposed upon the owner of each residential, industrial,
or commercial property making any connection to the sewer system in the
Borough of Hanover as described in Ordinance No. 2222161 shall be as
follows:
A. Capacity part of tapping fee: $1,382 per equivalent dwelling unit (for
calculation see Exhibit 1 attached).162
B. Collection part of tapping fee: $1,268 per equivalent dwelling unit (for
calculation see Exhibit 2 attached).163
161. Editor's Note: See Ch. 286, Sewers and Sewage Disposal, Art. V, Sewer Connection Permit;
Tapping Fee.
162. Editor's Note: Exhibit 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
163. Editor's Note: Exhibit 2 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ A401-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-12
1:795
§ A401-12. Stormwater management fees. [Added 9-23-2015 by Res.
No. 1110]
Fees for the review of stormwater management permit applications and
site plans, and inspection of approved physical improvements, whether
at the time of construction or if necessary during the active life of the
improvements, shall be charged as follows:
§ A401-13. Attorney fees. [Added 7-26-2017 by Ord. No. 2257]
§ A401-14. through § A401-15. (Reserved)
A. Stormwater management permit application fee: $25.
B. Staff/engineer review of stormwater management site plan and
inspection of approved physical improvements:
(1) Borough Engineer: $85 per hour.
(2) Borough Inspector: $50 per hour.
(3) Independent review/inspection firm/engineer: as invoiced.
A. The following schedule of attorney fees is established by Council for
legal fees incurred by the Borough in the collection of municipal claims
and liens, which fees are to be paid by the defendants in said legal
actions:
Type Fee
For the filing of a municipal lien $450
For actions taken to obtain
judgment on municipal liens;
execute on the real estate subject
to said lien; and pursue and
complete a sheriff or judicial sale
of the real estate
Hourly rate of $220 for all hours
expended
B. Council shall review the above fee schedule and amend the amount of
said fees from time to time by resolution.
§ A401-12 HANOVER CODE § A401-14
1:796
ARTICLE II
Fee Schedule
[Adopted 12-23-2015 by Res. No. 1121; amended in its entirety
12-23-2019 by Res. No. 1277]
§ A401-16. Fees established.
The following fee schedule for such permits, licenses, services, etc., is
hereby established:
Fire Department
Burning permit fee $30
Novelty fireworks sales permit $50
Police Department
Copy of accident report $15
Fingerprinting fee (Borough residents
exempt)
$15
Dog pound fee $20 per incident; $5 per day/
partial day, after first 24 hours
Parking Violations
Overtime to 1 hour $5
Overtime after 48 hours $15
Parking outside designated spaces $15
No-parking zone $15
Fire hydrant, 15 feet $15
Crosswalk, 20 feet $15
Parking Meters
30 minutes $0.10
Parking Permits
Parking space convenience pass, per
month
$25
Peddler's/Solicitation License
First vehicle $50
Each additional vehicle $25
Per person $10
Sign Permits
New sign $50
§ A401-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-16
1:797
Building Permits
Minimum charge for first $5,000 $50
Charge per each $1,000 or fraction
thereof over $5,000
$1
Demolition Permits
Minimum fee $50
Per 100 square feet for the first 1,000
square feet
$1
Per 100 square feet for each square
foot in excess of 1,000
$2
Street Opening Permits
0 to 1 years since street was repaved,
fee per 100 linear feet
$100
1 to 2 years since street was repaved,
fee per 100 linear feet
$100
2 to 3 years since street was repaved,
fee per 100 linear feet
$100
3 to 4 years since street was repaved,
fee per 100 linear feet
$100
4 to 5 years since street was repaved,
fee per 100 linear feet
$100
All other streets or emergencies, fee per
100 linear feet
$55
Inspection fee $55
Road Reconstruction
Road reconstruction for curbing work,
per linear foot
$10
Alleys
Fee for alley vacation requests and
hearing
$250
Sidewalk/Curb/Gutter Permit Fees
First 100 linear feet $50
Each additional 100 lineal feet $15
Plumbing License Fees
Master plumber license exam $100
Master plumber license annual fee $25
Journeyman plumber license exam $50
§ A401-16 HANOVER CODE § A401-16
1:798
Journeyman plumber license annual fee $10
Temporary master plumber license $25
Temporary journeyman plumber license $10
Plumbing Permits
Drawings or plans requiring at least two
or more inspections:
Per each inspection for 1 to 7
fixtures' installation
$50
Per fixture for each additional
fixture in excess of 7
$5
Sewer Tapping Fee
Capacity part of tapping fee $1,382
Collection part of tapping fee $1,268
Total $2,650
Stormwater Management Fees
Stormwater management permit
application fee
$25
Staff/engineer review of stormwater
management site plan and inspection of
approved physical improvements
Borough Engineer, per hour $85
Borough Inspector, per hour $50
Independent review/inspection
firm/engineer
As invoiced
Engineering Review/Inspection Fees
Borough Engineer, per hour $85
Borough Engineering Department staff,
per hour
$65
Borough Inspector, per hour $50
Outside firm, engineer, inspector, etc. As invoiced
Outdoor Seating Permit
Initial permit period for 1 year $100
Annual renewal fee $50
Miscellaneous
Per capita tax $5
Awnings (over public right-of-way) $10
§ A401-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-16
1:799
Removal of yard sale/political signs, per
sign
$5
Returned check fee $30
Municipal lien (Ord. No. 2267) attorney
filing fee (payable by defendant)
$450
Legal fee hourly rate (Ord. No. 2267) $220
Water meter testing fee (in Borough),
deposit returned/if results inaccurate
$100
Water meter testing fee (out of
Borough), deposit returned/if results
inaccurate
$10
Chicken permit fee $25
Yard Sale
Permit fee (2 days max, no Sunday, 2
per year)
$5
Special Event Permits
(Cost recovery fee as estimated which may include but is not limited to
the following fees:
Special event permit application fee $30
Temporary alley/street closure
application fee
$15
Barricade fee $30
Quadrant closure fee (charge up to 2
quadrants per event)
$75
Electricity access fee (Center Square,
Wirt Park and Moul Avenue Park)
$50
Bathroom deposit (refundable upon
successful inspection)
$50
Market House Rental Rates
Annual stall rental rate $350
Semiannual stall rental rate $280
Quarterly stall rental rate $250
Weekly stall rental rate $35
Restaurant stall rental rate with eating
space
$1,060
General Copies
Right-to-know requests/information,
per side
$0.25
Other general copies, per side $0.35
§ A401-16 HANOVER CODE § A401-16
1:800
Certified documents $5
Transfer Station
Fee for disposal of Freon in item $30
Private loads YCSWA disposal fee plus $19
(minimum fee of $30)
Commercial loads YCSWA disposal fee plus $16
(minimum fee of $30)
Special Pickups of Municipal Waste
(prepayment required, cost estimated by
Borough Department of Public Works)
Minimum fee $30
Fee for disposal of Freon in item $50
Bulk Water Rate at Wastewater Treatment Plant
Charge per thousand gallons $5.50
Zoning
Application for rezoning petition $500
Application for variance/special
exception
$400 plus additional costs
Home occupation certificate $50
Certificate of occupancy $10
Change of use certificate $15
Purchase of Zoning book $10
Purchase of Zoning Map $10
Purchase CD or flash drive copy of
Zoning book and Map
$15
Vacant Property Registration Fees
Vacant property registration $100
Inspection fee $150
Closing/Going-Out-of-Business Sale License*
For 30 days $50
For each 30-day extension $100
* As a condition of issuance of this license, the applicant shall provide
a bond with corporate surety in the amount equal to 5% of the first
$100,000 of the retail value of all goods, wares, and merchandise to be
sold, plus 2% of the next $400,000, plus 1% of the balance. In lieu of
corporate surety, applicant may post cash or certified check payable to
The Borough of Hanover to be held for license period.
§ A401-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-16
1:801
Special Labor Rate
Special labor rate, per hour $45.26
Special labor overtime rate, per hour $61.19
Special police overtime rate, per hour $88.83
Subdivision and Land Development
Maximum fee $3,000
Subdivision plan review: $550 per plan, plus $50 per lot/dwelling unit
Final subdivision plan review: $550 per plan, plus $30 per lot/dwelling
unit, not to exceed $3,000
Residential land development plan: $550 per plan, plus $50 per lot/
dwelling unit, not to exceed $3,000
Other land development plans: base fee of $550 plus:
Building Footprint
(square feet) Fee
Up to 2,000 Base fee only
2,001 to 5,000 $600
5,001 to 10,000 $1,000
10,001 to 50,000 $1,250
50,001 to 100,000 $1,500
100,001 to 200,000 $1,750
200,001 to 500,000 $2,000
500,001 and over $2,250
Review of plan for accessory building $500
Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance copy
$10
Community Room Rental Fees
Guthrie Memorial Library For Profit Nonprofit
John D. Bare Center $75/hour $35/hour
Roof $75/hour $35/hour
Program Room $75/hour $35/hour
Board Room $25/hour Free (1 per
quarter)*
Corner Room $25/hour Free (1 per
quarter)*
*Each additional meeting requires payment of fee
of $25 per meeting
§ A401-16 HANOVER CODE § A401-16
1:802
Additional Fees
Security deposit $100
Use of kitchen facilities $35
Events held outside of
normal library hours,
additional fee per hour
$80
Weddings and receptions
Security deposit $500
Up to 6 hours $5,000
Additional hours $100 per hour
Borough Municipal Building
Community room $40
Recreation - Field Rental Fees
Good Field Upper Field, monthly $125
Moul Field Upper Field, monthly $125
Moul Field Stawski Lighted Field,
mens' softball season
$375
Moul Field Stawski Lighted Field, perhour
rate
$20
Tournament fees $75
Tournament game fees, per game $20
Moul Field-Stawski Field $50 ($75 per 2-hour session)
Tennis and pickle ball courts, per
court, per hour
$15
§ A401-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A401-16
1:803
Chapter A402
FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS
§ A401-16 HANOVER CODE § A401-16
1:804
ARTICLE I
Hanover Light, Heat and Power Company164
[Adopted 4-8-1893 by Ord. No. 40]
§ A402-1. Grant of authority.
Permission be granted to the Hanover Light, Heat and Power Company to
erect and put up in the streets and alleys of the Borough of Hanover its,
the said company's, necessary poles and wires for the furnishing of light by
electricity, subject to the following restrictions:
§ A402-2. Pole and wire specifications.
The poles of the said company shall be straight and well planted, as nearly
perpendicular as may be, on the outside of and close to the curbline, all the
wires to be maintained at a height of not less than 18 feet above the grade
of the street or alley in which they may be placed.
§ A402-3. Placement of poles.
In putting up its poles, the said company shall plant them only at such
places as the Street Committee of the Council of said Borough shall
designate or approve.
§ A402-4. Obstructions.
Said company shall not erect or plant in any street or alley of said Borough
any pole or construction of any kind, for the purpose aforesaid, in front of
any show window, cellar door or coal chute, nor in any manner that may
obstruct or in any way hinder the convenient use of any building or lot or of
any street or alley of the said Borough.
§ A402-5. Repair and restoration of streets.
When it may become necessary for said company to dig up any part of any
street or alley in said Borough for the planting of any pole, the said company
shall immediately repair that part of said street or alley thus dug up, and
put it in such condition as will satisfy the Street Committee of said Borough.
§ A402-6. Pole removal; violations and penalties.
When in the judgment of the Mayor and Borough Council of said Borough
it shall appear that any pole or poles erected by said company in any of
the streets or alleys of the said Borough have become defective or stand
in the way of any necessary improvement, the said Mayor and Borough
Council shall have the right at any and all times, by resolution or ordinance,
to require the removal or replacement thereof, and if, after having been
notified by the said Mayor and Borough Council to remove or replace any
164. Editor's Note: The Hanover Light, Heat and Power Company is now vested in Metropolitan
Edison Company.
§ A402-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A402-6
1:805
such pole or poles, the said company shall refuse or neglect to do so for
a longer period than 10 days, it, the said company, shall be subject to a
penalty of not less than $5 nor more than $20, to be recovered as similar
penalties are now by law recoverable.
§ A402-7. Construction deadline. [Amended 9-4-1893 by Ord. No.
49]
If the said company shall not have introduced the electric light into at least
five of the principal streets of the said Borough on or before the first day of
November 1893 in such manner that said streets may be properly lighted
thereby, then all the rights and privileges granted by this ordinance shall
cease and be at an end.
§ A402-8. Failure to furnish lights.
If the said company, after having introduced the electric light into the said
Borough as provided in the preceding section, shall fail to furnish such light
for the period of 60 consecutive days in such manner that at least five of the
principal streets of the said Borough may be properly lighted thereby, then
all the rights and privileges granted by this ordinance shall cease and be at
an end.
§ A402-9. License fee.
From and after the first day of January 1894, the said company shall pay to
the said Borough an annual license fee of $0.25 for each and every pole then
erected by said company in any of the streets or alleys of the said Borough.
§ A402-10. Liability.
The said company shall be liable and shall make just compensation for all
property taken, injured or destroyed by the erection of its poles or wires, or
by the construction or carrying on of its works, apparatus or business.
§ A402-11. Noncompliance; violations and penalties.
Should said company or person or persons in their employ refuse or neglect
to comply with the provisions of the ordinance, or should violate or offend
against any of its provisions, said company shall forfeit and pay a fine of not
less than $5 nor more than $20 for each offense, said fines to be for the use
of said Borough, and to be recovered as other fines are by law recoverable.
§ A402-12. When effective.
The provisions of this ordinance shall not go into effect until a charter shall
have been obtained by the Board of Directors of said company within one
month from the date of the granting of a charter to the said company, such
acceptance entered upon their minutes, and a duly certified copy thereof be
delivered to the said Mayor and Borough Council.
§ A402-6 HANOVER CODE § A402-12
1:806
ARTICLE II
Hanover Telephone Company165
[Adopted 2-12-1894 by Ord. No. 56]
§ A402-13. Grant of authority.
Permission be granted to the Hanover Telephone Company to erect and
put up in the streets and alleys of the Borough of Hanover its, the said
company's, necessary poles and wires for the purpose of establishing a
system of communication by telephones, subject to the following
restrictions:
§ A402-14. Pole and wire specifications.
The poles of the said company shall be straight and well planted, as nearly
perpendicularly as may be, on the outside of and close to the curbline. All
the wires to be maintained at a height of not less than 18 feet above the
grade of the street or alley in which they may be placed.
§ A402-15. Placement of poles.
In putting up its poles, the said company shall plant them only at such
places as the Street Committee of the Council of said Borough shall
designate or approve.
§ A402-16. Obstructions.
Said company shall not erect or plant in any street or alley of said Borough
any pole or construction of any kind for the purpose aforesaid, in front of
any show window, cellar door or coal chute, nor in any manner that may
obstruct or in any way hinder the convenient use of any building or lot or of
any street or alley in the said Borough.
§ A402-17. Repair and restoration of streets.
When it may become necessary for said company to dig up any part of
any street or alley in said Borough for the planting of any pole, the said
company shall immediately repair that part of such street or alley thus dug
up, and put it in such condition as will meet with the approval of the Street
Committee of the Council of the said Borough.
§ A402-18. Pole removal; violations and penalties.
When in the judgment of the Mayor and Borough Council of the said
Borough it shall appear that any pole or poles erected by the said company
in any of the streets or alleys of the said Borough have become defective
or stand in the way of any necessary improvement, the said Mayor and
Borough Council shall have the right at any time and all times, by resolution
165. Editor's Note: The Hanover Telephone Company is now vested in United Telephone
Company of Pennsylvania.
§ A402-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A402-18
1:807
or ordinance, to require the removal or replacing thereof, and if, after
having been notified by the said Mayor and Borough Council remove or
replace any such pole or poles, the said company shall refuse or neglect
to do so for a longer period than 10 days, it, the said company, shall be
subject to a penalty of not less than $5 nor more than $20, to be recovered
as similar penalties are now by law recoverable.
§ A402-19. Noncompliance; violations and penalties.
Should said company or persons in their employ refuse or neglect to comply
with the provisions of this ordinance or should violate or offend against
any of its provisions, said company shall forfeit and pay a fine of not less
than $10 nor more than $20 for each and every offense, said fine to be
recoverable as similar fines are now by law recoverable.
§ A402-20. Charter required.
The provisions of this ordinance shall not go into effect until a charter shall
have been obtained by said company.
§ A402-21. Acceptance of provisions.
The provisions of this ordinance shall not go into effect until a charter shall
have been obtained by said company nor unless the same shall be accepted
by the Board of Directors of the said company, within one month from the
date of the granting of a charter to the said company, such acceptance
entered upon their minutes, and a duly certified copy be delivered to the
said Mayor and Borough Council.
§ A402-22. Failure to obtain charter. [Amended 10-20-1894 by Ord.
No. 68]
If, on or before January 1, 1895, the said company shall not have obtained a
charter, then all the rights and privileges granted hereby shall cease and be
at an end.
§ A402-23. Failure to have plant in operation. [Amended 10-20-1894
by Ord. No. 68]
Should the said company not have their plant in operation on or before
January 1, 1895, then all the rights and privileges granted hereby shall
cease and be at an end.
§ A402-24. License fees.
All the rights and privileges granted hereby to the said company shall be
enjoyed and exercised free from the payment of a license fee to be imposed
by the said Mayor and Borough Council for the period of three years from
the date of the passage of this ordinance, provided that at the end of the
said period of three years, the said company shall pay such license fee for
§ A402-18 HANOVER CODE § A402-24
1:808
the further exercise of the said privileges as shall be then agreed upon and
fixed by the said Mayor and Borough Council.
§ A402-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A402-24
1:809

ARTICLE III
Hanover Gas Company166
[Adopted 11-28-1900 by Ord. No. 103]
§ A402-25. Grant of authority.
The said Hanover Gas Company, its successors or assigns, are hereby
granted the right to erect, maintain and operate works for the manufacture
of gas in the Borough of Hanover, and are further hereby granted the right
and privilege of laying, placing and maintaining mains, pipes and their
appurtenances in, through and under the streets, roads, highways, alleys
and public places of said Borough for the purpose of supplying gas therein,
from and after the date when this ordinance goes into effect, upon the
terms, conditions and restrictions hereinafter specified.
§ A402-26. Obstructing and injuring streets.
The said Hanover Gas Company, its successors or assigns, in laying down
gas mains or pipes, shall not unnecessarily or unreasonably obstruct or
injure any street, road, highway, sidewalk, lane or alley, and shall
particularly and within a reasonable time restore the streets, roads,
highways, alleys and public places which shall be opened by it or its agents
or employees to the same order and condition in which they were before so
opened by said Hanover Gas Company, its successors or assigns.
§ A402-27. Excavations; safety precautions; liability.
Whenever the said Hanover Gas Company shall make any excavation in the
streets, roads, highways, alleys or public places of the said Borough, it shall
by signals or otherwise do all things necessary to protect the public from
injury resulting from such excavation, and the said Borough of Hanover
shall not be liable to any person or corporation for any damages that may
be suffered by such person or corporation by reason of the negligence of
the said Hanover Gas Company, its successors or assigns, in the use of
the streets for the purposes herein authorized, and the said Hanover Gas
Company shall in all respects save the Borough harmless from any and all
damages and costs to which the said Borough may be put by reason of the
negligence of the said Hanover Gas Company in failing to properly protect
such excavation; and shall be subject to all the provisions and penalties
prescribed by the ordinance of said Borough, enacted and ordained the 10th
day of June 1895, regulating the laying or re-laying of pipes in the said
Borough.
§ A402-28. Rules and regulations.
The said Hanover Gas Company, its successors or assigns, shall be subject
to all rules and regulations now in force which have been adopted or which
may hereafter be adopted by the said Borough concerning the opening of
166. Editor's Note: The Hanover Gas Company is now vested in York County Gas Company.
§ A402-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A402-28
1:811
streets, roads, highways and public places, and of obstruction to travel
therein.
§ A402-29. Acceptance of terms.
Within 60 days after the passage and approval of this ordinance, the said
Hanover Gas Company, its successors or assigns, shall file with the Clerk
of the Council of the said Borough of Hanover its acceptance in writing
of the terms and provisions hereof, and thereupon the said Hanover Gas
Company, its successors or assigns, shall become vested with all the rights
and privileges granted by this ordinance. If said Hanover Gas Company, its
successors and assigns, shall fail to file said acceptance within the period
named, then this ordinance shall, after the expiration of said period, become
null and void and of no effect.
§ A402-28 HANOVER CODE § A402-29
1:812
ARTICLE IV
Pennsylvania Telephone Company
[Adopted 1-7-1901 by Ord. No. 104]
§ A402-30. Permission granted.
Permission be granted to the Pennsylvania Telephone Company to erect,
operate and maintain in the streets and alleys of the Borough of Hanover,
Pennsylvania, its, the said company's necessary poles and wires, for the
purpose of establishing a system of communication by telephone, subject to
the following restrictions.
§ A402-31. Pole and wire specifications.
The poles of the said company shall be straight and well planted, as nearly
perpendicularly as may be, on the outside of and close to the curbline.
All the wires to be maintained at a height of not less than 18 feet above
the grade of the street or alley in which they may be placed, and of such
additional height as shall not interfere with any telephone or other wires
heretofore placed on said streets or alleys.
§ A402-32. Placement of poles.
In putting up its poles, the said company shall plant them only at such
places as the Street Committee of the Council of said Borough shall
designate or approve.
§ A402-33. Obstructions.
Said company shall not erect or plant in any street or alley of the said
Borough any pole or construction of any kind, for the purpose aforesaid, in
front of any show window, cellar door or coal chute, nor in any manner that
may obstruct or in any way hinder the convenient use of any building or lot
or of any street or alley in the said Borough.
§ A402-34. Repair and restoration of streets.
When it may become necessary for the said company to dig up any part of
any street or alley in said Borough for the planting of any pole, the said
company shall immediately repair that part of such street or alley thus dug
up, and put it in such condition as will meet with the approval of the Street
Committee of the Council of the said Borough.
§ A402-35. Pole removal; violations and penalties.
When in the judgment of the Mayor and Borough Council of the said
Borough it shall appear that any pole erected by the said company in any
of the streets or alleys of the said Borough has become defective or stands
in the way of any necessary improvement, the said Mayor and Borough
Council shall have the right at any time and at all times by resolution or
ordinance to require the removal or replacing thereof, and if, after having
§ A402-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A402-35
1:813
been notified by the said Mayor and Borough Council to remove or replace
any such pole or poles, the said company shall refuse or neglect to do so
for a longer period than 10 days, it, the said company, shall be subject to a
penalty of not less than $5 nor more than $20, to be recovered as similar
penalties are now by law recoverable.
§ A402-36. Liability.
The said company shall be liable to and make just compensation for all
property taken, injured or destroyed by the erection of its poles or wires or
by the construction or carrying on of its works, apparatus or business, and
also shall be liable for all damages arising from the negligence or neglect of
their employees.
§ A402-37. Noncompliance; violations and penalties.
Should said company or persons in their employ refuse or neglect to comply
with the provisions of this ordinance, or should violate or offend against any
of its provisions, the said company shall forfeit and pay a fine of not less
than $10 for each offense, said fines to be recoverable as similar fines are
now by law recoverable.
§ A402-38. Forfeiture of franchise.
The said Pennsylvania Telephone Company shall have their plant
constructed and in operation on or before June 1, 1901, and in default
thereof, all the rights and privileges hereby granted shall be forfeited and
the franchise fully ended.
§ A402-39. Acceptance of provisions.
The provisions of this ordinance shall not take effect until the same are
accepted by the Board of Directors of the Pennsylvania Telephone Company,
such acceptance entered upon their minutes and a duly certified copy
thereof filed with the Secretary of the Borough.
§ A402-40. License fees.
The said Pennsylvania Telephone Company shall pay and hereby agrees to
pay for the rights and privileges to them hereby granted an annual license
fee of $0.25 for each and every pole erected by them upon the streets or
alleys of the said Borough in the exercise of the said privileges as herein
granted.
§ A402-35 HANOVER CODE § A402-40
1:814
ARTICLE V
American Telegraph and Telephone Company
[Adopted 3-19-1926 by Ord. No. 384]
§ A402-41. Grant of authority.
The American Telegraph & Telephone Company of Pennsylvania, its
successors and assigns, may acquire, occupy and use such portion of the
aerial works of the Bell Telephone Company of Pennsylvania which are
now erected, constructed and in place, or which may hereafter be erected,
constructed and placed, on, over and along the public highways of the
Borough of Hanover, as may be required by the said the American Telegraph
& Telephone Company of Pennsylvania for connecting and through line
purposes in the due prosecution of its business, upon such arrangements as
the two companies may agree to.
§ A402-42. Liability.
The said the American Telegraph & Telephone Company of Pennsylvania
shall at all times fully indemnify, protect and save harmless the said
Borough of Hanover from and against all actions, claims, suits, damages
and charges, and against all loss and necessary expenditures arising from
the use or maintenance of any or all of the aerial works acquired by it as
aforesaid.
§ A402-43. Acceptance of terms.
The said American Telegraph & Telephone Company of Pennsylvania shall,
under its seal and by its proper officers, within 60 days from the date of the
final enactment of this ordinance, signify in writing its acceptance of all the
terms and conditions herein contained, in default of which, this ordinance
shall become null and void and of no effect.
§ A402-44. Advertising and printing fees.
All legal advertising or printing fees incurred by the Borough of Hanover,
County of York, State of Pennsylvania, in connection with the passage of this
ordinance, shall be paid by the American Telegraph & Telephone Company
of Pennsylvania.
§ A402-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A402-44
1:815

ARTICLE VI
Comcast Cable Agreement
[Adopted 4-1-2007]
§ A402-45. Definitions.
For the purposes of this franchise agreement, terms, phrases, words, and
abbreviations shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the Cable
Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended, 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 to 613
(the "Cable Act"), unless otherwise defined herein.
CUSTOMER — A person or user of the cable system who lawfully receives
cable service therefrom with the grantee's express permission.
EFFECTIVE DATE — The date on which all persons necessary to sign this
agreement in order for it to be binding on both parties have executed this
agreement as indicated on the signature page(s), unless a specific date is
otherwise provided in the "Term" section herein.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission or successor
governmental entity thereto.
FRANCHISE — The initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by
the franchising authority, whether such authorization is designated as a
franchise, agreement, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate,
ordinance or otherwise, which authorizes the construction and operation of
the cable system.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT or AGREEMENT — This agreement and any
amendments or modifications hereto.
FRANCHISE AREA — The present legal boundaries of the Borough as of the
effective date, and shall also include any additions thereto by annexation or
other legal means.
FRANCHISING AUTHORITY — The Borough or the lawful successor,
transferee, designee, or assignee thereof.
GRANTEE — Comcast of Southeast Pennsylvania, LLC.
GROSS REVENUE — [Amended 8-28-2019 by Res. No. 1264]
Revenue received by Comcast or its affiliated entities arising from,
attributable to, or in any way derived from the operation of Comcast's
cable system in the Borough to provide cable services, as calculated
in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP").
Gross revenue shall include, but is not limited to, the following:
(1) Basic service fees;
Fees charged to subscribers for any cable service tier other than
basic service;
(2)
(3) Fees charged for premium cable services;
(4) Fees for all digital video tiers;
A.
§ A402-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A402-45
1:817
(5) Fees for video-on-demand;
Fees charged to subscribers for any optional, per-channel or perprogram
cable services;
(6)
(7) Revenue from the provision of any other cable services;
Charges for installation, additional outlets, relocation,
disconnection, reconnection and change-in-service fees for cable
service;
(8)
(9) Fees for changing any level of cable service programming;
(10)Fees for service calls pertaining to cable services;
(11) Inside wire maintenance fees for cable services;
(12)Service plan protection fees for cable services;
(13)Convenience fees;
(14)Early termination fees on cable services;
(15)Fees for leased access channels;
Charges based on the sale or lease of any portion of the cable
system for cable service;
(16)
Rental or sales of any and all cable services equipment, including
converters and remote control devices;
(17)
(18)Any and all locally derived advertising revenues;
Revenues or commissions from locally derived home shopping
channels;
(19)
(20)Broadcast retransmission fees;
(21)Regional sports fee;
(22)Late payment fees on cable services;
(23)Billing and collection fees on cable services;
(24)NSF check charges; and
(25)Franchise fees.
Gross revenue shall not include refundable deposits, investment
income, programming launch support payments, nor any taxes, or other
fees or assessments imposed or assessed by any governmental
authority. Gross revenue shall not include actual bad debt that is
written off, consistent with generally accepted accounting principles
("GAAP"), provided however, that all or any part of any such actual bad
debt that is written off, but subsequently collected, shall be included in
the gross revenue in the period so collected. In the event of any dispute
B.
§ A402-45 HANOVER CODE § A402-45
1:818
PERSON — Any natural person or any association, firm, partnership, joint
venture, corporation, or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit
or not for profit, but shall not mean the franchising authority.
PUBLIC WAY — The surface of, and the space above and below, any public
street, highway, freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard,
sidewalk, way, lane, public way, drive, circle or other public right-of-way,
including, but not limited to, public utility easements, dedicated utility
strips, or rights-of-way dedicated for compatible uses and any temporary
or permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon now or hereafter
held by the franchising authority in the franchise area, which shall entitle
the grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing, operating,
repairing, and maintaining the cable system. "Public way" shall also mean
any easement now or hereafter held by the franchising authority within the
franchise area for the purpose of public travel, or for utility or public service
use dedicated for compatible uses, and shall include other easements or
rights-of-way as shall within their proper use and meaning entitle the
grantee to the use thereof for the purposes of installing, operating, and
maintaining the grantee's cable system over poles, wires, cables,
conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances,
attachments, and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and
pertinent to the cable system.
§ A402-46. Grant of authority.
over the classification of revenue, the Borough and Comcast agree that
reference should be made to GAAP as promulgated and defined by the
Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB").
A. The franchising authority hereby grants to the grantee under the Cable
Act a nonexclusive franchise authorizing the grantee to construct and
operate a cable system in, along, among, upon, across, above, over,
under, or in any manner connected with public ways within the
franchise area, and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair,
replace, reconstruct, maintain, or retain in, on, over, under, upon,
across, or along any public way and all extensions thereof and additions
thereto, such poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults,
manholes, pedestals, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other
related property or equipment as may be necessary or appurtenant to
the cable system. Nothing in this franchise shall be construed to
prohibit the grantee from offering any service over its cable system that
is not prohibited by federal or state law.
B. Term of franchise. The term of the franchise granted hereunder shall be
20 years, commencing upon the effective date of the franchise, unless
the franchise is renewed or is lawfully terminated in accordance with
the terms of this franchise agreement and the Cable Act.
C. Renewal. Any renewal of this franchise shall be governed by and comply
with the provisions of Section 626 of the Cable Act, as amended (47
U.S.C. § 546).
§ A402-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A402-46
1:819
§ A402-47. Construction and maintenance of cable system.
D. Reservation of authority. Nothing in this franchise agreement shall
abrogate the right of the franchising authority to perform any public
works or public improvements of any description; be construed as a
waiver of any codes or ordinances of general applicability promulgated
by the franchising authority; or be construed as a waiver or release of
the rights of the franchising authority in and to the public ways.
E. Competitive equity.
(1) The grantee acknowledges and agrees that the franchising
authority reserves the right to grant one or more additional
franchises to provide cable service within the franchise area;
provided, however, that no such franchise agreement shall contain
terms or conditions more favorable or less burdensome to the
competitive entity than the material terms and conditions herein,
including, but not limited to, franchise fees; insurance; system
build-out requirements; performance bonds or similar instruments;
public, education and government access channels and support;
customer service standards; required reports and related
recordkeeping; and notice and opportunity to cure breaches. If any
such additional or competitive franchise is granted by the
franchising authority which, in the reasonable opinion of the
grantee, contains more favorable or less burdensome terms or
conditions than this franchise agreement, the franchising authority
agrees that it shall amend this franchise agreement to include any
more favorable or less burdensome terms or conditions.
(2) In the event an application for a new cable television franchise is
filed with the franchising authority proposing to serve the
franchising area, in whole or in part, the franchising authority shall
serve or require to be served a copy of such application upon any
existing grantee or incumbent cable operator by registered or
certified mail or via nationally recognized overnight courier
service.
A. Permits and general obligations. The grantee shall be responsible for
obtaining, at its own cost and expense, all permits, licenses, or other
forms of approval or authorization necessary to construct, operate,
maintain or repair the cable system, or any part thereof, prior to the
commencement of any such activity. Construction, installation, and
maintenance of the cable system shall be performed in a safe, thorough
and reliable manner using materials of good and durable quality. All
transmission and distribution structures, poles, other lines, and
equipment installed by the grantee for use in the cable system in
accordance with the terms and conditions of this franchise agreement
shall be located so as to minimize the interference with the proper use
of the public ways and the rights and reasonable convenience of
property owners who own property that adjoins any such public way.
This requirement shall not be interpreted or construed in any way to
§ A402-46 HANOVER CODE § A402-47
1:820
require the grantee to obtain from the franchising authority prior
approval, authorization, permits, or licenses to perform standard
installations, routine maintenance or repair on any part of the cable
system.
B. Conditions on street occupancy.
(1) New grades or lines. If the grades or lines of any public way within
the franchise area are lawfully changed at any time during the term
of this franchise agreement, then the grantee shall, upon
reasonable advance written notice from the franchising authority
(which shall not be less than 10 business days), and at its own cost
and expense, protect or promptly alter or relocate the cable
system, or any part thereof, so as to conform with any such new
grades or lines. If public funds are available to any person using
such street or public right-of-way for the purpose of defraying the
cost of any of the foregoing, the franchising authority shall, upon
written request of the grantee, make application for such funds on
behalf of the grantee.
(2) Relocation at request of third party. The grantee shall, upon
reasonable prior written request of any person holding a permit
issued by the franchising authority to move any structure,
temporarily move its wires to permit the moving of such structure,
provided the grantee may impose a reasonable charge on any
person for the movement of its wires, and such charge may be
required to be paid in advance of the movement of its wires; and
the grantee is given not less than 10 business days' advance written
notice to arrange for such temporary relocation.
(3) Restoration of public ways. If in connection with the construction,
operation, maintenance, or repair of the cable system, the grantee
disturbs, alters, or damages any public way, the grantee agrees
that it shall, at its own cost and expense, replace and restore any
such public way to a condition reasonably comparable to the
condition of the public way existing immediately prior to the
disturbance.
(4) Safety requirements. The grantee shall, at its own cost and
expense, undertake all necessary and appropriate efforts to
maintain its work sites in a safe manner in order to prevent failures
and accidents that may cause damage, injuries or nuisances. All
work undertaken on the cable system shall be performed in
substantial accordance with applicable FCC or other federal and
state regulations. The cable system shall not unreasonably
endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the
franchise area.
(5) Trimming of trees and shrubbery. The grantee shall have the
authority to trim trees or other natural growth overhanging any of
its cable system in the franchise area so as to prevent contact with
§ A402-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A402-47
1:821
§ A402-48. Service obligations.
the grantee's wires, cables, or other equipment in accordance with
Chapter 294, Shade Trees, of the Code of the Borough of Hanover.
All such trimming shall be done at the grantee's sole cost and
expense. The grantee shall be responsible for any damage caused
by such trimming.
(6) Aerial and underground construction. If all of the transmission and
distribution facilities of all of the respective public or municipal
utilities in any area of the franchise area are underground, the
grantee shall place its cable system's transmission and distribution
facilities underground, provided that such underground locations
are actually capable of accommodating the grantee's cable and
other equipment without technical degradation of the cable
system's signal quality. In any region(s) of the franchise area where
the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public or
municipal utilities are both aerial and underground, the grantee
shall have the discretion to construct, operate, and maintain all of
its transmission and distribution facilities, or any part thereof,
aerially or underground. Nothing in this section shall be construed
to require the grantee to construct, operate, or maintain
underground any ground-mounted appurtenances such as
customer taps, line extenders, system passive devices, amplifiers,
power supplies, pedestals, or other related equipment.
A. General service obligation.
(1) The grantee shall make cable service available to every residential
dwelling unit within the franchise area where the minimum density
is at least 30 dwelling units per mile for aerial plant and 50 homes
per mile for underground plant, and is within one mile of the
existing cable system. Subject to the density requirement, grantee
shall offer cable service to all new homes or previously unserved
homes located within 125 feet of the grantee's distribution cable.
(2) The grantee may, in its sole discretion, elect to provide cable
service to areas not meeting the above density and distance
standards. The grantee may impose an additional charge in excess
of its regular installation charge for any service installation
requiring a drop-in or line extension in excess of the above
standards. Any such additional charge shall be computed on a timeplus-
materials basis to be calculated on that portion of the
installation that exceeds the standards set forth above.
B. No discrimination. Neither the grantee nor any of its employees,
agents, representatives, contractors, subcontractors, or consultants,
nor any other person, shall discriminate or permit discrimination
between or among any persons in the availability of cable services
provided in connection with the cable system in the franchise area. It
shall be the right of all persons to receive all available services provided
§ A402-47 HANOVER CODE § A402-48
1:822
§ A402-49. Fees and charges to customers.
All rates, fees, charges, deposits and associated terms and conditions to
be imposed by the grantee or any affiliated person for any cable service
as of the effective date shall be in accordance with applicable FCC rate
regulations. Before any new or modified rate, fee, or charge is imposed,
the grantee shall follow the applicable FCC notice requirements and rules
and notify affected customers, which notice may be by any means permitted
under applicable law.
§ A402-50. Customer service standards; customer bills; privacy
protection.
§ A402-51. Oversight and regulation by franchising authority.
on the cable system so long as such person's financial or other
obligations to the grantee are satisfied.
C. Prohibition against reselling service. No person shall resell, without the
express prior written consent of the grantee, any cable service,
program or signal transmitted over the cable system by the grantee.
A. Customer service standards. The franchising authority hereby adopts
the customer service standards set forth in Part 76 of the FCC's rules
and regulations (47 CFR 76.309). The grantee shall comply in all
respects with the customer service requirements established by the
FCC.
B. Customer bills. Customer bills shall be designed in such a way as to
present the information contained therein clearly and comprehensibly
to customers, and in a way that is not misleading and does not omit
material information. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in
Subsection A above, the grantee may, in its sole discretion, consolidate
costs on customer bills as may otherwise be permitted by Section
622(c) of the Cable Act [47 U.S.C. § 542(c)].
C. Privacy protection. The grantee shall comply with all applicable federal
and state privacy laws, including Section 631 of the Cable Act (47
U.S.C. § 551) and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
A. Oversight of franchise. In accordance with applicable law, the
franchising authority shall have the right to oversee, regulate and, on
reasonable prior written notice and in the presence of the grantee's
employees, periodically inspect the construction, operation and
maintenance of the cable system in the franchise area, and all parts
thereof, as necessary to monitor the grantee's compliance with the
provisions of this franchise agreement.
B. Technical standards. The grantee shall comply with all applicable
technical standards of the FCC as published in Subpart K of 47 CFR 76.
To the extent those standards are altered, modified, or amended during
§ A402-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A402-51
1:823
the term of this franchise, the grantee shall comply with such altered,
modified or amended standards within a reasonable period after such
standards become effective. The franchising authority shall have, upon
written request, the right to obtain a copy of tests and records required
to be performed pursuant to the FCC's rules.
C. Maintenance of books, records, and files.
(1) Books and records. Throughout the term of this franchise
agreement, the grantee agrees that the franchising authority, upon
reasonable prior written notice to the grantee, may review such of
the grantee's books and records regarding the operation of the
cable system and the provision of cable service in the franchise
area which are reasonably necessary to monitor grantee's
compliance with the provisions of this franchise agreement at the
grantee's business office, during normal business hours, and
without unreasonably interfering with grantee's business
operations. Such books and records shall include any records
required to be kept in a public file by the grantee pursuant to the
rules and regulations of the FCC. All such documents pertaining to
financial matters that may be the subject of an inspection by the
franchising authority shall be retained by the grantee for a
minimum period of three years.
(2) File for public inspection. Throughout the term of this franchise
agreement, the grantee shall maintain at its business office, in a file
available for public inspection during normal business hours, those
documents required pursuant to the FCC's rules and regulations.
(3) Proprietary information. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
set forth in this section, the grantee shall not be required to
disclose information which it reasonably deems to be proprietary or
confidential in nature. The franchising authority agrees to treat any
information disclosed by the grantee as confidential and only to
disclose it to those employees, representatives, and agents of the
franchising authority that have a need to know in order to enforce
this franchise agreement and who agree to maintain the
confidentiality of all such information. The grantee shall not be
required to provide customer information in violation of Section
631 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 551) or any other applicable
federal or state privacy law. For purposes of this section, the terms
"proprietary" or "confidential" include, but are not limited to,
information relating to the cable system design, customer lists,
marketing plans, financial information unrelated to the calculation
of franchise fees or rates pursuant to FCC rules, or other
information that is reasonably determined by the grantee to be
competitively sensitive. In the event that the franchising authority
receives a request under a state "sunshine," public records or
similar law for the disclosure of information the grantee has
designated as confidential, a trade secret or proprietary, the
franchising authority shall promptly notify the grantee of such
§ A402-51 HANOVER CODE § A402-51
1:824
§ A402-52. Transfer of cable system or franchise. [Amended
8-28-2019 by Res. No. 1264]
No transfer of control of Comcast, defined as an acquisition of 51% or
greater direct ownership interest in Comcast, shall take place without prior
written notice to the Borough. No notice shall be required, however, for the
following: a transfer in trust, by mortgage, hypothecation, or by assignment
of any rights, title, or interest of the Comcast in the franchise or in the cable
system in order to secure indebtedness; or a transfer to an entity directly or
indirectly owned or controlled by Comcast.
§ A402-53. Insurance; indemnity.
§ A402-54. System description and service.
request and cooperate with the grantee in its efforts to protect its
rights.
A. Insurance. Throughout the term of this franchise agreement, the
grantee shall, at its own cost and expense, maintain comprehensive
general liability insurance and provide the franchising authority
certificates of insurance designating the franchising authority and its
officers, boards, commissions, councils, elected officials, agents and
employees as additional insureds and demonstrating that the grantee
has obtained the insurance required in this section. Such policy or
policies shall be in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 for bodily injury
or death to any one person, and $1,000,000 for bodily injury or death of
any two or more persons resulting from one occurrence, and
$1,000,000 for property damage resulting from any one accident. Such
policy or policies shall be noncancelable except upon 30 days' prior
written notice to the franchising authority. The grantee shall provide
workers compensation coverage in accordance with applicable law. The
grantee shall indemnify and hold harmless the franchising authority
from any workers compensation claims to which the grantee may
become subject during the term of this franchise agreement.
B. Indemnification. The grantee shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless
the franchising authority, its officers, employees, and agents from and
against any liability or claims resulting from property damage or bodily
injury (including accidental death) that arise out of the grantee's
construction, operation, maintenance or removal of the cable system,
including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys' fees, provided that
the franchising authority shall give the grantee written notice of its
obligation to indemnify and defend the franchising authority within 10
business days of receipt of a claim or action pursuant to this section. If
the franchising authority determines that it is necessary for it to employ
separate counsel, the costs for such separate counsel shall be the
responsibility of the franchising authority.
§ A402-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A402-54
1:825
§ A402-55. Notice of violation; enforcement; termination of
franchise; technical violations.
A. System capacity. During the term of this agreement, grantee's cable
system shall be capable of providing a wide variety of video
programming choices, including two-way interactive service, with
reception available to its customers in the franchise area in accordance
with FCC technical standards.
B. Service to school buildings. The grantee shall provide free "basic" and
"expanded basic" tier cable service and free installation at one outlet to
each public K-12 school; and each nonpublic K-12 school that receives
funding pursuant to Title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education
Act of 1965, 20 U.S.C. § 6301 et seq., as amended, not including home
schools, located in the franchise area within 125 feet of the grantee's
distribution cable.
C. Service to governmental and institutional facilities. The grantee shall
provide free "basic" and "expanded basic" tier cable service and free
installation at one outlet to each municipal building located in the
franchise area within 125 feet of the grantee's distribution cable.
"Municipal buildings" are those buildings owned or leased by the
franchising authority for government administrative purposes, and
shall not include buildings owned by the franchising authority but
leased to third parties or buildings such as storage facilities at which
government employees are not regularly stationed.
A. Notice of violation or default. In the event the franchising authority
believes that the grantee has not complied with the material terms of
the franchise, it shall notify the grantee, in writing, with specific details
regarding the exact nature of the alleged noncompliance or default.
B. Grantee's right to cure or respond. The grantee shall have 45 days from
the receipt of the franchising authority's written notice to respond to
the franchising authority, contesting the assertion of noncompliance or
default; or to cure such default; or in the event that, by nature of the
default, such default cannot be cured within the forty-five-day period,
initiate reasonable steps to remedy such default and notify the
franchising authority of the steps being taken and the projected date
that they will be completed.
C. Public hearings. In the event the grantee fails to respond to the
franchising authority's notice or in the event that the alleged default is
not remedied within 60 days or the date projected by the grantee, the
franchising authority may schedule a public hearing to investigate the
default. Such public hearing shall be held at the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the franchising authority that is scheduled at a
time that is no less than 10 business days therefrom. The franchising
authority shall notify the grantee, in writing, of the time and place of
such meeting and provide the grantee with a reasonable opportunity to
be heard.
§ A402-54 HANOVER CODE § A402-55
1:826
D. Enforcement. Subject to applicable federal and state law, in the event
the franchising authority, after such public hearing, determines that the
grantee is in default of any provision of the franchise, the franchising
authority may:
(1) Seek specific performance of any provision that reasonably lends
itself to such remedy as an alternative to damages, or seek other
equitable relief; or
(2) In the case of a substantial default of a material provision of the
franchise, declare the franchise agreement to be revoked in
accordance with the following:
(a) The franchising authority shall give written notice to the
grantee of its intent to revoke the franchise on the basis of a
pattern of noncompliance by the grantee, including one or
more instances of substantial noncompliance with a material
provision of the franchise. The notice shall set forth with
specificity the exact nature of the noncompliance. The grantee
shall have 90 days from the receipt of such notice to object in
writing and to state its reasons for such objection. In the event
the franchising authority has not received a response from the
grantee or upon receipt of the response does not agree with
the grantee's proposed remedy, it may then seek termination of
the franchise at a public hearing. The franchising authority
shall cause to be served upon the grantee, at least 10 days
prior to such public hearing, a written notice specifying the
time and place of such hearing and stating its intent to request
termination of the franchise.
(b) At the designated hearing, the franchising authority shall give
the grantee an opportunity to state its position on the matter,
present evidence and question witnesses, after which it shall
determine whether or not the franchise shall be revoked. The
public hearing shall be on the record and a written transcript
shall be made available to the grantee within 10 business days.
The decision of the franchising authority shall be in writing and
shall be delivered to the grantee by certified mail. The grantee
may appeal such determination to an appropriate court, which
shall have the power to review the decision of the franchising
authority de novo and to modify or reverse such decision as
justice may require. Such appeal to the appropriate court must
be taken within 60 days of the issuance of the determination of
the franchising authority.
E. Technical violation. The franchising authority agrees that it is not its
intention to subject the grantee to penalties, fines, forfeitures or
revocation of the franchise for so-called "technical" breach(es) or
violation(s) of the franchise, which shall include, but not be limited, to
the following:
§ A402-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A402-55
1:827
§ A402-56. Miscellaneous provisions.
(1) In instances or for matters where a violation or a breach of the
franchise by the grantee was a good faith error that resulted in no
or minimal negative impact on the customers within the franchise
area; or
(2) Where there existed circumstances reasonably beyond the control
of the grantee and which precipitated a violation by the grantee of
the franchise, or which were deemed to have prevented the grantee
from complying with a term or condition of the franchise.
A. Force majeure. The grantee shall not be held in default under, or in
noncompliance with, the provisions of the franchise, nor suffer any
enforcement or penalty relating to noncompliance or default (including
termination, cancellation or revocation of the franchise), where such
noncompliance or alleged defaults occurred or were caused by strike,
riot, war, earthquake, flood, tidal wave, unusually severe rain or snow
storm, hurricane, tornado or other catastrophic act of nature, labor
disputes, failure of utility service necessary to operate the cable system,
governmental, administrative or judicial order or regulation or other
event that is reasonably beyond the grantee's ability to anticipate or
control. This provision also covers work delays caused by waiting for
utility providers to service or monitor their own utility poles on which
the grantee's cable or equipment is attached, as well as unavailability of
materials or qualified labor to perform the work necessary.
B. Notice. All notices shall be in writing and shall be sufficiently given and
served upon the other party by hand delivery, first-class mail, registered
or certified, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, or by reputable
overnight courier service and addressed as follows:
(1) To the franchising authority:
Hanover Borough
44 Frederick Street
Hanover, PA 17331
Attn: Borough Manager
(2) To the grantee:
Comcast
1004 Cornerstone Boulevard
Downingtown, PA 19335
Attn: Government Affairs
(3) With a copy to:
§ A402-55 HANOVER CODE § A402-56
1:828
§ A402-57. Franchise fees. [Added 8-28-2019 by Res. No. 1264]
Comcast
1500 Market Street
Philadelphia, PA 19102
Attn: Government Affairs Department
C. Entire agreement. This franchise agreement, including all exhibits,
embodies the entire understanding and agreement of the franchising
authority and the grantee with respect to the subject matter hereof and
supersedes all prior understandings, agreements and communications,
whether written or oral. All ordinances or parts of ordinances that are
in conflict with the provisions of this franchise agreement are
superseded by this franchise agreement.
D. Governing law. This franchise agreement shall be deemed to be
executed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and shall be governed
in all respects, including validity, interpretation and effect, and
construed in accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, as applicable to contracts entered into and performed
entirely within the commonwealth.
E. Modification. No provision of this franchise agreement shall be
amended or otherwise modified, in whole or in part, except by an
instrument, in writing, duly executed by the franchising authority and
the grantee, which amendment shall be authorized on behalf of the
franchising authority through the adoption of an appropriate resolution
or order by the franchising authority, as required by applicable law.
F. No third-party beneficiaries. Nothing in this franchise agreement is or
was intended to confer third-party beneficiary status on any member of
the public to enforce the terms of this franchise agreement.
G. No waiver of rights. Nothing in this franchise agreement shall be
construed as a waiver of any rights, substantive or procedural, grantee
may have under federal or state law, unless such waiver is expressly
stated herein.
A. Comcast shall pay to the Borough an amount equal to 3% of the gross
revenue derived from the operation of its cable system to provide cable
service in the Borough. Comcast shall not deduct or otherwise credit
against the franchise fee any tax, fee or assessment of general
applicability. The Borough may amend the franchise fee solely to reduce
the franchise fee percentage upon written notice to Comcast. A copy of
the resolution or ordinance authorizing the franchise fee adjustment by
the Borough shall accompany such written notice. Any change in
Comcast's franchise fee obligation contained herein shall commence
within 90 days from such written notice.
§ A402-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A402-57
1:829
B. Franchise fee payments to the Borough under this provision shall be
computed at the end of each calendar quarter. Such payments shall be
made within 45 days following the end of each of the first three
calendar quarters and 60 days after the fourth calendar quarter.
Specifically, payments shall be due and payable on or before May 15
(for the first quarter), August 15 (for the second quarter), November 15
(for the third quarter), and March 1 (for the fourth quarter). In the
event that any franchise fee payment is not made on or before the date
by which it is due, then interest calculated at the then-current prime
rate, as published by the Wall Street Journal, shall be added to the
amount of franchise fee revenue due to the Borough. The interest rate
shall be applied as described from the date such franchise fee payment
was originally due. No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as
an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall
acceptance of any payment be construed as a release of any claim the
Borough may have for additional sums payable under this agreement.
C. Within 10 days of each franchise fee payment described herein,
Comcast shall provide a written report containing an accurate
statement of Comcast's gross revenue received for cable services for
each calendar quarter in connection with the operation of Comcast's
cable system and showing the basis for the computation of fees.
Specifically, the report shall contain line items for sources of revenue
received and the amount of revenue received from each source. The
report shall be verified by a financial representative of Comcast.
§ A402-57 HANOVER CODE § A402-57
1:830
Chapter A403
PENALTY ASSESSMENT FOR VIOLATION OF PRETREATMENT
STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 286. Sewer use regulations — See Ch. 290.
§ A403-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this policy is to establish procedures whereby the Borough
of Hanover may directly levy civil penalties in a manner consistent with the
Pennsylvania Penalty Law for Publicly Owned Treatment Works.
§ A403-2. Method of determination.
A. The following is the basis for determining an administrative or civil
penalty to be issued by the Borough of Hanover for violation(s) of
pretreatment standards and/or requirements. The maximum fine to be
assessed is $25,000 per day, per violation. Each day that a violation
shall continue will be considered as a separate violation.
B. The formula for calculation of an assessment is as follows:
Fine = (Cvf + 1,000 Evf + 1,000 Avf) (1.0 + Bvf + Dvf) ± Fvf
Where:
Avf = Value factor assessed for damage to air, water, land or
other natural resources and their uses
Bvf = Value factor assessed for the magnitude of the cost of
restoration
Cvf = Savings to the violator as a consequence of the violation
Dvf = Value factor assessed for the history of past violations
Evf = Value factor assessed for the deterrence of future
violations
Fvf = Value factor assessed for other relevant factors
(1) The value factor for Avf shall be a value between one and a value
that results in the statutory maximum penalty. This value may be
applied to each month in which one or more violations present
actual harm to human health or to the environment. If no actual
harm is incurred, this factor is zero. Where evidence of actual harm
to human health exists, a factor from 10 to a value which results in
the statutory maximum penalty should be assessed. Where the
identified impact relates only to the environment, a factor from one
to 10 should be used.
§ A402-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A403-2
1:831
(2) The magnitude of the cost of restoration shall be determined on a
case-by-case basis. The value may range from zero to a number
high enough to increase the penalty by 150%.
(3) Savings to the violator shall be based on the benefit gained from
delaying expenditures and avoiding costs. This shall be determined
on a case-by-case basis. A comparison of costs that should have
been incurred, from the start of noncompliance to achieve
compliance, versus present value shall be made.
(4) Based on the history of violations, including the recalcitrance of the
defendant, the value for this factor may range from zero (good
compliance, active cooperation in remedying the violation), to a
factor that will result in a 150% increase in the penalty (bad faith,
unjustified delay in preventing, correcting or mitigating violations,
violations of prior administrative orders or consent decrees, failure
to provide timely and full information, etc.). Significance of the
violation will be taken into account. Pollutants classified as
conventional shall have a minimum factor of one; pollutants
classified as toxic shall have a minimum factor of two. The
classification of pollutants shall be consistent with the definitions
outlined in the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (the Act).167
Toxic pollutants shall be those listed and designated pursuant to
Section 307(a)(1) of the Act. Conventional pollutants shall be those
listed and designated pursuant to Section 304(a)(4) of the Act.
(5) Deterrence factor.
(a) The value factor assessed for the deterrence of future
violations shall be calculated for each month in which a
violation is present. It shall be based on the value assigned for
the percent the pollutant exceeds the permit limitation. A
distinction is made between the conventional pollutants
[Section 304(a)(4) of the Act], and toxic pollutants [Section
307(a)(1) of the Act].
Percent Exceedance Toxic Conventional
0 to 20 0 to 2 0 to 1
21 to 40 1 to 3 1 to 2
41 to 100 2 to 5 2 to 4
101 or more 3 to 7 3 to 5
(b) The value added shall be the highest value based upon
assessment of each of the permit limitations exceeded in each
month.
(6) The value factor for F shall consist of all other factors of the
violation which have not been addressed in this policy. This factor
167. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
§ A403-2 HANOVER CODE § A403-2
1:832
§ A403-3. Notice of fine.
The penalty assessment determined in accordance with this policy shall be
assessed on the user in the form of a notice of fine. The date payable shall
be 30 days from the date of receipt by the user. The fine is payable directly
to the Borough of Hanover. The user may appeal the fine in accordance
with the most recent edition of the Borough of Hanover's Fine Assessment
Appeal Policy.
§ A403-4. Consent penalty.
A consent penalty may be negotiated between the defendant and the
Borough in lieu of the penalty assessment fine. Negotiated penalties may be
less than that of the original assessment as determined on a case-by-case
basis. Consent penalties shall be incorporated into binding and enforceable
compliance agreements negotiated to achieve timely and effective
correction of the violation. All compliance agreements shall stipulate
further penalties for breach of any terms of the agreement. As consent
penalties are negotiated, all consent penalties agreements shall provide
for the user to knowingly and explicitly waive its right pursuant to 35
P.S. § 752.7(b) or other applicable authority, whether in law or equity, to
appeal or otherwise contest the violation, the amount of the penalty or any
provision of the consent penalty agreement entered into by the user.
§ A403-5. Construal of provisions.
In addition to the penalties and assessments contained herein, nothing in
this policy is to be construed as precluding any other action or remedy
available, in equity or at law, to any person, legal entity or governmental
entity.
§ A403-6. Maximum penalty.
The maximum penalty that may be issued hereunder shall not exceed
$25,000 per day. Each day that a violation shall continue shall be deemed a
separate violation.
Chapter A404
SEWER AGREEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 286. Sewer use regulations — See Ch. 290.
may be a basis for increasing or decreasing the amount of the
penalty. The duration of noncompliance for violations of the same
parameter may be accounted for under this factor, with a value
from zero to five.
§ A403-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A403-6
1:833

ARTICLE I
Sewer Service Agreement
[Adopted 10-21-1970 by Ord. No. 1487]
§ A404-1. Agreement authorized.
The proper officers of the Borough of Hanover are hereby authorized to
enter into the sewage service agreement under date of January 15, 1970,
with the Supervisors of Conewago Township and the Conewago Township
Municipal Authority providing for the acceptance and treatment of sewage
from Conewago Township; the limitations of quantities; the regulation
thereof; the plans and specifications for construction of lines; the term of 40
years; the rental charges and payments.
§ A404-2. Ratification.
Any acts heretofore done and any agreements entered into heretofore by
the officers of the Borough of Hanover in accordance with the foregoing are
hereby ratified and confirmed.
§ A404-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A404-2
1:835
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1967 Code to 2012 Code.
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in
nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. II.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title From 1967 Code Location in 2012 Code
Part I, Administration
Ch. 1, General Provisions (reserved) Omitted
Ch. 2, Auditor, Independent Ch. 5
Ch. 3, Board of Health Ch. 12
Ch. 5, Borough Manager Ch. 16
Ch. 7, Committees Ch. 28
Ch. 9, Disposition of Moneys Ch. 20, Art. I
Ch. 11, Fire Commissioner Ch. 43
Ch. 13, Municipal Authority Ch. 8, Art. I
Ch. 13A, Municipal Drug Task Force Ch. 33
Ch. 14, Municipal Parking Authority Ch. 8, Art. II
Ch. 15, Intermunicipal Agreements
Art. I, Local Government Trust Ch. 52, Art. I
Ch. 16, Planning Commission Ch. 70
Ch. 17, Police Force Ch. 75
Ch. 18, Public Library Ch. 55
Ch. 18A, Public Records
Art. I, Disposition of Public Records Ch. 80, Art. I
Art. II, Public Records Policy Ch. 80, Art. II
Ch. 19, Recreation Board Ch. 84
Ch. 20, Sewerage Service Agreement Ch. A404, Art. I
Ch. 21, Sewer System Agreement REP
Ch. 22, Shade Tree Commission Ch. 92
Ch. 23, Streetlighting Contracts Ch. 100
§ A404-2 HANOVER CODE § DT-1
1:836
Chapter/Title From 1967 Code Location in 2012 Code
Ch. 23A, Tax Collector Ch. 105
Ch. 24, Ward Boundaries Ch. 110
Part II, Franchises
Ch. 26, American Telegraph and Telephone
Company
Ch. A402, Art. V
Ch. 27, Community Antenna Television
Franchises
Ch. 164
Ch. 29, Hanover Gas Company Ch. A402, Art. III
Ch. 30, Hanover Light, Heat and Power
Company
Ch. A402, Art. I
Ch. 31, Hanover Telephone Company Ch. A402, Art. II
Ch. 32, Pennsylvania Telephone Company Ch. A402, Art. IV
Part III, Personnel Programs
Ch. 35, Chief of Police Pension Plan and
Fund
Ch. 62, Art. I
Ch. 35A, Drug and Alcohol Testing Ch. 38, § 38-8
Ch. 36, Employees Pension Plan Ch. 62, Art. II
Ch. 37, Employee Regulations Ch. 38
Ch. 39, Fire Drivers' Pension Plan Ch. 62, Art. III
Ch. 40, Firemen's Relief Association Ch. 47
Ch. 42, Police Pension Plan Ch. 62, Art. IV
Ch. 43, Salaries and Compensation Ch. 88
Ch. 44, Social Security Ch. 96
Part IV, General Penalty
Ch. 46, Violation and Penalty Ordinance
Art. I, General Provisions Ch. 1, Art. I
Art. II, Penalty Assessment for Violation
of Pretreatment Standards
Ch. A403
Part V, General Ordinances
Ch. 48, Automobile Graveyards Ch. 130
Ch. 50, Board of Health Rules and
Regulations
Ch. 137, Part 1
Ch. 52, Burial Regulations Ch. 155
Ch. 54, Commercial Licenses Ch. 240
Ch. 55, Curfew Ch. 175
Ch. 56, Dance Halls Ch. 179
Ch. 57, Dead Animals Ch. 182
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:837
Chapter/Title From 1967 Code Location in 2012 Code
Ch. 59, Disorderly Conduct Ch. 186
Ch. 60, Dogs and Other Animals
Art. I, Running at Large Ch. 126, Art. I
Art. II, Nuisances Ch. 126, Art. II
Ch. 61, Eating and Drinking
Establishments
Ch. 137, Part 2, Art. III
Ch. 62, Fees Ch. A401
Ch. 63, Fees, Inspection; Eating and
Drinking Places
Ch. 137, Part 2, Art. IV
Ch. 64, Firearms and Fires Ch. 200
Ch. 65, Fire Prevention Ch. 212
Ch. 66, Fires: Open Ch. 159
Ch. 67, Food Handlers Ch. 217
Ch. 68, Frozen Desserts Repealed by Ord. No. 2164
Ch. 70, Garbage Grinders Ch. 263, Part 1
Ch. 73, Milk and Milk Products Repealed by Ord. No. 2163
Ch. 75, Motor Vehicles, Abandoned or
Junked
Ch. 342
Ch. 76, Municipal Waste and Recycling Ch. 308
Ch. 77, Public Areas, Use of Ch. 259, Art. II
Ch. 78, Public Market Ch. 267
Ch. 79, Public Parks Ch. 259, Art. I
Ch. 81, Railroads Ch. 274
Ch. 82, Rental Property
Art. I, Filing of Occupancy Reports Ch. 278, Art. I
Ch. 84, Taxation
Art. I (Reserved) Omitted
Art. II, Per Capita and Amusement Tax Ch. 325, Art. I
Art. III, Realty Transfer Tax Ch. 325, Art. II
Art. IV, Wage and Income Tax Repealed by Ord. No. 2177
Art. V, Local Services Tax Ch. 325, Art. VI
Art. VI, Business Privilege Tax Ch. 325, Art. III
Art. VII, Tax Certification Notices Ch. 325, Art. IV
Art. VIII, Taxpayer's Bill of Rights Ch. 325, Art. V
Ch. 87, Trailers and Other Temporary
Structures
Ch. 330
Ch. 89, Utility Poles and Wires
§ DT-1 HANOVER CODE § DT-1
1:838
Chapter/Title From 1967 Code Location in 2012 Code
Art. I, Marking Ch. 335, Art. I
Art. II, Pole License Fee Ch. 335, Art. II
Ch. 90, Vegetation and Weeds Ch. 142
Ch. 90A, Water
Art. I, Use Restrictions Ch. 355, Art. I
Art. II, Water Rates Ch. 355, Art. II
Ch. 91, Yard Sales Ch. 364
Part VI, Streets and Sidewalks
Ch. 92, Advertisements Ch. 120
Ch. 93, Awnings Ch. 133
Ch. 99, Noise Ch. 248
Ch. 101, Running Ch. 282
Ch. 102, Shade Trees Ch. 294
Ch. 103, Sidewalk, Curb and Gutter
Construction
Ch. 316, Art. IV
Ch. 104, Signs; Street Encroachments Ch. 298
Ch. 106, Snow and Ice Removal Ch. 316, Art. III
Ch. 108, Street and Sidewalks Uses
Art. I (Reserved) Omitted
Art. II, Throwing Missiles Ch. 316, Art. I
Ch. 109, Street Construction and
Dedication
Ch. 316, Art. II
Ch. 110, Street Openings and Excavations Ch. 313
Part VII, Vehicles and Traffic
Ch. 114, Fire Lanes Ch. 204
Ch. 115, Impoundment Ch. 339
Ch. 116, Parking Meters Ch. 254
Ch. 118, Snow and Emergency Regulations Ch. 304
Ch. 119, Traffic Regulations Ch. 346
Ch. 121, Weight Limits Ch. 350
Part VIII, Buildings and Structures
Ch. 124, Building Regulations Ch. 150
Ch. 125, Construction Codes, Uniform Ch. 170
Ch. 126, Fire Limits Ch. 207
Ch. 128, House Numbering Ch. 147
Ch. 129, Housing Standards Ch. 230
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:839
Chapter/Title From 1967 Code Location in 2012 Code
Ch. 131, Plumbing Code Ch. 263, Part 2
Ch. 133, Septic Tanks, Cesspools and Privy
Vaults
Ch. 286, Art. I
Ch. 134, Sewerage Connections Ch. 286, Art. II
Ch. 135, Sewer Rents Ch. 286, Art. III
Ch. 136, Sewers
Part 1, Industrial Waste See now Ch. 290, Part 1
Part 2, Wastewater Collection and
Treatment
Ch. 290, Part 2
Part IX, Subdivisions and Zoning
Ch. 138, Land Subdivision Ch. 320
Ch. 140, Zoning Reference page only; see Ch.
370
Part X, Index
Part XI, Appendix
Ch. 150, Enumeration of Street, Sewer and
Land Ordinances
Ch. A400
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2080
1-5-2004 Garbage amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 2096
Ord. No.
2081
2-25-2004 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2082
6-23-2004 Uniform construction
codes
Ch. 170
Ord. No.
2083
9-22-2004 Alcoholic beverage
license transfer
NCM
Res. No. 830 10-27-2004 Public market amendment Ch. 267
Ord. No.
2084
12-22-2004 2005 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
2085
12-22-2004 Salaries amendment NCM
§ DT-1 HANOVER CODE § DL-1
1:840
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2086
12-22-2004 Garbage amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 2096
Ord. No.
2087
12-22-2004 Water rates amendment Ch. 355, Art. II
Ord. No.
2088
12-22-2004 Sewer rents amendment Ch. 286, Art. III
Ord. No.
2089
12-22-2004 Sewer rents amendment Ch. 286, Art. III
Ord. No.
2090
12-22-2004 Street vacation Ch. A400
Ord. No.
2091
12-22-2004 Zoning amendment See Ch. 370
Ord. No.
2092
4-13-2005 Alcoholic beverage
license transfer
NCM
Ord. No.
2093
4-27-2005 Zoning amendment See Ch. 370
Ord. No.
2094
11-9-2005 Street vacation Ch. A400
Ord. No.
2095
11-9-2005 Fire Commissioner; Fire
Department amendment
Ch. 43
Ord. No.
2096
11-9-2005 Solid waste Ch. 308
Ord. No.
2097
11-22-2005 General obligation note NCM
Ord. No.
2098
12-14-2005 Sewer rents amendment Ch. 286, Art. III
Ord. No.
2099
12-14-2005 Alcoholic beverage
license transfer
NCM
Ord. No.
2100
12-28-2005 2006 tax levy NCM
Ord. No.
2101
12-28-2005 Salaries amendment NCM
Ord. No.
2102
12-28-2005 Sewer rents amendment Ch. 286, Art. III
Ord. No.
2103
12-28-2005 Garbage, rubbish and
ashes rates
NCM
Ord. No.
2104
1-25-2006 General obligation note NCM
Ord. No.
2105
1-25-2006 Sewage connections
amendment
Ch. 286, Art. II
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:841
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2106
3-22-2006 Fire Drivers Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 62, Art. III
Ord. No.
2107
4-12-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 346
Ord. No.
2108
5-10-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 346
Ord. No.
2109
8-9-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 346
Ord. No.
2110
8-9-2006 Street opening
amendment
Ch. A400
Ord. No.
2111
9-27-2006 General obligation bond NCM
Ord. No.
2112
11-21-2006 Sewer rents amendment Ch. 286, Art. III
Ord. No.
2113
11-21-2006 Solid waste amendment Ch. 308
Res. No. 862 9-27-2006 Public market amendment Ch. 267
Ord. No.
2114
12-27-2006 2007 tax levy NCM
Ord. No.
2115
12-27-2006 Salaries amendment NCM
Ord. No.
2116
12-27-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 346
Ord. No.
2117
12-26-2006 Fire Commissioner; Fire
Department amendment
Ch. 43
Ord. No.
2118
12-29-2006 Acquisition of property by
eminent domain
Ch. A400
Ord. No.
2119
3-28-2007 Shade trees amendment Ch. 294
4-1-2007 Comcast cable agreement Ch. A402, Art. VI
Ord. No.
2120
4-11-2007 Fire Drivers Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 62, Art. III
Ord. No.
2121
4-11-2007 Police Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 62, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2122
4-11-2007 Borough Employees
Pension Plan amendment
Ch. 62, Art. II
Ord. No.
2123
4-25-2007 Zoning amendment See Ch. 370
Ord. No.
2124
4-25-2007 Yard sales; auctions
amendment
Ch. 364
§ DL-1 HANOVER CODE § DL-1
1:842
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2125
4-25-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 346
Ord. No.
2126
11-14-2007 Street vacation Ch. A400
Ord. No.
2127
11-28-2007 Sewer rents amendment Ch. 286, Art. III
Ord. No.
2128
11-28-2007 Sewer rents amendment Ch. 286, Art. III
Ord. No.
2129
12-11-2007 Local services tax Ch. 325, Art. VI
Ord. No.
2130
12-26-2007 2008 tax levy NCM
Ord. No.
2131
12-26-2007 Salaries amendment NCM
Ord. No.
2132
12-26-2007 Garbage, rubbish and
ashes rates
NCM
Ord. No.
2133
12-26-2007 Zoning amendment See Ch. 370
Ord. No.
2134
6-25-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 346
Ord. No.
2135
6-25-2008 Police Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 62, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2136
8-27-2008 Penn Township
Wastewater Treatment
Standards
Ch. 290, Part 2
Ord. No.
2137
9-24-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 346
Ord. No.
2138
10-22-2008 Zoning Map amendment NCM
Res. No. 899 12-23-2008 Public market amendment Ch. 267
12-23-2008 Open records policy Ch. 80, Art. II
Ord. No.
2139
12-23-2008 2009 tax levy NCM
Ord. No.
2140
12-23-2008 Salaries amendment NCM
Ord. No.
2141
12-23-2008 Local services tax
amendment
Ch. 325, Art. VI
Ord. No.
2142
12-23-2008 Sewer rents amendment Ch. 286, Art. III
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:843
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2143
12-23-2008 Sewer rents amendment Ch. 286, Art. III
Ord. No.
2144
12-23-2008 Parks and other public
areas: rules and
regulations amendment
Ch. 259, Art. I
Ord. No.
2145
2-11-2009 Borough Employees
Pension Plan amendment
Ch. 62, Art. II
Ord. No.
2146
2-11-2009 Fire Drivers Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 62, Art. III
Ord. No.
2147
2-11-2009 Police Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 62, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2148
2-11-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 346
Ord. No.
2149
2-18-2009 General obligation note NCM
Ord. No.
2150
3-25-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 346
Ord. No.
2151
8-26-2009 Building regulations
amendment
Ch. 150
Ord. No.
2152A
9-9-2009 Zoning amendment See Ch. 370
Ord. No.
2153
9-9-2009 Eating and drinking
establishments
amendment
Ch. 137, Part 2,
Art. III
Ord. No.
2154
10-14-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 346
Ord. No.
2155
12-23-2009 2010 tax levy NCM
Ord. No.
2156
12-23-2009 Salaries amendment NCM
Res. No. 927 12-23-2009 Police Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 62, Art. IV,
footnote only
Ord. No.
2157
3-24-2010 Parking meters
amendment
Ch. 254
Ord. No.
2158
3-24-2010 Water rates amendment Ch. 355, Art. II
Ord. No.
2159
3-24-2010 Water rates amendment Ch. 355, Art. II
§ DL-1 HANOVER CODE § DL-1
1:844
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2160
4-28-2010 Parks and other public
areas: rules and
regulations amendment
Ch. 259, Art. I
Ord. No.
2161
5-12-2010 Zoning Map amendment NCM
Ord. No.
2162
6-9-2010 Civil Service Commission Ch. 25
Ord. No.
2163
6-9-2010 Milk and milk products
repealer
Repealer only
Ord. No.
2164
6-9-2010 Frozen desserts repealer Repealer only
Ord. No.
2165
8-25-2010 Bond NCM
Res. No. 938 10-13-2010 Public market amendment Ch. 267
Ord. No.
2166
11-10-2010 Street vacation Ch. A400
Ord. No.
2167
12-22-2010 Tax rate 2011 NCM
Ord. No.
2168
12-22-2010 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
2169
12-22-2010 Parking meters
amendment
Ch. 254
Ord. No.
2170
12-22-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 346
Ord. No.
2171
12-22-2010 Industrial waste
amendment
Ch. 290, Part 1
Ord. No.
2172
12-22-2010 Water rates amendment Ch. 355, Art. II
Ord. No.
2173
1-26-2011 Industrial waste
amendment
Ch. 290, Part 1
Res. No. 956 4-27-2011 Penn Township
Wastewater Treatment
Standards amendment
Ch. 290, Part 2
Ord. No.
2174
9-28-2011 Local services tax
amendment
Ch. 325, Art. VI
Ord. No.
2175
9-28-2011 Board of Health rules and
regulations: eating and
drinking establishments
amendment
Ch. 137, Part 2,
Art. IV
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:845
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No. 970 9-28-2011 Board of Health rules and
regulations: eating and
drinking establishments
amendment
Ch. 137, Part 2,
Art. IV,
attachment only
Ord. No.
2176
10-12-2011 Signs; street
encroachments
amendment
Ch. 298
Res. No. 971 10-12-2011 Fees amendment Ch. A401
Ord. No.
2177
10-26-2011 Earned income and net
profits tax
Ch. 325, Art. VII
Ord. No.
2178
11-22-2011 Police Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 62, Art. IV,
attachment only
Ord. No.
2179
12-28-2011 Water rates amendment Ch. 355, Art. II
Ord. No.
2180
12-28-2011 Solid waste amendment Ch. 308
Ord. No.
2181
12-28-2011 Sewer rents amendment Ch. 286, Art. III
Ord. No.
2182
12-28-2011 Tax rate 2012 NCM
Ord. No.
2183
12-28-2011 Salaries amendment NCM
Res. No. 985 12-28-2011 Fees amendment Ch. A401
Res. No. 986 12-28-2011 Sewers and sewage
disposal: sewer rents
amendment; fees
amendment
Ch. 286, Art. III;
Ch. A401
Res. No. 987 12-28-2011 Fees amendment Ch. A401
Ord. No.
2184
3-28-2012 Street vacation Ch. A400
Ord. No.
2185
5-23-2012 Street acceptance Ch. A400
Ord. No.
2186
5-23-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 346
Ord. No.
2187
6-27-2012 Street acceptance Ch. A400
Ord. No.
2188
6-27-2012 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. II
Res. No.
1012
9-26-2012 Public market amendment Ch. 267
§ DL-1 HANOVER CODE § DL-1
1:846
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2189
10-24-2012 General obligation bond NCM
Ord. No.
2190
11-28-2012 Tax rate 2013 NCM
Ord. No.
2191
12-26-2012 Property maintenance Ch. 265
Ord. No.
2192
12-26-2012 Fire prevention Superseded by
Ord. No. 2284
Ord. No.
2193
12-26-2012 Salaries amendment NCM
Ord. No.
2194
12-26-2012 Water rates amendment Ch. 355, Art. II
Ord. No.
2195
12-26-2012 Water rates amendment Ch. 355, Art. II
Ord. No.
2196
1-23-2013 Tax rate 2013 NCM
Res. No.
1031
1-23-2013 Tax Collector amendment Ch. 105
Res. No.
1037
3-27-2013 Fees amendment Ch. A401
Ord. No.
2197
6-5-2013 General obligation bond NCM
Res. No.
1046
6-5-2013 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 62, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2198
6-12-2013 Parking meters
amendment
Ch. 254
Res. No.
1049
6-26-2013 Fees Amendment; Parking
Meters Amendment
Ch. 254; Ch. A401
Res. No.
1061
11-26-2013 Fees amendment Ch. A401
Res. No.
1062
11-26-2013 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 62, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2199
12-11-2013 Tax rate 2014 NCM
Ord. No.
2200
12-23-2013 Salaries amendment NCM
Res. No.
1067
12-23-2013 Billing credits for water
leaks
Ch. 286, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2201
3-26-2014 Zoning amendment See Ch. 370
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:847
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2202
2-26-2014 Employee work
regulations amendment
Ch. 38
Ord. No.
2203
7-23-2014 Borough Employees
Pension Plan amendment
Ch. 62, Art. II,
attachment only
Res. No.
1081
9-24-2014 Public market amendment Ch. 267
Ord. No.
2204
11-25-2014 Tax rate 2015 NCM
Ord. No.
2204(A)
12-23-2014 Tax rate 2015 NCM
Ord. No.
2205
11-25-2014 Borough Employees
Pension Plan amendment
Ch. 62, Art. II,
attachment only
Ord. No.
2206
11-25-2014 Police Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 62, Art. IV,
attachment only
Ord. No.
2207
11-25-2014 Fire Drivers Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 62, Art. III,
attachment only
Ord. No.
2208
12-23-2014 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
2209
12-23-2014 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2210
12-23-2014 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2211
12-23-2014 Intermunicipal
agreements: York County
Regional Chesapeake Bay
Pollutant Reduction Plan
Ch. 52, Art. II
Ord. No.
2212
12-23-2014 Stormwater management Repealed by Ord.
No. 2235
Ord. No.
2213
12-23-2014 Parks and other public
areas: rules and
regulations amendment
Ch. 259, Art. I
Ord. No.
2214
3-25-2015 Water rates amendment Ch. 355, Art. II
Ord. No.
2215
3-25-2015 Water rates amendment Ch. 355, Art. II
Ord. No.
2216
4-22-2015 Fire Commissioner; Fire
Department amendment;
fire lanes amendment;
subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 43; Ch. 204,
footnote only; Ch.
320, footnote only
§ DL-1 HANOVER CODE § DL-1
1:848
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2217
4-22-2015 Per capita tax amendment Ch. 325, Art. I
Ord. No.
2218
5-27-2015 Sidewalk eating
establishments
Ch. 316, Art. V
Ord. No.
2219
5-27-2015 Bond NCM
Res. No.
1098
5-27-2015 Fees amendment Superseded by
Res. No. 1121
Ord. No.
2220
6-24-2015 Parking meters
amendment
Ch. 254
Ord. No.
2221
6-24-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 346
Ord. No.
2222
7-22-2015 Sewer connection permit;
tapping fee
Ch. 286, Art. V
Ord. No.
2223
7-22-2015 Sidewalk, curb and gutter
construction amendment
Ch. 316, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2224
7-22-2015 Open burning amendment Ch. 159
Ord. No.
2225
7-22-2015 Solid waste amendment Ch. 308
Ord. No.
2226
7-22-2015 Licensing for public
entertainment, peddling
and soliciting
amendment; special
events
Ch. 240; Ch. 309
Res. No.
1103
7-22-2015 Open records policy
amendment
Ch. 80, Art. II
Ord. No.
2227
8-26-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 346
Ord. No.
2228
8-26-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 346
Ord. No.
2229
8-26-2015 Building regulations
amendment
Ch. 150
Ord. No.
2230
8-26-2015 Street openings and
excavations amendment
Ch. 313
Ord. No.
2231
8-26-2015 Plumbing Code
amendment
Ch. 263, Part 2
Ord. No.
2232
8-26-2015 Plumbing Code
amendment
Ch. 263, Part 2
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:849
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2233
8-26-2015 Fees amendment Ch. A401
Ord. No.
2234
8-26-2015 Sidewalk, curb and gutter
construction amendment
Ch. 316, Art. IV
Res. No.
1104
8-26-2015 Fees amendment Ch. A401
Res. No.
1105
8-26-2015 Fees amendment Superseded by
Res. No. 1121
Res. No.
1106
8-26-2015 Fees amendment Ch. A401
Res. No.
1107
8-26-2015 Fees amendment Ch. A401
Res. No.
1108
8-26-2015 Fees amendment Ch. A401
Ord. No.
2235
9-23-2015 Stormwater management Ch. 310
Ord. No.
2236
9-23-2015 Parking meters
amendment
Ch. 254
Res. No.
1110
9-23-2015 Fees amendment Ch. A401
Ord. No.
2237
12-23-2015 Zoning amendment See Ch. 370
Ord. No.
2238
12-23-2015 Floodplain management Ch. 215
Ord. No.
2239
12-23-2015 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
2240
12-23-2015 Tax rate 2016 NCM
Ord. No.
2241
12-23-2015 Street acceptance Ch. A400
Res. No.
1121
12-23-2015 Fees amendment Ch. A401
Res. No.
1122
12-23-2015 Fees amendment Ch. A401
Ord. No.
2242
1-27-2016 Tax rate 2016 NCM
Ord. No.
2243
5-25-2016 Signs; street
encroachments
amendment
Ch. 298
§ DL-1 HANOVER CODE § DL-1
1:850
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2244
5-25-2016 Taxation: local services
tax amendment
Ch. 325, Art. VI
Ord. No.
2245
5-25-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 346
Ord. No.
2246
5-25-2016 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2247
7-27-2016 Taxation: business
privilege tax amendment
Ch. 325, Art. III
Ord. No.
2248
7-27-2016 Enumeration of street,
sewer and land
ordinances amendment
Ch. A400
Ord. No.
2249
8-24-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 346
Ord. No.
2250
8-24-2016 Enumeration of street,
sewer and land
ordinances amendment
Ch. A400
Ord. No.
2251
9-28-2016 Vehicle weight limits
amendment
Ch. 350
Res. No.
1135
9-28-2016 Public market
amendment; Fees: fee
schedule amendment
Ch. 267; Ch. A401
Ord. No.
2252
10-26-2016 Parks and other public
areas: rules and
regulations amendment
Ch. 259, Art. I
Ord. No.
2253
12-28-2016 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
2254
12-28-2016 Tax rate 2017 NCM
Ord. No.
2255
12-28-2016 Intermunicipal
agreements: Hanover
Area Fire and Rescue
Ch. 52, Art. III
Res. No.
1177
12-28-2016 Fees: miscellaneous fees
amendment
Ch. A401, Art. I
Res. No.
1178
1-25-2017 Fees: miscellaneous fees
amendment; fee schedule
amendment
Ch. A401, Art. I;
Ch. A401, Art. II
Res. No.
1180
1-25-2017 Fees: miscellaneous fees
amendment
Ch. A401, Art. I
Ord. No.
2256
4-26-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 346
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:851
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2257
7-26-2017 Fees: Miscellaneous Fees
Amendment
Ch. A401, Art. I
Ord. No.
2258
Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2259
8-23-2017 Intermunicipal
Agreements: York County
Regional Chesapeake Bay
Pollutant Reduction Plan
Amendment
Ch. 52, Art. II
Ord. No.
2260
Number Not Used
Ord. No.
2261
8-23-2017 Enumeration of Street,
Sewer and Land
Ordinances
Ch. A400
Ord. No.
2262
9-27-2017 Registration of Vacant
Property
Ch. 266, Art. I
Res. No.
1194
11-28-2017 Fees: Miscellaneous Fees
Amendment
Ch. A401, Art. I
Res. No.
1195
11-28-2017 Fees: Miscellaneous Fees
Amendment
Ch. A401, Art. I
Ord. No.
2263
12-27-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 346
Ord. No.
2264
Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
2265
12-27-2017 Tax Rate 2018 NCM
Ord. No.
2266
12-27-2017 Intermunicipal
Agreements:
Intergovernmental
Insurance Cooperative
Ch. 52, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2267
12-27-2017 Animals Ch. 126
Res. No.
1202
12-27-2017 Fees: Miscellaneous Fees
Amendment
Ch. A401, Art. I
Res. No.
1206
1-24-2018 Fees: Fee Schedule
Amendment
Ch. A401, Art. II
Ord. No.
2268
2-28-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 346
Ord. No.
2269
4-25-2018 Large Vehicles Ch. 348
§ DL-1 HANOVER CODE § DL-1
1:852
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2270
6-27-2018 Streets and Sidewalks:
Sidewalk Eating
Establishments
Amendment
Ch. 316, Art. V
Ord. No.
2271
6-27-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 346
Ord. No.
2272
8-22-2018 Large and Oversized
Vehicles: Oversized and/
or Overweight Vehicles
Ch. 348, Art. II
Ord. No.
2273
8-22-2018 Stormwater Management
Amendment
Ch. 310
Ord. No.
2274
9-26-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 346
Ord. No.
2275
10-24-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 346
Ord. No.
2276
10-24-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 346
Ord. No.
2277
10-24-2018 Municipal Authorities:
Stormwater Authority
Ch. 8, Art. III
Res. No.
1220
10-24-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. A401
Ord. No.
2278
11-28-2018 Pension Plans
Amendment
Ch. 62
Ord. No.
2279
12-19-2018 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
2280
12-19-2018 Tax Rate 2019 NCM
Res. No.
1234
12-19-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. A401
Res. No.
1235
12-19-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. A401
Res. No.
1236
12-19-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. A401
Res. No.
1237
12-19-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. A401
Res. No.
1238
12-19-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. A401
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:853
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. No.
2281
2-27-2019 Taxation: Local
Economic
Revitalization Tax
Assistance
(LERTA) Program
Ch. 325,
Art. VIII
11
Res. No. 1244 2-27-2019 Boundaries of
Deteriorated
Area (LERTA)
NCM 11
Ord. No.
2282
3-27-2019 Taxation: Local
Economic
Revitalization Tax
Assistance
(LERTA) Program
Amendment
Ch. 325,
Art. VIII
11
Ord. No.
2283
3-27-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 346 11
Ord. No.
2284
4-24-2019 Fire Prevention Ch. 212 11
Ord. No.
2285
4-24-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 346 11
Res. No. 1252 4-24-2019 Eligibility for
Participation in
Employees
Deferred
Compensation
Plan
NCM 11
Ord. No.
2286
6-26-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 346 11
Ord. No.
2287
8-28-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 346 11
Ord. No.
2288
Not
Adopted
11
Res. No. 1261 8-28-2019 Policy
Authorizing YATB
To Provide Relief
From Delinquent
MBP Taxes
Interest/Penalties
NCM 11
§ DL-1 HANOVER CODE § DL-1
1:854
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Res. No. 1264 8-28-2019 Franchise
Agreements:
Comcast Cable
Agreement
Amendment
Ch. A402,
Art. VI
11
Ord. No.
2289
9-25-2019 Bond NCM 11
Ord. No.
2290
10-23-2019 Renumbering of
Specific Buildings
NCM 11
Ord. No.
2291
11-26-2019 Fire Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 212 11
Ord. No.
2292
Not
Adopted
11
Ord. No.
2293
12-23-2019 Sewer Use
Regulations:
Industrial Waste
Ch. 290,
Part 1
11
Res. No. 1277 12-23-2019 Fees: Fee
Schedule
Amendment
Ch. A401,
Art. II
11
Res. No. 1278 12-23-2019 Fees:
Miscellaneous
Fees Amendment
Ch. A401,
Art. I
11
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:855

Last Amended 03/26/2014
Ordinance #2201
THE BOROUGH OF HANOVER
ZONING ORDINANCE
2014 PRINTING
II
THE BOROUGH OF HANOVER
ZONING ORDINANCE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I - INTRODUCTION
SECTION 140-1. Short Title ................................................................................................... 1
SECTION 140-2. Purposes ..................................................................................................... 1
SECTION 140-3. Scope .......................................................................................................... 1
SECTION 140-4. Interpretation ............................................................................................. 1
SECTION 140-5. Definitions .................................................................................................. 2
ARTICLE II - DISTRICTS
SECTION 140-6. Classes of Districts ................................................................................... 14
SECTION 140-7. Zoning Map .............................................................................................. 14
SECTION 140-8. District Boundaries .................................................................................. 15
ARTICLE III - GENERAL REGULATIONS
SECTION 140-9. Application .............................................................................................. 16
SECTION 140-10. General Use Regulations .......................................................................... 16
SECTION 140-11. Municipal, Public, and School Buildings and Uses .................................. 17
SECTION 140-12. Public-Utility Buildings and Uses ............................................................ 17
SECTION 140-13. Accessory Buildings and Accessory Uses ................................................. 17
SECTION 140-14. Swimming Pools ...................................................................................... 18
SECTION 140-15. Conversion Apartment ............................................................................. 18
SECTION 140-16. Lot Area ................................................................................................... 18
SECTION 140-17. Railroads ................................................................................................. 19
SECTION 140-18. Courts ..................................................................................................... 19
SECTION 140-19. Habitable Floor Area ................................................................................ 19
SECTION 140-20. Heights of Buildings ................................................................................. 20
SECTION 140-21. Front Yards .............................................................................................. 21
SECTION 140-22. Side Yards ............................................................................................... 21
SECTION 140-23. Through Lots ........................................................................................... 21
SECTION 140-24. Dwelling Units Above Stores .................................................................... 21
SECTION 140-25. Projections into Yards .............................................................................. 21
SECTION 140-26. Fences, Walls, and Screen Plantings ........................................................ 22
SECTION 140-27. Open Storage of Vehicles and Equipment ................................................ 22
SECTION 140-28. Professional and Home Occupations in Residential Districts .................. 23
SECTION 140-29. Adult Bookstore and/or Theater .............................................................. 24
SECTION 140-30. Foundations & Appurtenances ................................................................ 25
SECTION 140-31. Animals, Poultry, and Farming ................................................................ 25
SECTION 140-32. Vision Obstruction ................................................................................... 26
SECTION 140-33. Access to Lots .......................................................................................... 26
SECTION 140-34. Used or Discarded Parts and Containers ................................................. 26
SECTION 140-35. Newly Annexed Territory .......................................................................... 26
SECTION 140-36. Prohibited Uses ........................................................................................ 26
SECTION 140-37. Nursing or Convalescent Homes .............................................................. 27
SECTION 140-38. Drive-in Traffic ......................................................................................... 27
SECTION 140-38A. Private Sales in Private Residences ...................................................... 27
III
ARTICLE IV: AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS
SECTION 140-39. Application ............................................................................................... 27
SECTION 140-40. Use Regulations ........................................................................................ 27
SECTION 140-41. Area Regulations ....................................................................................... 28
SECTION 140-42. Height Regulations ................................................................................... 28
SECTION 140-43. Off-Street Parking ..................................................................................... 29
ARTICLE V: R-6 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION 140-44. Application ............................................................................................... 29
SECTION 140-45. Use Regulations ........................................................................................ 29
SECTION 140-46. Area Regulations ....................................................................................... 29
SECTION 140-47. Height Regulations ................................................................................... 30
SECTION 140-48. Automobile Parking Space Regulations ..................................................... 30
SECTION 140-49. Accessory Buildings .................................................................................. 30
ARTICLE VI: R-5 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION 140-50. Application ............................................................................................... 30
SECTION 140-51. Use Regulations ........................................................................................ 30
SECTION 140-52. Area Regulations ....................................................................................... 30
SECTION 140-53. Height Regulations ................................................................................... 31
SECTION 140-54. Automobile Parking Space Regulations ..................................................... 31
SECTION 140-55. Accessory Buildings .................................................................................. 31
ARTICLE VII: R-3 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION 140-56. Application ............................................................................................... 31
SECTION 140-57. Use Regulations ........................................................................................ 31
SECTION 140-58. Area Regulations ....................................................................................... 32
SECTION 140-59. Height Regulations ................................................................................... 32
SECTION 140-60. Automobile Parking Space Regulations ..................................................... 32
SECTION 140-61. Accessory Buildings .................................................................................. 32
ARTICLE VIII: O-A RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION 140-62. Application ............................................................................................... 32
SECTION 140-63. Use Regulations in Principal Buildings ..................................................... 32
SECTION 140-64. Use Regulations in Accessory Buildings .................................................... 33
SECTION 140-65. Area Regulations ....................................................................................... 34
SECTION 140-66. Height Regulations ................................................................................... 35
SECTION 140-67. Automobile Parking Space Regulations ..................................................... 35
SECTION 140-68. Accessory Buildings .................................................................................. 35
IV
ARTICLE IX: BUSINESS DISTRICTS
SECTION 140-69. LB - Local Business District...................................................................... 35
SECTION 140-69A. Application ............................................................................................... 35
SECTION 140-69B. Use Regulations........................................................................................ 35
SECTION 140-69C. Area Regulations ...................................................................................... 36
SECTION 140-69D. Height Regulations ................................................................................... 37
SECTION 140-69E. Automobile Parking and Loading Space Regulations ................................ 37
SECTION 140-70. HB Highway-Oriented Business District ................................................... 37
SECTION 140-70A. Application ............................................................................................... 37
SECTION 140-70B. Use Regulations........................................................................................ 37
SECTION 140-70C. Area Regulations ...................................................................................... 38
SECTION 140-70D. Height Regulations ................................................................................... 39
SECTION 140-70E. Automobile Parking Space Regulations ................................................... 39
SECTION 140-71. GB – General Business Districts .............................................................. 39
SECTION 140-71A. Application .............................................................................................. 39
SECTION 140-71B. Use Regulations....................................................................................... 39
SECTION 140-71C. Area Regulations ..................................................................................... 40
SECTION 140-71D. Height Regulations .................................................................................. 41
SECTION 140-71E. Automobile Parking Space Regulations ................................................... 41
ARTICLE X
SECTION 140-72 to 140.78. RESERVED ................................................................................. 41
ARTICLE XI: INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION 140-79. LM - Limited Manufacturing District ....................................................... 41
SECTION 140-79A. Application .............................................................................................. 41
SECTION 140-79B. Use Regulations....................................................................................... 42
SECTION 140-79C. Area Regulations ..................................................................................... 42
SECTION 140-79D. Height Regulations .................................................................................. 42
SECTION 140-79E. Parking Space Regulations ...................................................................... 43
SECTION 140-79F. Loading Space ........................................................................................ 43
SECTION 140-79G. Submission/Approval of Limited Manufacturing Development Plan ........ 43
SECTION 140-80. M - Manufacturing Districts .................................................................... 43
SECTION 140-80A. Application .............................................................................................. 43
SECTION 140-80B. Use Regulations....................................................................................... 43
SECTION 140-80C. Area Regulations ..................................................................................... 45
SECTION 140-80D. Height Regulations .................................................................................. 45
SECTION 140-80E. Automobile Parking Space Regulations ................................................... 45
SECTION 140-80F. Loading Space ......................................................................................... 45
SECTION 140-81. HI - Heavy Industry Districts ................................................................... 46
SECTION 140-81A. Application .............................................................................................. 46
SECTION 140-81B. Use Regulations....................................................................................... 46
SECTION 140-81C. Area Regulations ..................................................................................... 47
SECTION 140-81D. Height Regulations .................................................................................. 47
SECTION 140-81E. Automobile Parking Space Regulations ................................................... 47
SECTION 140-81F. Loading Space ......................................................................................... 47
V
ARTICLE XII: OPEN SPACE DISTRICTS
SECTION 140-82. Application ................................................................................................ 48
SECTION 140-83. Use Regulations ......................................................................................... 48
ARTICLE XII-A - FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT PROVISIONS
SECTION 140-84. Application/Floodplain District Provisions ................................................. 48
SECTION 140-85. Permitted Uses........................................................................................... 49
SECTION 140-86. Uses Permitted by Special Exception ......................................................... 52
SECTION 140-87. Flood-Fringe District (FF) ........................................................................... 52
SECTION 140-88. General Flood Plain District (FA) ................................................................ 53
SECTION 140-88A Prohibited Uses in Flood Plain District ...................................................... 54
SECTION 140-89. Special Exceptions and Variances in the Flood Plain District..................... 54
SECTION 140-90. Administration ........................................................................................... 60
ARTICLE XIII - NONCONFORMING BUILDING AND USES
SECTION 140-91. Application ................................................................................................ 60
SECTION 140-92. Building Permit .......................................................................................... 60
SECTION 140-93. Alteration, Restoration, or Replacement ..................................................... 61
SECTION 140-94. Extensions and Enlargements ................................................................... 61
SECTION 140-95. Discontinuance of Nonconforming Use of Land ......................................... 62
SECTION 140-96. Maintenance of Premises for Nonconforming Uses ..................................... 62
SECTION 140-97. Existing Proposals ..................................................................................... 62
SECTION 140-98. Certificate Required ................................................................................... 62
SECTION 140-99. Changes ..................................................................................................... 62
ARTICLE XIV - PARKING AND LOADING SPACE
SECTION 140-100. Parking Space, Automobile ...................................................................... 63
SECTION 140-101. Loading and Unloading Space.................................................................. 64
SECTION 140-102. Reduction in Required Parking and Loading Facilities ............................. 65
SECTION 140-103. Exceptions ............................................................................................... 65
ARTICLE XV - MOTOR VEHICLE ACCESS
SECTION 140-104. Application............................................................................................... 65
ARTICLE XVI - PARKING LOTS AND COMMUNITY GARAGES
SECTION 140-105. Submission of Plans ................................................................................ 66
ARTICLE XVII - UNIT DEVELOPMENT PLAN
SECTION 140-106. Residential Development Plan .................................................................. 67
VI
ARTICLE XVIII - MOBILE HOME COMMUNITIES
SECTION 140-107. Proposals ................................................................................................. 68
SECTION 140-108. Definitions of Mobile Home Terms ........................................................... 69
SECTION 140-109. Regulations .............................................................................................. 69
ARTIBLE XIX - SHOPPING CENTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN
SECTION 140-110. Submission of Plans ................................................................................ 71
SECTION 140-111. Approvals ................................................................................................. 72
ARTICLE XX - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT AND/OR CONDOMINIUM
SECTION 140-112. Submission of Plans ................................................................................ 72
SECTION 140-113. Approvals ................................................................................................. 73
ARTICLE XXI - SIGNS
SECTION 140-114. Compliance Necessary ............................................................................. 73
SECTION 140-115. Sign ...................................................................................................... 73
SECTION 140-116. Permitted Use of Signs ............................................................................. 75
SECTION 140-117/118. Reserved ........................................................................................... 76
SECTION 140-119. General Regulations for all Signs ............................................................. 76
ARTICLE XXII - ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 140-120. Enforcement ............................................................................................ 77
SECTION 140-121. Requirement of Zoning Permits ................................................................ 77
SECTION 140-122. Application for Zoning Permits ................................................................. 78
SECTION 140-123. Issue of Zoning Permits ........................................................................... 78
SECTION 140-124. Certificate of Nonconformance ................................................................. 78
SECTION 140-125. Professional or Home Occupation Certificate ........................................... 78
SECTION 140-126. Temporary Permits .................................................................................. 78
SECTION 140-127. Fees ...................................................................................................... 79
ARTICLE XXIII - ZONING HEARING BOARD
SECTION 140-128. Zoning Hearing Board .............................................................................. 79
SECTION 140-129. Powers ..................................................................................................... 79
SECTION 140-130. Rules ...................................................................................................... 79
SECTION 140-131. Meetings .................................................................................................. 80
SECTION 140-132. Appeals to the Zoning Hearing Board ...................................................... 80
SECTION 140-133. Hearings .................................................................................................. 80
SECTION 140-134. Appeal to Court ........................................................................................ 81
SECTION 140-135. Standards for Review of Proposed Variances/Special Exceptions ............ 81
ARTICLE XXIV - AMENDMENTS
SECTION 140-136. Amendment by Borough Council ............................................................. 83
SECTION 140-137. Amendment by Citizens' Petitions ............................................................ 83
SECTION 140-138. Citizen Protest Against Amendments ....................................................... 83
VII
ARTICLE XXV - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION 140-139. Remedies ................................................................................................. 83
SECTION 140-140. Violation and Penalties ............................................................................ 84
SECTION 140-141. Severability .............................................................................................. 84
SECTION 140-142. Inconsistent Ordinances Repealed ........................................................... 84
ADDENDA
SECTION 140-143. Summary of Standardized Zoning Regulations - Table I .......................... 85
PLATE I Curb Radii Length .................................................................................... 86
PLATE II Sight Distance Diagram ........................................................................... 87

1
HANOVER BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE OF 1961
(ORDINANCE NUMBER 1110)
An ordinance regulating and restricting the height, number of stories, and size of buildings and other structures, their construction, alteration, extension, repair, maintenance and all facilities and services in or about such buildings and structures, the percentage of lot that may be occupied, the size of yards, courts and other open spaces, the density of population, the location and use of buildings, structures and lands for trade, industry, residence or other purposes; establishing and maintaining building lines and setback lines upon all streets, public roads, or highways; establishing districts and boundaries thereof for said purposes within the Borough of Hanover; providing for the appointment of a Zoning Hearing Board and setting forth the duties and functions of said Board; and providing for the administration and enforcement of this ordinance and penalties for the violation thereof.
Be it enacted and ordained by the Borough of Hanover and it is hereby enacted and ordained by the authority of the same, as follows:
ARTICLE I
INTRODUCTION
SECTION 140-1. SHORT TITLE. This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Hanover Zoning Ordinance of 1961."
SECTION 140-2. PURPOSES. This ordinance is enacted for the following purposes: to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Borough of Hanover, by lessening congestion in the roads and streets; securing safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; providing adequate light and air; preventing the overcrowding of land; avoiding undue concentration of population; facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks, and other public requirements; conserving the value of buildings; and encouraging the most appropriate use of land.
SECTION 140-3. SCOPE. From and after the effective date of this ordinance, the use of all land and every building or portion of a building erected, altered with respect to height and area, added to, or relocated, and every use within a building or use accessory thereto, in the Borough of Hanover, shall be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. Any existing building or structure and any existing use of building or land not in conformity with the regulations herein prescribed shall be regarded as nonconforming, but may be continued, extended, or changed subject to the special regulations herein provided with respect to nonconforming building or uses.
SECTION 140-4. INTERPRETATION. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, morals, and general welfare.
Where the provisions of this ordinance impose greater restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this ordinance shall be controlling. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions than this ordinance, or contain prohibitions in addition to those required by this ordinance, the provisions of such statute, other ordinance or regulation shall be controlling.
2
SECTION 140-5. DEFINITIONS.
A. For the purpose of this ordinance, certain terms and words are hereby defined and shall have the meanings set forth in the glossary at the end of this section, unless it shall be apparent from the context that different meanings are intended.
B. Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include the plural; the words in the plural number include the word "structure," except as otherwise specified. The term "used" shall mean "used or intended to be used, or arranged or designed for use." The term "occupied" shall mean "occupied or intended to be occupied, or arranged or designed for occupancy." The word "including" shall mean "including but not limited to."
C. GLOSSARY
ACCESSORY BUILDING - A subordinate building on the property which is used for purposes incidental to the uses of the principal building.
ACCESSORY USE - A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or building and located on the same lot with such principal use or buildings.
ADULT BOOKSTORE AND/OR THEATER - A commercial establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its business and stock in trade books, magazines, photographs, motion picture film, video tapes, or other similar material which is sold or offered for viewing that is lewd, or an establishment with a segment or section of its business devoted to the sale, viewing, or display of lewd material. (Amended Ord. #1774 4/4/84)
ALLEY - A public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property, not intended for general traffic circulation, and twenty-five (25') feet or less in width.
ALTERATIONS - As applied to a building or structure, means a change or rearrangement in the structural parts or in the exit facilities, or an enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height, or the moving from one (1) location or position to another.
ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL - A structural alteration is any change in the supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls, partitions, columns, beams, or girders.
APARTMENT HOUSE - A building arranged, intended or occupied by three (3) or more families living independently of each other.
APARTMENT - CONVERSION - A multi-family dwelling constructed by converting an existing dwelling into apartments for more than one (1) family without substantially altering the exterior of the building.
APARTMENT - EFFICIENCY – A one or two-room apartment consisting of one room for eating, living and a small kitchen (kitchenette) and the
3
second room used for a bedroom. This is in addition to a separate bathroom. (Amended Ord. # 2201 – 03/26/14)
AREA, BUILDING - The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at the main grade level of the principal building and all accessory buildings, exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces, steps, eaves, cornices, and gutters.
AUTOMOBILE CAMP - Land or premises used or occupied, for compensation, by campers traveling by automobile or otherwise.
AUTO COURT - A building or group of buildings, whether detached or in connected units, used as individual sleeping or dwelling units designed primarily for transient automobile travelers and providing for accessory off-street parking facilities. The term "auto court" includes buildings designed as tourist courts, motor lodges, motels, and similar appellations.
AUTOMOBILE AND MOBILE HOME SALES AREA - An open, off-street area used for the display, sale, or rental of new or used automobiles or trailers and where no public or general repair work is done.
BAKING UNIT – A kitchen appliance designed to prepare food by cooking in a dry heat, typically at high temperatures. (Amended Ord # 2201 - 03/26/14)
BASEMENT - Any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. (Amended Ord. #1857 - 05/17/89).
BED AND BREAKFAST - Any dwelling in which more than three (3) persons either individually or as families, are housed or lodged for hire, with or without meals, for transient guests, for a period less than one (1) week. A rooming house or a furnished room house shall be deemed a Bed and Breakfast but not including a building in which ten (10) or more guest rooms are provided (see hotel). For each guest room one (1) off street parking space will be required for Bed and Breakfasts in addition to the parking required for dwelling unit. (Amended Ord. #1816 - 4/16/86)
BLOCK - The property abutting on one (1) side of a street and lying between the two (2) nearest intersecting or intercepting streets or nearest intersecting or intercepting street and railroad right-of-way, waterway, or other barrier to or gap in the continuity of development along such street, alleys excluded.
BOARDING HOUSE - Any dwelling in which more than three (3) persons, either individually or as families, are housed or lodged for hire, with or without meals for a period of more than one (1) week. A rooming house shall be deemed a boarding house, but not including a building in which ten (10) or more guest rooms are provided (see hotel). Boarding houses shall provide five hundred (500) square feet in lot space above the zone minimum for each guest room. (Amended Ord. #1816 - 4/16/86)
BUILDING - A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, for the shelter support, enclosure or protection of persons, animals, chattels, or property.
4
(1) DETACHED - A building surrounded by open space on the same lot, which has no party walls.
(2) SEMIDETACHED - A building which has only one (1) party wall in common with an adjacent building.
(3) ATTACHED (ROW) - A building which has two (2) party walls in common with adjacent buildings.
BUILDING, MAIN - A building in which is conducted the principal use of lot on which it is situated.
BUILDING, FRONT LINE OF - The line of that face of the building nearest the front line of the lot. This face includes sun parlors and covered porches, whether enclosed or unenclosed, but does not include steps.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF - The vertical distance measured from the main street curb level to the highest point of the roof surface of a flat room, to the deck line of a mansard roof, and to one-half (1/2) the vertical distance between the eaves and ridge for a gable, hip or gambrel roof, provided, however, that where buildings are set back from the street line the height of the building may be measured from the average elevation of the finished yard grade along the front of the building.
BUSINESS - The engaging in the purchase, sale, barter or exchange of goods, wares, merchandise, or services, the maintenance or operation of offices, or recreational and amusement enterprises for profit.
CAMP - Any land and any building thereon used for any assembly of persons for what is commonly known as "day camp" purposes, whether or not conducted for profit, and whether occupied by adults or children, either as individuals, families, or groups.
CARPORT - An accessory building open on three (3) or four (4) sides which is detached or semi-attached to the main building and primarily designed or used for parking automobiles.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY - A statement, signed by the administrative officer, setting forth either that a building or structure complied with this ordinance, or that a building, structure, or parcel of land may lawfully be employed for specified uses, or both.
COMPLETELY DRY SPACE - a space which will remain totally dry during flooding; the structure is designed and constructed to prevent the passage of water and water vapor. (Amended Ord. #2152A 9/9/2009)
CONDOMINIUM - A condominium is a Special Exception to the normal manner of subdividing and/or owning property. It is a structure that has individual ownership of single units and an undivided (common) ownership of the common elements and facilities serving the structure, such as roofs, hallways, stairways, elevators, central heating and cooling systems, basements, lobbies, open space, driveways, sewer laterals, water lines,
5
storm sewers, recreation areas, sidewalks, parking areas, curbs, public right-of-way, and so forth. (Amended Ord. #1715 - 6/18/80)
COOKING, UNIT – A kitchen appliance capable of heating food to necessary temperatures so as to make it safe for consumption, as in boiling, roasting, steaming, etc. (Amended Ord. # 2201 – 03/26/14)
COURT, INNER - A court enclosed on all sides by exterior walls of a building or by exterior walls and lot lines on which walls are allowable.
COURT, OUTER - A court enclosed on not more than three (3) sides by exterior walls and lot lines on which walls are allowable, with one (1) side or end open to a street, driveway, alley, or yard.
COVERAGE - That percentage of the plot or lot area covered by the building area.
CURB LEVEL - The officially established grade of the curb line in front of the midpoint of that lot.
DEVELOPMENT - Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, the placement of mobile homes, streets, and other paving, utilities, filling, grading, excavation, mining, dredging, or drilling operations and the subdivision of land. (Amended Ord. #1732 - 12/16/81)
DISTRICT - A section of the Borough of Hanover for which uniform regulations governing the use, height, area, size and intensity of use or buildings and land, and open spaces about buildings, are herein established.
DOG KENNEL - Keeping of three (3) or more dogs that are more than six (6) months old.
DUMP - A lot of land or part thereof used primarily for the disposal by abandonment, dumping, burial, burning, or any other means and for whatever purpose, of garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, junk, discarded machinery, vehicles or parts thereof, or waste materials of any kind.
DWELLING - A building designed or used as the living quarters for one (1) or more families. The terms "dwelling," "one-family dwelling," "multiple dwelling," "two family dwelling," or "dwelling group," shall not be deemed to include automobile court, rooming house, tourist home, or hotel.
(1) DWELLING UNIT - Two (2) or more rooms and kitchen designed for or used as the living quarters of one (1) family and in which no more than two (2) persons, other than members of the family, are lodged or boarded for compensation at any one (1) time.
(2) ONE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING - A building designed for or used as the residence of one (1) family.
6
(3) TWO-FAMILY DWELLING - A duplex building designed for or used as the residence of two (2) families living independently of each other wholly or partly over the other, or a semidetached building designed for or used as the residence of two (2) families living independently of each other.
(4) DWELLING UNIT, MULTIPLE-FAMILY - A building or portion thereof designed for and used as the residence of three (3) or more families living independently of each other.
(5) DWELLING UNIT, GROUP - Three (3) or more dwelling structures, not exceeding two and one-half (2 1/2) stories in height, arranged upon a court opening on a street or place approved by the Planning Commission.
(6) DWELLING UNIT, ROW - A row of three (3) or more attached one-family dwellings not exceeding two and one-half (2 1/2) stories in height nor more than two (2) rooms deep, except end dwellings that may be more than two (2) rooms deep.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES - Means the erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance by public utilities or by governmental departments or commissions, of such underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam, or water transmission or distribution systems and structures, including towers, poles, wires, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cable, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, street lights, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment, and accessories in connection therewith, but not including buildings or microwave radio relay structures, as are reasonably necessary for furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or governmental departments or commissions, or as are required for protection of the public health, safety, or general welfare. For the purpose of this definition, the word "building" does not include "structures" for essential services.
ESSENTIALLY DRY SPACE – a space which will remain dry during flooding, except for the passage of some water vapor or minor seepage; the structure is substantially impermeable to the passage of water. (Amended Ord. #2152A 9/9/2009)
FAMILY - One (1) or more persons, with their domestic servants, occupying a dwelling unit as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit, but not including a group occupying a hotel, boarding house, club, dormitory, fraternity or sorority house.
FAMILY DAY CARE HOME: Shall be considered a home occupation wherein no more than six (6) non-family children or four (4) non-family tots, up to four (4) years of age, are supervised by one (1) caregiver. (Amended Ord. #1848 – 10/19/88).
FARM - Any parcel of land which is used for gain in the raising of agricultural products, livestock, poultry, and daily products. It includes necessary farm structures within the prescribed limits, and the storage of
7
equipment used. It excludes the raising of fur-bearing animals, riding academies, livery or boarding stables, and dog kennels.
FILLING STATION - Any area of land, including structures thereon, that is used or designed to be used for the supply of gasoline or oil or other fuel for the propulsion of motor vehicles, and which may include facilities used or designed to be used for polishing, greasing, washing, dry cleaning, or otherwise cleaning or servicing such motor vehicles.
FLOOD - A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas. (Amended Ord.# 1732 - 12/16/81).
FLOOD PLAIN - (1) A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream, or watercourse which is subject to partial or complete inundation; (2) an area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. (Amended Ord. #1732 -12/16/81).
FLOOD-FRINGE AREA - (FF): Shall be that area of the one hundred (100) year flood plain not included in the floodway. The basis for the outer-most boundary of this area shall be the one hundred (100) year flood elevations contained in the flood profiles provided in the FIS. (Amended Ord. #1857 - 05/17/89).
FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT – Those flood plain districts specifically designated in the Hanover Borough Zoning Ordinance as being unundated primarily by the one hundred (100) year flood. Included would be areas identified as Floodway District (FW), Flood Fringe District (FF) and General Flood Plain District (FA). (Added Ord. #1732 12/16/81).
FLOODWAY AREA (FW): - Is delineated for purposes of this Ordinance using the criteria that a certain area within the floodplain must be capable of carrying the waters of the one hundred (100) year flood more than one (1) foot at any point. The areas included in this area are defined in the Floodway Data Table contained in the Flood Insurance Study as prepared by the FEMA and shown on the accompanying FIRM. The term shall also include floodway areas which have been identified in other available studies or sources of information for those floodplain areas where no floodway has been identified in the Flood Insurance Study. (Amended Ord. #1857 - 05/17/89).
FLOOR AREA OF A BUILDING - The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building and its accessory buildings on the same lot, excluding cellar and basement floor areas not devoted to residential use, but including the area of roofed porches and roofed terraces. All dimensions shall be measured between exterior faces of walls.
FLOOR AREA, HABITABLE - The aggregate habitable floor area shall be the sum of the horizontal areas of all rooms used for habitation, such as living rooms, dining rooms, kitchens and bedrooms, but not including bathrooms, water closets, hallways, stairways, cellars, attics, service rooms or utility rooms, closets, nor unheated areas such as enclosed porches. (Amended Ord. # 2201 – 03/26/14)
8
GENERAL FLOOD PLAIN AREA - (FA): Shall be that floodplain area for which no detailed flood elevations or floodway information is provided. Such areas are shown as Zone A on the maps accompanying the Flood Insurance Study prepared by the FEMA. For these areas, elevation and floodway information from other Federal, State, or other acceptable source shall be used when available. When such other acceptable information is not available, the elevation shall be determined by using the elevation of a point on the boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site. (Amended Ord. #1857 - 05/17/89).
GARAGE, PRIVATE - An accessory building with capacity for not more than three (3) motor vehicles for storage only, not more than one (1) of which may be a commercial vehicle licensed for a gross weight not to exceed 8,000 pounds.
GARAGE, PUBLIC - A building or portion of a building, except that herein defined as a private garage or as a repair garage, used for the storage of motor vehicles, or where any such vehicles are kept for remuneration or hire, in which any sale of gasoline, oil, and accessories is only incidental to the principal uses.
GARAGE, REPAIR - A building or space where the principal business is the repairing or maintenance of motor vehicles, but not including factory assembly of such vehicles, auto wrecking establishments, or junkyards.
GARAGE, TRUCK - A building or portion of a building, except that herein defined as private, public, or repair garages, used for the storage of commercial vehicles whose principal use is transporting materials and rendering delivery service, in which any sale of gasoline, oil, and accessories is only used by the vehicles stored on the premises.
GRADE, ESTABLISHED - The elevation of the center line of the streets as officially established by the municipal authorities.
GRADE, FINISHED - The completed surface of lawns, walks, and roads brought to grades as shown on official plans or designs relating thereto.
GROUP DAY CARE CENTERS – Are a business for the supervision of children outside the home and residential setting wherein seven (7) or more children are supervised, where the ratio of care givers to children is as follows - one (1) care giver to four (4) infants one (1) to two (2) years of age; one (1) care giver to five (5) tots, three (3) to four (4) years of age; one (1) care giver to ten (10) preschoolers, five (5) years of age; one (1) care giver to twelve (12) school age youths, six (6) years and older. (Amended Ord. #1848, 10/19/88).
GROUP DAY CARE HOME - Is a facility serving seven (7) to eleven (11) children in a residential zone where professional businesses are allowed. The facility used must have a minimum of forty (40) square feet of floor space per child exclusive of halls, bathrooms, office, kitchen, and lockers as well as outdoor open space suitable for play, or sixty-four (64) square feet per child within one-half (½) mile of the facility. Each facility shall have two (2) child givers. If over six (6) non-household children are present,
9
family children shall be counted toward the facility maximum of eleven (11). (Amended Ord. # 1848, 10/19/88).
HISTORIC STRUCTURE – any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
(a) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior;
Or
(b) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. (Amended Ord. #2152A 9/9/2009)
HOME OCCUPATION – Any use customarily conducted for gain or support
in a dwelling by a member or members of a family, and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the premises and does not change the character thereof. (See Section 140-28) (Amended Ord. #1715, 6/18/80).
HOTEL - A building or portion thereof in which ten (10) or more guest rooms are provided for occupancy, for compensation, by transient or semi-permanent guests, or both.
HOTEL, RESIDENTIAL - A building or portion thereof containing ten (10) or more guest rooms in which lodging is provided, with or without meals, for compensation, and which is open to semi-permanent or permanent guests, or both, and where no provisions are made for cooking in any individual case.
JUNKYARD - A lot, land or structure, or part thereof, used primarily for the collecting, storage, and sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal, or discarded material; or for the collecting, dismantling, storage, and salvaging of
10
machinery or vehicles not in running condition, and for the sale of parts thereof.
LEWD - Any material which the average person, applying contemporary standards, would find, when considered as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest and which depicts or describes patently offensive representations or descriptions of ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; or masturbation, excretory functions, or exhibitions of genitals or genital area. Nothing herein contained is intended to include or prescribe any matter which, when considered as a whole and in the context in which it is used, possesses serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. (Amended Ord. #1774 - 4/4/84).
LOT - Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings or by a dwelling group and its accessory buildings, together with such open spaces as are required under the provisions of this ordinance, having not less than the minimum area and width required by this ordinance for a lot in the district in which such land is situated, and having its principal frontage on a street or on such other means of access as may be determined in accordance with the provisions of law to be adequate as a condition of the issuance of a building permit for building on such land.
LOT, CORNER - A parcel of land at the junction of and abutting on two (2) or more intersecting streets, where the interior angle of the interception or intersection does not exceed one hundred thirty-five (135°) degrees.
LOT, INTERIOR - A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT, LINES - The lines bounding a lot, as defined herein.
LOT, THROUGH - A lot having its front and rear lines on different streets.
LOWEST FLOOR - Means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistance enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program. (Amended Ord. #1857 - 05/17/89).
MANUFACTURED HOME - A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For flood plain management purposes the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the term "manufactured home" does not include park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles. (Amended Ord. #1834 - 9/2/87).
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. (Amended Ord. #1834 - 9/2/87).
11
MIXED OCCUPANCY - Occupancy of a building or of land for more than one (1) use.
NEW CONSTRUCTION – Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after January 6, 1982, and includes any subsequent improvements thereto. (Amended Ord. #2152A 9/9/2009)
NONCONFORMING USE – Use of a building or of land which existed previously that does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING - A building or structure which does not conform to all the height, area, and yard regulations of the district in which it is located.
NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME - Any home, place, or institution which operates or maintains facilities providing invalid or chronic care, or both, for a period in excess of twenty-four (24) consecutive hours, for four (4) or more patients not related by blood or marriage to the operator, who, by reason of illness or infirmity, are unable to properly care for themselves. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include general hospitals or places which provide care and treatment for the acutely ill and maintain and operate facilities. (See Section 140-37 and Section 140-57.)
ONE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD - A flood that, on the average, is likely to occur once every one hundred (100) years (i.e. that has a one (1%) percent chance of occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year). (Amended Ord. #1732 - 12/16/81).
OPEN SPACE - An unoccupied space open to the sky, on the same lot with the building.
PARKING SPACE - The space within a building, or on a lot or parking lot, for the parking or storage of one automobile.
PARKING LOTS - An open, off-street area used for the temporary parking of more than four (4) automobiles and available for public use, with or without charge, or as an accommodation for clients or customers.
PLOT - A map, plan, or layout of a subdivision indicating the location and boundaries of individual properties.
PREMISES - Any lot, parcel, or tract of land and any building constructed thereon.
PROFESSIONAL OCCUPATION AND OFFICES – The office of a professional person, including a prescription-type pharmacy, without a display of merchandise (see Section 140-28). (Amended Ord. #1277 7/7/65).
PUBLIC UTILITY - Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department, or board duly authorized to furnish, and furnishing, under public regulation, to the public, electricity, gas, heat, steam power, telephone, telegraph, transportation, or water.
12
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE - a vehicle which is (i) built on a single chassis; (ii) not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; (iv) not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. (Amended Ord. #2152A 9/9/2009)
SCREEN PLANTING - A vegetative material of sufficient height and density to conceal from the view of property owners in adjoining Residential Districts the structures and any uses on the premises on which the screen planting is located.
SIGN - Any device for visual communication that is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of the public, but not including any flag, badge, or insignia of any government or government agency, or of any civic, charitable, religious, patriotic, fraternal, or similar organization.
SIGNBOARD - Any structure or part thereof on which lettered or pictorial matter is displayed for advertising or notice purposes.
STORY - That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it.
STORY, HALF - A story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at last two (2) opposite exterior walls are not more than two (2) feet above the floor of such story.
STREET - A public way which affords principal means of access to abutting properties.
STREET GRADE - The officially established grade of the street upon which a lot fronts or, in its absence, the established grade of other street upon which the lot abuts, at the midpoint of the frontage of the lot thereon. If there is no officially established grade, the existing grade of the street at such midpoint shall be taken as the street grade.
STRUCTURE - Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground including, but not limited to buildings, sheds, manufactured homes, and other similar items. This term includes any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or in land or water whether or not affixed to land. (Amended Ord. #2152A 9/9/2009)
SUBDIVISION - An area of land divided by the owners or agent, either by lots or by metes and bounds, into lots or parcels two (2) or more in number, for the purpose of conveyance, transfer, improvement, or sale. The appurtenant roads, streets, lanes, alleys, and ways dedicated or intended to be dedicated to public uses or the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon, are included. The word "subdivision" includes the words re-subdivision, plot, re-plot, plan, or re-plan.
13
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE – Damage from any cause sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent or more of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. (Amended Ord. #2152A 9/9/2009)
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT – Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or:
(2) Any alteration of a “historic structure”, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure”. (Amended Ord. #2152A 9/9/2009)
THEATER - A building or part of a building devoted to the showing of moving pictures or theatrical productions on a paid admission basis.
THEATER, OUTDOOR DRIVE-IN - An open lot or part thereof, with its appurtenant facilities, devoted primarily to the showing of moving pictures or theatrical productions, on a paid-admission basis, to patrons seated in automobiles or on outdoor seats.
TOURIST HOME - A dwelling in which less than ten (10) guest rooms are provided for occupancy for compensation by transient guests.
USE - The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged, intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. The term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed to include any non-conforming use.
WINDOW - An opening to the outside, other than a door, which provides all or part of the required natural light, natural ventilation, or both, to all interior space. The glassed portion of a door in an exterior wall may be construed to be a window.
YARD, FRONT - An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a main building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the street line and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. The depth of the front yard shall be measured between the front line of the building and the street right-of-way line.
Covered porches, whether enclosed or unenclosed, shall be considered as part of the main building and shall not project into a required front yard.
14
YARD, REAR - An open space on the same lot with a main building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. The depth of the rear yard shall be measured between the rear line of the lot, or the center line of the alley, if there be an alley, and the rear line of the main building.
YARD, SIDE - The required open unoccupied space, the full depth of the lot, extending from the side line of the lot to the nearest main or accessory building on the lot, exclusive of overhanging eaves, gutters, or cornices.
ZONE - Same as DISTRICT.
ZONING HEARING BOARD - See Section 140-128.
ARTICLE II
DISTRICTS
SECTION 140-6. CLASSES OF DISTRICTS. For the purpose of this ordinance, thirteen (13) classes of districts are established within the Borough of Hanover.
A Districts: Agriculture Districts (farms)
R-6 Districts: One-family Dwelling Districts
(formerly R-1, Amend. Ord. 2091, 12-22-04)
R-5 Districts: One- and Two-family Dwelling Districts
(formerly R-2, Amend. Ord. 2091, 12-22-04)
R-3 Districts: One and Four-family Dwelling Districts
O-A Districts: Office - Apartment Districts
(formerly LMD Ltd Mult. Dwelling, Amend. Ord. 2091, 12-22-04)
LB Districts: Local Business Districts (Neighborhood Stores)
GB Districts: General Business Districts (Downtown Stores)
HB Districts: Highway Oriented Business Districts
SC Districts: Shopping Center Districts
LM Districts: Limited Manufacturing Districts
M Districts: Manufacturing Districts
HI Districts: Heavy Industrial Districts
OS Districts: Open Space Districts (Amend. Ord. #1678 2/16/77)
SECTION 140-7. ZONING MAP. The boundaries of said districts shall be shown upon the Zoning Map. The map herein referred to is identified by the title "Zoning Map of Hanover Borough," and by the signature of the duly authorized officers of the Borough Council and the Planning Commission affixed thereto, said map bearing drawing No. D1072-RF42 under original date of December 1, 1961, with latest revised date being December 22, 2004 (Ord. #2091), shall be known as the “Zoning Map”, and such map, together with all notations, references, and other data shown thereon, is hereby incorporated by reference to this ordinance as if more fully described herein. Said Zoning Map shall be kept on file and available for examination by persons interested therein at the office of the Borough of Hanover; said Zoning Map may be removed from the office of the Borough of Hanover for any reasonable purpose upon the order of the President of the Borough Council or Chairman of the Planning Commission. Copies of said Zoning Map shall be available, for a fee, for those wishing to obtain them. (Amend. Ord. #1779 5/2/84).
15
A. The boundaries of the Borough of Hanover Flood Boundary and Floodway Map are an addendum to the Zoning Map of The Borough of Hanover. The Floodway Map herein referred to is identified by the Community Panel Number 422212-0001-A affixed thereto. Said map drawing No. FR42 under the original date of January 6, 1982, shall be known as the Floodway Map, and such map together with all notations, references, and data shown thereon is hereby incorporated by reference to this ordinance as if more fully described herein. Said map shall be filed and available commensurate with conditions of the Zoning Map as described in Section 140-7. (Amended Ord. #1732 - 12/16/81)
B. The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of Hanover Borough subject to the one hundred (100) year flood, which is identified as Zone A (Area of Special Flood Hazard) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated September 25, 2009 and the accompanying maps or the most recent revision thereof as issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Including all digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study. (Amended Ord. #2152A 9/9/2009)
SECTION 140-8. DISTRICT BOUNDARIES. For determination of the boundaries of the districts shown on the district map, the following rules shall apply.
A. Where such zoning boundaries are indicated as following or approximately following street and alley lines, such street and alley lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. (Amended Ord. #1732 - 12/16/81)
B. Where such zoning boundaries are indicated as following or approximately following lot lines or property lines, such lot lines or property lines, shall be construed to be such boundaries. (Amended Ord. #1732 - 12/16/81)
C. In un-subdivided property or where a zoning district boundary divides a lot or parcel of property, the location of any such boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions shown on the district map, shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on such map. (Amended Ord. #1732 - 12/16/81)
D. Whenever a zoning district boundary line in a Residential District passes through a lot on record which existed prior to the passing of this ordinance and such parcel of property is of an area equal to the minimum requirements of either zone, the lot may be used in accordance with the provisions of the least restrictive of the two (2) zones in question. Any lots or parcels zoned as commercial or industrial shall not extend beyond the line or lines of any established or approved plan of lots zoned for residential purposes. (Amended Ord. #1732 - 12/16/81)
E. The commercial and industrial areas shall be considered only for the frontage in the districts so zoned, and where the same extends into or onto another street in the rear thereof it shall not be considered as having established a commercial or industrial zone unless all of the area in the rear and opposite is zoned the same as the property in question. If the property is not zoned for commercial or industrial use, the street at the rear of the commercial or industrial property shall not be used as access to
16
the commercial or industrial property for loading or unloading purposes or as access to a parking area. (Amended Ord. #1732 - 12/16/81)
F. The Zoning Hearing Board established hereby shall, upon application or upon its own motion, determine the location of zoning and flood way boundaries in cases where uncertainty exists.
The person questioning or contesting the location of Floodway District boundaries shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his case to the Zoning Hearing Board and to submit his own technical evidence. (Amended Ord. #1732 - 12/16/81)
G. The Flood Plain District shall be overlays to the existing Zoning Districts shown on the Official Zoning Ordinance Map. Where there is a conflict between flood and zoning district requirements, the more restrictive provisions shall apply. The delineation of any flood plain district may be revised by Borough Council where natural or man-made changes have occurred and more detailed engineering studies document the need for specific changes. Prior to changes, the Federal Insurance Administration or its successors must be notified and approval obtained where federally mandated conditions are affected. (Amended Ord. #1732 - 12/16/81)
ARTICLE III
GENERAL REGULATIONS
SECTION 140-9. APPLICATION. The following regulations shall qualify or supplement the district regulations appearing elsewhere in this ordinance.
SECTION 140-10. GENERAL USE REGULATIONS. Except as hereinafter provided:
A. Any building, structure, premises, or land shall be used or occupied for only the uses permitted in the district in which such building, structure, premises, land or part thereof is located, and then only after applying for and securing all permits and licenses required by law and Borough Ordinance.
B. Any building, structure, premises or part thereof shall be erected, moved,
reconstructed, extended, enlarged or altered only for the purpose of accommodating the uses permitted in the district in which such building, structure, or premises is located, and then only after applying for and securing all permits and licenses required by law and Borough Ordinance.
C. Any building or structure hereafter built, enlarged, or moved on a lot shall conform to the area regulations of the district in which such building or structure is located.
1. No lot area now existing or hereafter established shall be so reduced or diminished that the yards, open spaces, or total lot area be made smaller than required by this ordinance, nor shall the lot area per family be decreased in any manner except in conformity with the regulations of this ordinance.
17
2. No yard or other open space now provided for any building or structure or hereafter provided in compliance with the regulations of this ordinance shall be considered as any part of a yard or open space for any other building or structure, nor shall any yard or open space of abutting property be considered as providing a yard or open space for a building or structure on a lot.
3. No permit for the construction, alteration, enlarging, or moving of any building or structure shall be granted where it shall appear from the Borough records that the plot contains any lot or tract of land, or part of any lot or tract of land previously designated as the lot, or part of the plot, for any building or structure, for the construction, alteration, enlarging, or moving of which a permit has been granted, if the original plot will thereby be reduced to an area which will not comply with the lot area and yard requirements of this ordinance.
(A) No yard shall include any premises dedicated, reserved, or set aside for street purposes except as provided in this chapter.
(B) No yard shall include any land condemned for or upon which notice of condemnation has been given for public purposes.
SECTION 140-11. MUNICIPAL, PUBLIC, AND SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND USES.
A. This ordinance shall not apply to any building owned or occupied by the Borough if the Borough shall, after a public hearing, decide that such building or extension thereof or such use of any premises is reasonably necessary for the convenience or welfare of the public. Any municipal recreational building or use may be established by the Borough at any location in the Borough without holding such public hearing.
B. When such Municipal, Public and/or School Building property is sold, transferred or leased to a person, firm, or corporation other than the public owner, the use of Municipal, Public, and School structures and grounds for other use than that permitted in the district in which they are located may be permitted as a Special Exception when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board after a public hearing in accordance with Section 140-135B - Standards for Special Exception. (Amended Ord. #1707 - 8/1/79)
SECTION 140-12. PUBLIC-UTILITY BUILDINGS AND USES. This ordinance shall not apply to any existing or proposed building or extension thereof, used or to be used by the public-utility corporation, if upon petition of such corporation the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission shall, after a public hearing, decide that the present or proposed situation of the building in question is reasonably necessary for the convenience or welfare of the public.
SECTION 140-13. ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND ACCESSORY USES. Accessory buildings and accessory uses and uses customarily incidental to uses specifically permitted therein, including public and private ways and easements, essential services, dwelling units for servants employed on the premises or for private guests, private garages, such permission being subject to the following provisions, however:
18
A. No accessory use shall be dangerous or otherwise detrimental to persons residing or working in the vicinity thereof, or to the public welfare, or shall impair the uses, enjoyment, or value of any property.
B. No accessory dwelling unit shall be let to guests for living purposes for compensation.
SECTION 140-14. SWIMMING POOLS. All swimming pools in Residential Districts which are over 1,000 gallons capacity shall require an approved filtering and treatment system which will produce a safe purity level and shall conform to the following requirements:
A. Any part of the pool, including the aprons and external structure, must be located fifteen (15') feet back from the front building line, ten (10') feet from the rear property line and minimum dimensions of the side yard, for the application district must be maintained.
B. Entrance to the pool must be protected by a barrier height of four (4') feet. In the case of sunken or submerged pools, they must be surrounded by a permanent continuous fence as a safeguard which is at least four (4') feet high and has a lockable gate. In the case of pools constructed above the ground level, their construction and safeguards must be such that there is a four (4') foot barrier around the pool with lockable access into the pool.
C. Covered pools must be in keeping with the general character of the neighborhood. Due to their construction they become accessory buildings. The application for the construction of a covered pool shall be submitted to the Zoning Hearing Board for architectural review.
D. Safeguards for abandoned or empty swimming pools must be maintained the same as that for pools actively used.
SECTION 140-15. CONVERSION APARTMENT. The Zoning Hearing Board may authorize the conversion of any dwelling in residential and commercial districts into a dwelling for more than one (1) family. The conversion apartments shall be in such dwelling in the ratio of one (1) for each three hundred (300) square feet in total floor area (not inclusive of basement floor area) in such dwelling before conversion; provided further that the total dwelling units in each building shall not exceed four (4) in number. One (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for each conversion apartment or dwelling unit added. (Amended Ord. #1643 - 8/20/75)
SECTION 140-16. LOT AREA.
A. Residential lots, where not served by public water and sanitary sewers, shall be not less than one hundred (100') feet wide at the building line nor less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in area per family.
B. Residential lots, where served by public water and not by sanitary sewers, shall be not less than seventy-five (75') feet wide at the building line nor less than nine thousand (9,000) square feet in area per family.
19
C. No lot area shall be so reduced that the area of the lot or the dimensions of the open spaces shall be smaller than herein prescribed.
D. In the case of a single lot held in single and separate ownership in a residential district at the effective date of this ordinance, which lot has the required lot area but because of unusual conditions of depth or width has difficulty in providing the required front yard, side yards, or rear yard of the district in which it is located, the required open spaces may be decreased for a one-family dwelling if the plan for front, side, and rear yards is approved by the Planning Commission and Borough Council.
SECTION 140-17. RAILROADS. Existing railway tracks and rights-of-way shall not be considered as Nonconforming Uses.
SECTION 140-18. COURTS. Where a court is provided for the purpose of furnishing adequate light and air, or where a court is otherwise provided, such court shall conform to the following requirements:
A. An open space in the form of an inner court or outer court shall be provided in connection with any building in any residence or business district, wherever any room therein in which a person or persons live, work, sleep, or congregate cannot be adequately lighted or ventilated from the street or yard. Such court shall be adjacent to such room, the windows of which shall open in such court.
B. Outer Court
(1) The width of any outer court upon which windows from a living room, bedroom, or dining room open shall be not less than the height of any opposing wall forming said court. The depth of an outer court formed by walls on three (3) sides shall be not greater than one and one-half (1 1/2) times the width.
(2) The width of any outer court shall be not less than two-thirds (2/3) the height of any opposing wall forming said court, and the depth shall not be greater than one and one-half (1 1/2) times the width.
C. Inner Court
(1) The least dimension of an inner court shall be not less than the full height of the walls enclosing such court, but not less than fifty (50') ft.
(2) An open and unobstructed passageway shall be provided at the grade level of each inner court. Such passageway shall have a cross-section area and sufficient headroom to permit the passage of fire-fighting equipment, and shall be continuous from the inner court to a yard or an unobstructed open area between buildings.
SECTION 140-19. HABITABLE FLOOR AREA.
A. The minimum habitable floor area for R-6, R-5, R-3, and O-A Districts shall be 720 Sq. Ft. of floor area with 7 1/2 foot ceilings for a single-family
20
dwelling unit, semidetached or a duplex dwelling unit, permanent or temporary, moved or erected upon a lot hereafter. The total window area in any room shall be five (5%) percent or more of the habitable floor area of such room.
B. Habitable floor area shall include areas assigned for habitation, such as
living rooms, dining rooms, kitchens, and bedrooms. Bathrooms, water closets, hallways, stairways, cellars, attics, service rooms or utility rooms, closets, and unheated areas such as enclosed porches, shall not be considered as part of the habitable floor area of any dwelling unit. A habitable dwelling area must have a minimum clear ceiling height of five (5) feet at the walls. If the clear ceiling height at the wall is less than seven (7) feet six (6) inches ceiling must slope up at a rate of not less than thirty-five (35o) degrees to a minimum prescribed ceiling height of seven (7) feet six (6) inches. If any room in a building has a sloped ceiling, the prescribed ceiling height for the room is required in one-half the area thereof. When more than four (4) feet of the clear ceiling height of the basement is located below the ground on all sides, a basement shall not be used for dwelling purposes. (Amended Ord. # 2201 – 03/26/14)
C. A habitable floor area used as a dwelling unit shall contain an enclosed toilet that has at least a lavatory and a water closet, both of which must be connected to a pressure water supply and must also be connected to the borough sewer system or a septic tank system approved by the Board of Health.
D. A habitable floor area used as an efficiency apartment shall be limited to a maximum of two (2) occupants, and of two (2) rooms, which shall have a minimum Habitable Floor Area of not less than three hundred (300) square feet. The total floor area, including the bathroom and non-habitable areas, shall not be more than seven hundred nineteen (719) square feet. The apartment must also include an enclosed area for a water closet, lavatory, and a bathtub or shower; this enclosed bathroom shall be included in the computation of the total floor area, but is not to be considered a part of the minimum habitable floor area. Also, the apartment must provide a cooking unit, baking unit, sink, refrigerator, storage cupboards with shelving for utensils, and closets for food and clothing. (Amended Ord. # 2201 – 03/26/14)
SECTION 140-20. HEIGHTS OF BUILDINGS. The building height limits established herein for districts shall not apply to steeples, domes, towers, belfries, statuary or other ornamentations covered with fire-proof materials and intended and used for strictly ornamental purposes, and shall not apply to poles, towers, and similar structures for essential services. These provisions shall, further more, not apply to flagstaffs, chimneys, pipes, cupolas, or roof houses not exceeding fifteen (15') feet in length or width, nor twelve (12') feet in height, providing such cupolas or roof houses be covered with fire-proof materials. Above provisions shall not apply to water tanks, bulkheads, elevator structures, cooling towers, and similar mechanical appurtenances extending above the roof of any building and not occupying more than twenty-five (25%) percent of the area of such roof.
21
SECTION 140-21. FRONT YARDS.
A. Where a line designating future width of any street or highway is shown on the Official Map or is otherwise established, the front yard depth shall be measured from such line instead of from the front line of the lot. In a block where the average of the front yard depths of existing buildings within a distance of one hundred (100') feet on both sides of a building to be erected is not more than six (6') feet greater or not more than six (6') feet less than the front yard depth required for the district in which such block is located, the front yard depth for such building shall be not less than such average depth. Where such average depth is more than six (6') feet greater or more than six (6') feet less than the front yard depth required for such district, said requirement may be waived by the Zoning Hearing Board and a different requirement established by said Board.
B. When a block, as herein defined, is partly in two (2) districts, the front yard depth required for the district with the most restrictive requirements shall apply along its entire length.
C. The front yard depth for lands fronting on an Arterial Street shall be fifty (50') feet. The owner or owners of land so affected may submit plans to the Borough Planning Commission for modification of this requirement. After a public hearing on the alternate plans, the Borough Planning Commission shall submit their recommendations to Borough Council for their approval or disapproval. In no case shall the required front yard be less than the minimum established for the district. (Amended Ord. #1715 - 6/18/80)
SECTION 140-22. SIDE YARDS. Where required on interior lots, there shall be a side yard on each side of the main building, and each side yard shall have a width of not less than the minimum for the district. On corner lots, the side yard regulations shall be the same as for interior lots, except where the rear lot line of a corner lot abuts the side lot line of the lot in the rear. In this case there shall be a side yard on the street side of such corner lot equal to the front yard of the lot abutting the corner lot in the rear. In no case, however, shall the side yard on the street side of a corner lot be less than the minimum for the district. No accessory building on such corner lot shall project beyond the required front yard line of the lot in the rear, nor be located less than the minimum side yard for the district from the side lot line of the lot in the rear. The interior side yard shall be the same as required for interior lots.
SECTION 140-23. THROUGH LOTS. Through lots having a frontage on two (2) streets shall provide the required front yard on each street.
SECTION 140-24. DWELLING UNITS ABOVE STORES. Front and side yards for dwellings above stores of businesses shall be waived when front and side yards are not required for such commercial use.
SECTION 140-25. PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS. Every part of a required yard shall be open from the ground to the sky unobstructed, except for the following:
A. Accessory building in the rear yard.
22
B. Ordinary building projections such as cornices, eaves, belt courses, sills, or similar architectural features may project into any yard not more than thirty (30") inches.
C. Chimneys may project into any yard not more than eighteen (18") inches.
D. Uncovered balconies, or fire escapes may project into the minimum required front, or rear yard four (4') feet.
E. Uncovered terraces or platforms which do not extend above the level of the first floor of the building may project or extend into the minimum required front, or rear yard.
F. No part of any building shall project across any lot line.
SECTION 140-26. FENCES, WALLS, AND SCREEN PLANTINGS. Fences and walls may be erected, altered, and maintained within the side and rear yards of residential districts, provided that any fence or wall exceeding six (6') feet in height shall contain openings therein equal to fifty (50%) percent of the area of that portion of the wall or fence exceeding six (6') feet in height, and must be set back from the property line a distance equal to the amount they exceed six (6') feet in height. Soil retaining walls are excluded from this provision and may extend into the front yard. Screen plantings shall be so located that the normal growth, when properly trimmed, will not extend over the property line. Fences may not extend into front yards except under the following provisions: (Amended Ord. #1938 - 6/16/93)
A. Fences shall not be a material or design which would cause a physical hazard (i.e., spiked crown) to pedestrians and/or obstruct proper vision of vehicular traffic at intersections and crosswalks or violate Section 140-32A (Vision Obstruction) of this Zoning Code.
B. Fences shall not exceed an overall height of forty-eight (48") inches in front yards. Corner properties which parallel public streets shall be limited to the restrictions of front yards mentioned above.
C. Fences shall be of open construction so that each lineal foot of fence has at least fifty (50%) percent opening for free movement of air and the transmission of sunlight.
D. Fences which encroach upon the public right-of-way or are not properly
maintained, causing a detriment to the neighborhood, may be ordered to
be removed within thirty (30) days by the Zoning Officer of the Borough.
E. No fence shall be constructed closer than one (1') foot to the inside edge of
the public sidewalk or street right-of-way line, whichever is closer.
SECTION 140-27. OPEN STORAGE OF VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT.
A. In Residential Districts, not more than two (2) currently unregistered or uninspected motor vehicles shall be parked in the open on any property. These vehicles must be parked behind the building line. Said vehicles shall not at any time be in a state of major disassembly or disrepair nor shall they be in the process of being stripped or dismantled. No vehicle of
23
any type shall undergo major overhaul, including bodywork, except in an enclosed area in a residential district. (Amended Ord. #1828 - 5/6/87)
B. Commercial Vehicles and Equipment - The open storage of trucks heavier than 8,000 lbs. gross weight, office trailers, tool trailers, commercial transport trailers, construction equipment, etc., is prohibited in residential districts.
C. The unsightly storing of machinery, building materials, landscaping, materials is prohibited if its appearance is detrimental to the neighborhood or proves to be an attractive nuisance detrimental to children. This also includes any abandoned walls, shafts, basements, or excavations; any
structurally unsound fences or structures, or any lumber, fences, debris, or vegetation which may prove detrimental to the general appearance of the neighborhood or a hazard for inquisitive minors. Any open excavation, any material or machinery stored more than ninety (90) days prior to its use on the site, or any excavation made in connection with construction work and left open more than ninety (90) days is prohibited.
SECTION 140-28. PROFESSIONAL AND HOME OCCUPATIONS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
A. The use of a dwelling occupied by the applicant for a profession or service, not in an accessory building, may be granted by the Zoning Hearing Board provided no wholesale sales or distribution are involved. Retail sales must be incidental to the profession or service rendered. Not more than two assistants may be employed; not more than one-half (1/2) of the habitable floor area of the dwelling may be devoted to such profession or service. No display pertaining to the profession or service shall be visible from the street. Only one sign or device, not exceeding two (2) square feet in area containing only the name and profession or service shall be permitted, which sign or device shall not be illuminated. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided for the assistants, customers, patients, clients, etc. Being served by the home occupation. (Amended Ord. #1715 - 6/18/80)
B. Application to the Zoning Hearing Board. No Home Occupation or Professional Use may be granted except upon application to the Zoning Hearing Board, which shall determine in each case whether or not such home occupation is likely to adversely affect any neighborhood, and may impose any reasonable conditions in granting same or may in its discretion deny the application.
C. Because of the close proximity to the Hanover General Hospital within the following defined area, any of the following uses shall be allowed in this area:
Beginning at the intersection of Stock Street and George Street, thence westwardly along Stock Street to its intersection with McCosh Street; thence northwardly along McCosh Street to its intersection with Allegheny Avenue; thence eastwardly along Allegheny Avenue to its intersection with George Street; thence southwardly along George Street to its intersection with Stock Street, said point being the place of beginning.
24
(1) Any use normally allowed within the normal zoning district as may heretofore or hereafter be established by the Hanover Borough Council under Article II, Section 140-6 of the Hanover Borough Zoning Ordinance, and as referred thereto on the Hanover Borough Zoning Map as required under Article II, Section 140-7.
(2) Professional offices, where such professions are normally incident to or related to those services performed within a hospital.
(3) Combination professional offices as allowed in Section 140-28C (2) above, and residential apartment units.
D. The following restrictions shall apply where allowed as specified in Section 140-28C (2) and (3) above. Any use normally allowed in the normal zoning district classification shall be subject to the zoning restrictions relating to the normal zoning district.
(1) Lot area: the total area of any individual lot so used shall not be less than the lot area allowed by the normal zoning district.
(2) Width regulations: same as a normal zoning district.
(3) Coverage regulations: the coverage, forty (40%) percent or less.
(4) Yard regulations (setback): same as normal zoning district.
(5) Height regulations: same as normal zoning district.
(6) Minimum floor area per apartment unit: three hundred (300) square feet.
(7) Minimum open space per apartment unit: two thousand (2,000) square feet.
(8) Parking and loading space regulations as provided by ordinance.
(9) Alterations to existing structures or new structures shall not change the character or general appearance of the neighborhood. (Amended Ord. #1643 - 8/20/75)
SECTION 140-29. ADULT BOOKSTORE AND/OR THEATER
A. An Adult Bookstore and/or Theater shall be permitted in GB, HB, and SC
Districts.
B. Lewd materials, merchandise, or film offered for sale, rent, lease, loan, or for view upon the premises shall not be advertised, exhibited, or displayed outside the Adult Bookstore and/or Theater. The name of the establishment shall not convey or imply that it is a store selling lewd materials.
25
C. Any building or structure used or occupied as an Adult Bookstore and/or Theater shall conform in architectural and all other external aspects to other businesses in the area.
D. The entrance to an Adult Bookstore and/or Theater shall be located not less than two hundred fifty (250') feet from the entrance to any other Adult Bookstore and/or Theater.
E. An Adult Bookstore and/or Theater shall be located from the street entrance of any school, church, library, park, playground, day car center, or Residential District as follows:
1. The minimum distance shall be two hundred fifty (250') feet and the maximum distance, when approved by the Zoning Hearing Board, may be as much as three hundred twenty-five (325') feet measuring from the center line of streets and alleys or street entrances on an official map. Logical boundaries shall be used but not limited to center lines of streets and alleys. Individually owned properties shall not be split by boundary lines.
2. The Hanover Borough Zoning Hearing Board shall use its discretion
in interpreting all parts of Section 140-29 and establishing the
restricted areas within the districts where Adult Book-stores
and/or Theaters are a permitted use.
F. Each entrance to the premises of an Adult Bookstore and/or Theater shall be posted with a notice which has lettering one and one-half (1 1/2") inches to two (2") inches in height, between fifty (50") inches and sixty (60") inches above grade, specifying that persons under the age of eighteen (18) years are not permitted to enter therein.
G. The Zoning Officer, when determining what is an Adult Bookstore and/or Theater and what is lewd material, at his discretion refers the problem to the Hanover Borough Zoning Hearing Board for a final ruling.
SECTION 140-30. FOUNDATIONS AND APPURTENANCES. Dwellings in residential districts (R-6, R-5, R-3 and O-A) shall have a permanent foundation with a footer below frost line. The foundation wall shall be a minimum of eight (8") inches thick with the top of the footer thirty (30") inches below the normal surface of the lot. The footer shall have a minimum width of sixteen (16") inches and a minimum thickness of four (4") inches. Tie downs shall be provided on each corner for Mobile Homes. The area beneath all dwellings shall be enclosed by a barrier or wall and shall be continuous and rodent proof.
All entrances to dwellings shall open on a landing or porch of not less than nine (9) square feet. Where the door opens out, the outside grade shall not be more than two (2") inches lower than the inside floor; and where the door opens in, the landing or porch shall not be lower than nine (9") inches. All porches, landings, and steps must be reasonably sturdy and safe. (Amended Ord. #1804 9/4/85)
SECTION 140-31. ANIMALS, POULTRY, AND FARMING. The commercial use of buildings and land for riding academies, livery or boarding stables, dog kennels, stock
26
raising, dairying, and poultry shall be permitted in only A districts, subject to the following restrictions:
A. No building in which animals or poultry are to be kept for commercial use shall be hereafter erected, altered, or used within one hundred (100') feet of any residential district's lot line.
B. No storage of odor, dust, or dust producing substance shall be permitted within one hundred (100') feet of any residential district's lot line.
C. The tilling of the soil, raising of crops, and gardening shall be permitted in any district.
SECTION 140-32. VISION OBSTRUCTION.
A. No walk, fence, sign, or other structure shall be erected or altered, and no hedge, tree, shrub, or other growth shall be maintained or permitted which may cause danger to traffic on a street or public road by obscuring the view.
B. In residential areas, a clear-sight prism from three (3') feet to ten (10') feet above the cartway shall be provided in which no permanent structures, fences, walls, hedges, plantings, or other obstructions shall be placed or maintained, except for utility poles, light standards, street signs, and fire hydrants. Each leg of the clear-sight triangle shall equal the sum of the two (2) distances that the main building is set back from the property line. However, each leg of the triangle need not exceed thirty (30') feet.
SECTION 140-33. ACCESS TO LOTS. No dwelling shall hereafter be erected or altered unless there is direct access to it through an open space on the same lot. Such open space shall be at least fifteen (15') feet wide and shall extend from the dwelling to a public street or highway, or to a private street or high-way not less than forty (40') feet in width and having a cartway so constructed and maintained that vehicles of all kinds may readily pass over it at all seasons of the year. For the purpose of this section, an alley shall not constitute a public street or highway.
SECTION 140-34. USED OR DISCARDED PARTS AND CONTAINERS. In residential and commercial districts, used and/or discarded parts and/or containers shall not be allowed to accumulate in open air spaces. All such used and/or discarded material must be stored within an enclosed building to remain on the premises.
SECTION 140-35. NEWLY ANNEXED TERRITORY. All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the Borough of Hanover shall automatically become an A Agricultural District until the Borough Planning Commission shall make a thorough study of the newly annexed area and reports its recommendations for final classification of the newly annexed area to the Borough Council. The final classification of the district shall be in accordance with the Article on amendments.
SECTION 140-36. PROHIBITED USES.
A. The following uses are prohibited in all districts throughout the municipality:
27
(1) The incineration, reduction, or storage of garbage, offal, animals, fish, or refuse unless by the authority of or under the supervision of the municipality.
(2) Dumps and dumping of any kind unless by the authority of or under the supervision of the municipality.
(3) The stripping of top soil exclusive of the process of grading a right-of-way or a lot preparatory to the construction of a building for which application for a building permit has been made.
B. As provided herein, no land shall be used, no industrial processes shall be permitted, and no building shall be erected, altered, or used for any purpose that creates a hazard to the public health, safety, or welfare of the community or is in conflict with the intent of this ordinance.
SECTION 140-37. NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOMES. The Zoning Hearing Board may authorize the conversion of any large dwelling in any district except R-6, R-5, and R-3 into a nursing or convalescent home. Off-street parking as called for in Section 140-100-I shall be provided. (Amended Ord. #1643 - 8/20/75)
SECTION 140-38. DRIVE-IN TRAFFIC. Vehicular traffic on arterial streets is not to be impeded or made hazardous for vehicles and pedestrians by grouping the entrances and/or exits of drive-in businesses and services such as: automobile service stations and repair shops, drive-in facilities serving prepared foods and beverages, shopping marts, motels, shopping centers, drive-in banks, etc. The normal distance between such entrances and exits shall be not less than seventy-five (75') feet. The Zoning Hearing Board shall review the traffic flow at the proposed entrances and exits and may increase or decrease the proposed distance between entrances and exits. The Zoning Hearing Board may establish such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it deems necessary to implement the purposes of this act and the zoning ordinance.
SECTION 140-38A. PRIVATE SALES IN PRIVATE RESIDENCES. The display for sale, barter, or exchange of an assortment of any new or used furniture, sporting goods, fixtures, vehicles, tools, equipment, food, clothing, metal, glass, paper, rubber, synthetics, household goods, or rummage conducted in any dwelling, house, building, or other structure designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, garage, basement, steps, or vestibule belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, or other structure shall be in accordance with the Hanover Borough Yard Sale Ordinance of 1976 and its amendments. (Amended Ord. #1678 - 2/16/77).
ARTICLE IV
AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS
SECTION 140-39. APPLICATION. In Agricultural Districts, the following regulations shall apply.
SECTION 140-40. USE REGULATIONS. A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the following purposes and no other:
A. One-family detached dwelling.
28
B. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the aforementioned
uses, but shall not include a business.
C. The following uses may be permitted as a Special Exception when
authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board after a public hearing held in accordance with Section 140-135-B - Standards for Special Exception.
(1) Churches or similar places of worship, parish houses and convents.
(2) Public and private schools having a curriculum for educational purposes comparable to those in public elementary and secondary schools.
(3) Public and private parks and recreation grounds and facilities operated by nonprofit organizations.
(4) Museums, libraries, community centers, and municipal buildings.
(5) Hospitals and sanitariums.
(6) Colleges and universities.
(7) Mobile home communities (Amended Ord. #1643 - 8/20/75)
SECTION 140-41. AREA REGULATIONS.
A. Lot area. The lot area and lot area per dwelling unit shall be not less than three-fourths (3/4) acre for every dwelling hereafter erected.
B. Width regulations. The lot width at the building line shall be not less than one hundred twenty-five (125') feet.
C. Coverage regulations. The average shall be no more than twenty-five (25%)
percent.
D. Yard regulations. Each lot shall have front, side, and rear yards of not less than the depth or width indicated below. Also see Section 140-21, 140-22, and 140-23.
(1) Front yard: depth, thirty-five (35') feet.
(2) Side yards, two (2): width, twenty-five (25') feet each.
(3) Rear yard: depth, twenty-five (25') feet.
SECTION 140-42. HEIGHT REGULATIONS. The height of a building shall be not greater than thirty-five (35') feet. The minimum height of a building used for residential purposes shall be not less than eight (8') feet.
29
SECTION 140-43. OFF-STREET PARKING. See Sec. 140-100 for off-street parking regulations.
ARTICLE V
R-6 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS (Amend. Ord. #2091 12/22/04, formerly R-1)
SECTION 140-44. APPLICATION. In R-6 Residential Districts, the following regulations shall apply.
SECTION 140-45. USE REGULATIONS. A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the following purposes and no other:
A. One-family detached dwelling.
B. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the aforementioned uses, but shall not include a business.
C. The following uses may be permitted as a Special Exception when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board after a public hearing held in accordance with Section 140-135B - Standards for Special Exception:
(1) Churches or similar places of worship, parish houses and convents.
(2) Public and private schools having a curriculum for educational purposes comparable to those in public elementary and secondary schools.
(3) Public and private parks and recreation grounds and facilities operated by nonprofit organizations.
(4) Museums, libraries, community centers, and municipal buildings.
(5) Hospitals and sanitariums.
(6) Mobile home communities.
(7) Permitted uses in an R-5 District. (Amended Ord. #1843 -5/18/88)
SECTION 140-46. AREA REGULATIONS.
A. Lot area. The lot area and lot area per dwelling unit shall be not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet for every dwelling hereafter erected.
B. Width regulations. The lot width at the building line shall be not less than sixty (60') feet per single-family dwelling.
C. Coverage regulations. The lot coverage shall be no more than thirty-five (35%) percent.
D. Yard regulations. Each lot shall have front, side, and rear yards of not less than the depth or width indicated below. Also see Section 140-23.
30
(1) Front yard: depth, twenty-five (25') feet. See Section 140-21.
(2) Side yards, two (2): width, eight (8') feet. See Section 140-22.
(3) Rear yard: depth, fifteen (15') feet.
SECTION 140-47. HEIGHT REGULATIONS: The height of a building shall be no greater than thirty-five (35') feet.
SECTION 140-48. AUTOMOBILE PARKING SPACE REGULATIONS. See Section 140-100 for automobile parking space regulations.
SECTION 140-49. ACCESSORY BUILDINGS. Accessory buildings shall not occupy more than fifty (50%) percent of the required rear yard. New accessory buildings shall have two (2) side yards of three (3') feet each and a rear yard of three (3') feet from the rear property line, or thirteen (13') feet from the center line of the alley. Whichever is the greater distance from the rear property line shall apply. Existing accessory buildings may be extended along natural lines as long as the extension does not reduce the existing conforming side or rear yard to less than the required minimum. (Amended Ord. #1168 - 1/16/63)
ARTICLE VI
R-5 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS (Amend. Ord. #2091 12/22/04, formerly R-2)
SECTION 140-50. APPLICATION. In R-5 Residential Districts, the following regulations shall apply.
SECTION 140-51. USE REGULATIONS. A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the following purposes and no other:
A. All permitted uses in R-6 Residential Districts.
B. Two-family dwellings, with additional lot area as required herein.
C. The following uses may be permitted as a Special Exception when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board after a public hearing held in accordance with Section 140-135B - Standards for Special Exception.
(1) Permitted uses in an R-3 District. (140-57A, B, C & D)
(2) Uses permitted as a Special Exception in an R-6 District. (Amended Ord. #1643 - 8/20/75)
SECTION 140-52. AREA REGULATIONS.
A. Lot area. The lot area shall be no less than five thousand (5,000) square feet for one-family dwelling lots and not less than three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet per family for a two-family dwelling lot.
B. Width regulations. The lot width at the building line shall be no less than fifty (50') feet per single-family detached dwelling and no less than forty (40') feet per family for semidetached or duplex dwellings.
31
C. Coverage regulations. The lot coverage shall be no more than forty (40%) percent.
D. Yard regulations. Each lot shall have front, side, and rear yards of no less than the depth or width indicated below. Also see Section 140-23.
(1) Front yards: depth, twenty-five (25') feet. See Section 140-21.
(2) Side yards, two (2): width, seven (7') feet. See Section 140-22.
(3) Rear yard: depth, twelve (12') feet.
SECTION 140-53. HEIGHT REGULATIONS. The height of a building shall be no greater than thirty-five (35') feet.
SECTION 140-54. AUTOMOBILE PARKING SPACE REGULATIONS. See Section 140-100 for automobile parking space regulations.
SECTION 140-55. ACCESSORY BUILDINGS. Accessory buildings shall not occupy more than fifty (50%) percent of the required rear yard. New accessory buildings shall have two (2) side yards of two (2') feet each and rear yard of three (3') feet from the rear property line or thirteen (13') feet from the center line of the alley. Whichever is the greater distance from the rear property line shall apply. Existing accessory buildings may be extended along natural lines as long as the extension does not reduce the existing conforming side or rear yard to less than the required minimum. (Amended Ord. #1168 - 1/16/63)
ARTICLE VII
R-3 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION 140-56. APPLICATION. In R-3 Districts, the following regulations shall apply.
SECTION 140-57. USE REGULATIONS. A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the following purposes and no other:
A. Permitted uses in an R-5 Residential District.
B. Three and four-family dwellings, provided that all units of a building are constructed at the same time and that all units have a front wall and rear wall opening to the respective yards. (Amended Ord. #1643 - 8/20/75)
C. Professional offices: doctors, dentists, lawyers, engineers, architects, etc.
D. Boarding houses and group day care homes. (Amended Ord. #1643 8/20/75 & #1848 - 10/19/88)
E. The following uses may be permitted as a Special Exception when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board after a public hearing held in accordance with Section 140-135B - Standards for Special Exception. (Amended Ord. #1643 -8/20/75)
32
(1) Permitted uses in an O-A District. (140-63A, B, C, & D)
(2) Uses permitted as a Special Exception in an R-6 District.
SECTION 140-58. AREA REGULATIONS.
A. Lot area. A lot area shall not be less than four thousand (4,000) square feet for a one-family dwelling lot, not less than three thousand (3,000) square feet per family for a two family dwelling lot, and not less than two thousand (2,000) square feet per family for three and four family dwelling lots.
B. Width regulations. The lot width at the building line shall not be less than forty (40') feet per single family detached dwelling, not less than thirty (30') feet per family for a two-family dwelling unit, and not less than twenty (20') feet per family for three and four family dwelling units.
C. Coverage regulations. The coverage shall be no more than forty-five (45%)
percent.
D. Yard regulations. Each lot shall have front, side, and rear yards of not less than the depth or width indicated below. Also see Section 140-23.
(1) Front yard: depth, fifteen (15') feet. See Section 140-21.
(2) Side yards, two (2): width, five (5') feet. See Section 140-22.
(3) Rear yard: depth, twenty (20') feet from centerline of the alley. If there is no alley at the rear of the lot, ten (10') feet from rear property line.
SECTION 140-59. HEIGHT REGULATIONS. The height of a building shall not be greater than two (2) stories and shall not exceed thirty-five (35') feet.
SECTION 140-60. AUTOMOBILE PARKING SPACE REGULATIONS. See Section 140-100 for automobile parking space regulations.
SECTION 140-61. ACCESSORY BUILDINGS. Accessory buildings shall not occupy more than fifty (50%) percent of the required rear yard. New accessory buildings shall have two (2) side yards of two (2') feet each, and a rear yard of three (3') feet from the rear property line or thirteen (13') feet from the center line of the alley. Whichever is the greater distance from the rear property line shall apply. Existing accessory buildings may be extended along natural lines as long as the extension does not reduce the existing conforming side or rear yard to less than the required minimum. (Amended Ord. #1168 - 1/16/63)
ARTICLE VIII
O-A RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS (Amended Ord. #2091 12/22/04, formerly LMD)
SECTION 140-62. APPLICATION. In O-A Residential Districts, the following shall apply.
SECTION 140-63. USE REGULATIONS IN PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS.
33
A. Permitted uses in R-3 Districts.
B. Row dwellings, multiple dwellings, dwelling groups, and bed and breakfasts. (Amended Ord. #1816 – 4/16/86)
C. Mortuaries. (Amended Ord. #1643 - 8/20/75)
D. Offices: insurance, real estate, building and loan, sales (no merchandise), etc.
E. The following uses may be permitted as a Special Exception when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board after a public hearing held in accordance with Section 140-135B - Standards for Special Exception.
(1) Uses permitted as a special exception in an R-6 District.
(2) Nursing and convalescent homes.
SECTION 140-64. USE REGULATIONS IN ACCESSORY BUILDINGS. The following uses may be permitted as a Special Exception when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board after a public hearing. The Zoning Hearing Board shall determine that (1) the proposed change will not substantially injure or detract from the use of the neighborhood, and that the use of the property adjacent to the area included in the proposed change or plan is adequately safeguarded, and that (2) the proposed change will serve the best interests of the Borough, the convenience of the community (where applicable) and the public welfare. The Zoning Hearing Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this act and the zoning ordinance.
A. Shops and services for:
(1) Electricians.
(2) Painting and paperhanging.
(3) Locksmith.
(4) Shoemaker.
(5) Sign painter.
(6) Print shop.
(7) Jeweler.
(8) Auto parking.
(9) Floor covering, wall and ceiling tile.
(10) Medical and dental clinics and laboratories.
(11) Floor cleaning and waxing.
34
(12) Florist.
(13) Office equipment.
(14) Taxidermist.
(15) Storage.
(16) Storage garage.
(17) Saw sharpening.
(18) Antiques, repairing and restoring.
B. The Zoning Hearing Board may authorize uses similar to the above list as it deems appropriate in accordance with the provisions of Section 140-135, excluding:
(1) Automobile and auto-body repair shops.
(2) Foundries.
(3) Cutting and distributing meat.
SECTION 140-65. AREA REGULATIONS.
A. Lot area. The lot area shall not be less than three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet for a one family dwelling lot, not less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet per family for a two family dwelling lot, and not less than two thousand (2,000) square feet per family unit for dwellings with three (3) or more units.
B. Width regulations. The lot width at the building line shall not be less than thirty-five (35') feet per single-family detached dwelling, not less than twenty-five (25') feet per family for a two family dwelling unit, and not less than twenty (20') feet per family for all other dwellings with three (3) or more dwelling units.
C. Coverage regulations. The lot coverage shall be no more than fifty (50%) percent.
D. Yard regulations. Each lot shall have front, side, and rear yards of no less than the depth and width indicated below. Also see Sections 140-21, 140-22, and 140-23.
(1) Front yard: depth, fifteen (15') feet.
(2) Side yards, two (2): width, four (4') feet for single-family and two-family dwellings, five (5') feet for three (3) or more family dwellings.
(3) Rear yard: depth, fifteen (15') feet, regardless of the number of dwelling units.
35
SECTION 140-66. HEIGHT REGULATIONS. The height of a building shall not be greater than thirty-five (35') feet.
SECTION 140-67. AUTOMOBILE PARKING SPACE REGULATIONS. See Section 140-100 for automobile parking regulations.
SECTION 140-68. ACCESSORY BUILDINGS. Accessory buildings shall not occupy more than fifty (50%) percent of the required rear yard. New accessory buildings shall have two (2) side yards of two (2') feet each and a rear yard of three (3') feet from the rear property line or thirteen (13') feet from the center line of the alley. Whichever is the greater distance from the rear property line shall apply. (Amended Ord. #1168 - 1/16/63)
Existing accessory buildings may be extended along natural lines as long as the extension does not reduce the existing conforming side or rear yard to less than the required minimum.
ARTICLE IX
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
SECTION 140-69. LB - LOCAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
SECTION 140-69A. APPLICATION. Regulations applicable in an LB Local Business District. In LB Districts the following regulations shall apply, except as otherwise provided herein.
SECTION 140-69B. USE REGULATIONS. The following uses only shall be permitted by right, provided that no objectionable emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas, vibration, or noise is produced or hazard to health or property is imposed:
A. Apartment houses, multiple-family dwellings, and dwelling groups.
B. Boarding and lodging houses, and bed and breakfasts. (Amended Ord. #1816 –
4/16/86)
C. Nursing and convalescent homes.
D. Retail sales of goods and services, prepared foods and beverages, excluding automobile drive-in type facilities and automobile display, sales and services. No more than ten (10%) percent of any business sales or display area shall be outdoors. (Amended Ord. 2123 – 4/25/07)
E. Business offices, professional offices, and group day care centers. (Amended Ord. #1848 - 10/19/88)
F. Churches, assembly halls, lodges, and indoor theaters having a seating capacity of less than six hundred (600) persons.
The following uses may be permitted as a special exception when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board:
(1) Automobile filling station.
36
(2) Automobile indoor display and sales.
(3) Drive-in service type facilities.
SECTION 140-69C. AREA REGULATIONS.
A. Lot area. The lot area shall not be less than two thousand (2,000) square feet per family unit or other permitted use unit. Efficiency apartments for one and two people are exempt.
B. Width regulations. The lot width at the building line shall not be less than twenty (20') feet.
C. Coverage regulations. The ground surface covered by principal and accessory uses shall not be more than fifty (50%) percent of the lot area. The total lot coverage by building and paved surfaces shall not exceed eighty (80%) percent of the lot area. (Amended Ord. #1588 - 6/20/73)
D. Yard regulations.
(1) Front yard: depth, fifteen (15') feet except that within a block where the entire street frontage is located in an LB District and more than fifty (50%) percent of the frontage is in existing business use, no front yard is required; and where the frontage within a block is partly in an LB District and partly in a Residential District, the front yard requirement of the Residential District shall apply.
(2) Side yard: Where the side of a lot in an LB District abuts the side of a lot in a Residential District, or whose lot line is separated by an alley from the side lot line of a Residential District, there shall be a side yard of not less than eight (8') feet in width. Where the rear lot line of a corner lot of an LB District abuts the side lot line of a lot in a Residential District, or where the rear lot line of a corner lot of an LB District is separated by an alley from the side lot line of a lot in a Residential District, a side yard on the street side of such corner lot shall not be less than one-half (1/2) of the front yard required on the lots in the rear of such corner lot, but such side yard need not exceed twelve (12') feet in width. In such case, however, the side yard on the street side of a corner lot shall not be less than (8') feet. No accessory building on such corner lot shall project beyond the required front yard line of the lot in the rear, nor be located less than eight (8') feet from the side lot line of the lot in the rear.
Where the side lot line of an LB District abuts the rear lot line of a Residential District, or where the side lot line of an LB District is separated by an alley from the rear lot line of lots in a Residential District, the side yard of the LB District adjacent to the Residential District shall be a minimum of eight (8') feet.
In other cases, a side yard for a non-residential building shall not be required.
37
The side yard requirements for buildings used entirely for residential purposes shall be five (5') feet minimum on each side.
(3) Rear yard: depth, twenty (20') feet from the center line of an alley. If there is no alley at the rear of the lot, ten (10') feet from rear property line.
SECTION 140-69D. HEIGHT REGULATIONS. The height of a building may be three (3) stories, but not exceeding thirty-five (35') feet.
SECTION 140-69E. AUTOMOBILE PARKING AND LOADING SPACE REGULATIONS. See Section 140-100 for parking and loading space regulations.
SECTION 140-70. HB HIGHWAY ORIENTED BUSINESS DISTRICT.
SECTION 140-70A. APPLICATION. Regulations applicable in HB Highway Oriented Districts. In HB Districts the following regulations shall apply, except as otherwise provided herein.
SECTION 140-70B. USE REGULATIONS. The following uses only shall be permitted by right, provided that no objectionable emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas, vibration, or noise is produced or hazard to health or property is imposed:
A. Motor vehicle, tire, motor homes, travel trailers, and boat, (indoor and outdoor) display, sales, storage and repair excluding body and/or tire recapping shops.
B. Auto and trailer courts, boarding houses, tourist homes, and bed and breakfasts. (Amended Ord. #1816 – 4/16/86)
C. Banks, businesses, professional offices, and group day care centers. (Amended Ord. #1848 - 10/19/88)
D. Churches or similar places of worship.
E. Indoor theaters, assembly halls and lodges.
F. Indoor and outdoor retail sales of goods and services, prepared foods and
beverages, including drive-in service type facilities.
G. Accessory uses customarily incidental to permitted uses.
The following uses may be permitted as a Special Exception when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board:
(1) Automobile filling station.
(2) Commercial recreation.
(3) Wholesale business.
(4) Transportation terminals.
38
(5) Uses permitted in O-A Districts.
SECTION 140-70C. AREA REGULATIONS.
A. Lot area. The lot area shall not be less than 5,000 square feet, except that
for auto courts and automobile filling stations the lot area shall not be less
than 20,000 square feet.
B. Width regulations. The lot width at the building line shall not be less than fifty (50') feet, except that for 20,000 square feet minimum lots the lot width shall not be less than one hundred fifty (150') feet.
C. Coverage regulations. The ground surface covered by principal and accessory uses shall not be more than fifty (50%) percent of the lot area. The total lot coverage by buildings and paved surfaces shall not exceed eighty (80%) percent of the lot area, and in all cases at least ten (10%) percent of the unpaved, unimproved, required area shall be in the front yard.
D. Yard regulations.
(1) Front yard: depth, fifteen (15') feet.
(2) Side yard: Where the side of the lot in an HB District abuts the side of a lot in a Residential District, or whose lot line is separated by an alley from the side lot line of a Residential District, there shall be a side yard of not less than eight (8') feet in width. Where the rear lot line of a corner lot of an HB District abuts the side lot line of a lot in a Residential District, or where the rear lot line of a corner lot of an HB District is separated by an alley from the side lot in a Residential District, a side yard on the street side of such corner lot shall not be less than one-half (1/2) of the front yard required on the lots in the rear of such corner lot, but such side yard need not exceed twelve (12') feet in width. In such case, however, the side yard on the street side of a corner lot shall not be less than eight (8') feet. No accessory building on such corner lot shall project beyond the required front yard line of the lot in the rear, nor be located less than eight (8') feet from the side lot line of the lot in the rear. Where the side lot line of an HB District abuts the rear lot line of a Residential District, or where the side lot line of an HB District is separated by an alley from the rear lot line of lots in a Residential District, the side yard of an HB District adjacent to the Residential District shall be a minimum of eight (8') feet.
In other cases, a side yard for a business building shall not be required.
The side yard requirements for buildings used entirely for residential purposes shall be five (5') feet minimum on each side.
39
(3) Rear yard: depth, twenty (20') feet from the centerline of an alley. If there is no alley at the rear of the lot, ten (10') feet from rear property line.
SECTION 140-70D. HEIGHT REGULATIONS. The height of a building shall not exceed thirty-five (35') feet.
SECTION 140-70E. AUTOMOBILE PARKING SPACE REGULATIONS. See Section 140-100, parking and loading space.
SECTION 140-71. GB - GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS.
SECTION 140-71A. APPLICATION. In a GB General Business District, the following regulations shall apply, except as otherwise provided herein.
SECTION 140-71B. USE REGULATIONS.
A. Uses permitted in O-A Districts and in LB Districts, excluding one and two family dwellings.
B. Bus, taxi, and truck yards.
C. Cleaning and dyeing offices.
D. Commercial recreation uses.
E. Garages for the storage and repair of motor vehicles, but not automobile
body shops.
F. Medical and dental clinics and laboratories.
G. Florists or nurseries, provided that all incidental equipment and supplies, including fertilizers and empty cans, are kept within the building.
H. Stores for the retailing of food, drugs, confectionery, hardware, bakery products, clothing, household appliances, flowers, or house plants.
I. Personal service shops, including barbers, beauty parlors, tailors, shoe repair, and dry cleaning.
J. Banks, business and professional offices.
K. Electric and telephone public-utility transmission and distribution facilities, including substations, water pumping stations, and reservoirs.
L. Municipal buildings or uses.
M. Restaurants, tea rooms, cafes, and other places serving food or beverages.
N. Private schools conducted for gain or profit.
O. Advertising signs subject to the regulations and restrictions of this and other applicable ordinances.
40
P. Tire repair shops, excluding recapping.
Q. Transportation terminals, railway tracks, and rights-of-way.
R. Warehouses are permitted as an accessory use to the principal use.
(Amended Ord. #1715 - 6/18/80)
S. Wholesale and jobbing businesses.
T. Other retail or wholesale sales or service uses which are similar in character to those enumerated above and which will not be dangerous or
otherwise detrimental to persons residing or working in the vicinity thereof, or to the public welfare, and will not impair the use, enjoyment, or value of any property, but not including any of the following uses:
(1) Any use excluded from M Districts.
(2) Dumps; junkyards.
(3) Livestock yards or slaughterhouses.
(4) Manufacturing and processing other than an accessory use customarily incidental to permitted commercial sales and service uses.
(5) Any use which is objectionable by reason of emission of odor, smoke, gas, vibration, or noise, or which may impose hazard to health or property.
SECTION 140-71C. AREA REGULATIONS.
A. Lot area. None for commercial; same as O-A for dwellings.
B. Width regulations. None for commercial; same as O-A for dwellings.
C. Coverage regulations. None for commercial; same as O-A for dwellings.
D. Yard regulations.
(1) Front yard: none.
(2) Side yard:
(a) Where the side of a lot in a GB District abuts the side of a lot in a Residential District or whose lot line is separated by an alley from the side lot line of a Residential District, there shall be a side yard of not less than eight (8') feet in width. Where the rear lot line of a corner lot of a GB District abuts the side lot line of a lot in a Residential District, or where the rear lot line of a corner lot of a GB District is separated by
41
an alley from the side lot line of a lot in a Residential District, a side yard on the street side of such corner lot shall not be less than one-half (1/2) of the front yard required on the lots in the rear of such corner lot, but such side yard need not exceed twelve (12') feet in width. In such case, however, the side yard on the street side of a corner lot should not be less than eight (8') feet. No accessory building on such corner lot shall project beyond the required front yard line of the lot in the rear, nor be located less than eight (8') feet from the side lot line of the lot in the rear.
(b) Where the side lot line of a GB District abuts the rear lot line of a Residential District, or where the side lot line of a GB District is separated by an alley from the rear lot line of lots in a Residential District, the side yard of the GB District adjacent to the Residential District will be a minimum of eight (8') feet.
(c) In other cases, a side yard for a commercial building shall not be required.
(d) The side yard regulations for buildings hereafter built or used entirely for residential purposes shall be the same as required in the O-A District.
(3) Rear yard: none.
SECTION 140-71D. HEIGHT REGULATIONS. The height of a building may be six (6) stories, but not exceeding seventy-five (75') feet, provided that no building or portion of a building shall be erected to a height exceeding forty-five (45’) feet on any portion of a lot less than twenty (20’) feet distant from any portion of a lot in any Residential or LB District.
SECTION 140-71E. AUTOMOBILE PARKING SPACE REGULATIONS. See Section 140-100 for automobile parking space regulations for dwelling units.
ARTICLE X
SECTION 140-72 - 140-78. RESERVED.
ARTICLE XI
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION 140-79. LM LIMITED MANUFACTURING DISTRICT.
SECTION 140-79A. APPLICATION. Regulations applicable in LM Limited Manufacturing Districts. In LM Districts, the following regulations shall apply, except as otherwise provided herein.
42
SECTION 140-79B. USE REGULATIONS. The following uses only shall be permitted by right, provided that no objectionable emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas, vibration, or noise is produced that is perceptible at the lot boundaries or hazard to health or property is imposed:
A. Business offices, research and administrative activities and group day care centers. (Amended Ord. #1848 - 10/19/88)
B. Cleaning, distribution, processing, production, repair, storage, or testing of materials, goods and/or products, provided that all such activities are conducted within an enclosed structure; no open storage of raw and/or waste materials should be permitted; no reproduction of any material designed for use as an explosive shall be permitted; no untreated potentially dangerous effluent from plant operations shall be discharged.
C. Accessory uses customarily incidental to permitted uses.
D. The Zoning Hearing Board may authorize other industrial uses and commercial uses similar to those permitted in a shopping center that are compatible to the growth and development of the adjacent zoning districts. The Board may attach such reasonable requirements, conditions, and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this act and the zoning ordinance. (Amended Ord. #1643 - 8/20/75)
SECTION 140-79C. AREA REGULATIONS.
A. Lot area. The lot area shall not be less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
B. Width regulations. The lot width at the building line shall not be less than one hundred fifty (150') feet.
C. Coverage regulations. The ground surface covered by principal and accessory uses shall not be more than fifty (50%) percent of the lot area. The total lot coverage by buildings and paved surfaces shall not exceed eighty (80%) percent of the lot area.
D. Yard regulations.
(1) Front yard: depth, fifty (50') feet for buildings and loading spaces; fifteen (15') feet for parking spaces.
(2) Side yard: width, thirty (30') feet from buildings to lot, alley, or street right-of-way lines; fifteen (15') feet from parking and loading spaces to lot or street right-of-way lines.
(3) Rear yard: depth, thirty (30') feet from buildings to lot, alley, or street right-of-way lines; fifteen (15') feet from parking and loading spaces to lot or street right-of-way lines.
SECTION 140-79D. HEIGHT REGULATIONS. The height of a building shall not exceed thirty-five (35') feet.
43
SECTION 140-79E. PARKING SPACE REGULATIONS. See Section 140-100 for automobile parking space requirements. An appropriate landscape screen treatment surrounding parking areas shall be provided.
SECTION 140-79F. LOADING SPACE. See Section 140-101 for loading space requirements. An appropriate landscape screen treatment surrounding loading areas shall be provided.
SECTION 140-79G. SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL OF LIMITED MANUFACTURING DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
A. All Limited Manufacturing development plans shall be subject to the review and approval of the Borough Planning Commission and Council as a prerequisite to the issuing of Building Permits and Certificates of Occupancy.
(1) Statement of proposed uses.
(2) Plans of the floor areas, loading docks, and parking areas, including plans of driveways, direction of traffic flow, and any necessary traffic control devices.
(3) Illustrations showing the architectural design of proposed development and the appropriate landscape treatment of the entire tract of land.
B. After reviewing the plan at a regularly scheduled meeting, the Borough Planning Commission shall approve the plan or disapprove it with a statement citing the reasons for such disapproval. The Planning Commission shall then submit its recommendations to Borough Council.
C. After reviewing the plan and Planning Commission recommendations at a regularly scheduled meeting, the Borough Council shall approve or disapprove the plan.
SECTION 140-80. M MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS.
SECTION 140-80A. APPLICATION. In M Manufacturing Districts the following regulations shall apply, except as otherwise provided herein.
SECTION 140-80B. USE REGULATIONS.
A. Manufacturing of shoes, shoe bindings, and leather goods.
B. Bottling works and bookbinding.
C. Building materials storage, lumber yards, and lumber mills.
D. Blacksmith and machine shops.
E. Contractors equipment, sales, service, and storage.
44
F. Mixing plant for concrete and concrete products.
G. Cleaning, dyeing and steam laundry.
H. Freight terminal and freight yards.
I. Metal fabrication and forging.
J. Gas (illuminating or heating) manufacturing and storage.
K. Grain elevators and bulk storage of petroleum and similar products.
L. Railroad yards and truck terminals.
M. Laboratories and lithographing.
N. Laundries, cleaning, dyeing, carpet and rug cleaning.
O. Distribution plants, parcel delivery, and service industries.
P. Manufacturing, compounding, processing, or treatment of such products as bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, dairy products, drugs, pharmaceutical and food products, except the following: fish products, sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast, and rendering or refining of fat and oils.
Q. The manufacture, compounding, assembling, or treatment of articles or merchandise from the following previously prepared materials: bone, cellophane, canvas, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, film, fur, glass, hair, leather, paper, plastics, precious or semiprecious metals or stones, shell, textiles, tobacco, wool yarns, and paint not employing a boiling process.
R. The manufacturing of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products, using only clay, and kilns fired only by electricity or gas.
S. Printing and newspaper publishing.
T. Electrical, optical, and textile manufacturing.
U. Wholesale business, welding shops, warehouses, and cold storage plants.
V. The following uses may be permitted as a Special Exception when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board after a public hearing held in accordance with Section 140-135B - Standards for Special Exception.
(1) Uses permitted in GB districts, excluding multiple and group dwellings, and private schools conducted for gain or profit. (Amend. Ord. #2093 4/27/05)
(2) Mobile home communities.
(3) Churches and similar places of worship. (Amended Ord. #1643 - 8/20/75)
45
SECTION 140-80C. AREA REGULATIONS.
A. Lot area. None.
B. Width regulations. None.
C. Coverage regulations. None.
D. Yard regulations.
(1) Front yard: the front yard shall have a depth of twenty-five (25') feet. Where the frontage is partly in the M District and partly in the Residential District, the front yard requirements of the Residential District shall apply in the M District.
(2) Side yard:
(a) Where the side of a lot in an M District abuts the side of a lot in a Residential District or whose lot line is separated by an alley from the side lot line of a Residential District, there shall be a side yard of not less than eight (8') feet in width.
Where the rear lot line of a corner lot of an M District abuts the side lot line of a lot in a Residential District or where the rear lot line of a corner lot of an M District is separated by an alley from the side lot line of a lot in a Residential District, a side yard on the street side of such corner lot shall not be less than one-half (1/2) of the front yard required on the lots in the rear of such corner lot, but such side yard need not exceed twelve (12') feet in width. In such case, however, the side yard on the street side of a corner lot should not be less than eight (8') feet. No accessory buildings on such corner lot shall project beyond the required front yard line of the lot in the rear, nor be located less than eight (8') feet from the side lot line of the lot in the rear.
(b) Where the side lot line of an M District abuts the rear lot line of a Residential District or where the side lot line of an M District is separated by an alley from the rear lot line of lots in a Residential District, the side yard of the M District adjacent to the Residential District will be a minimum of eight (8') ft.
(3) Rear yard: the rear yard shall have a depth of twenty (20') feet.
SECTION 140-80D. HEIGHT REGULATIONS. The maximum height of a building shall be fifty (50') feet.
SECTION 140-80E. AUTOMOBILE PARKING SPACE REGULATIONS. See Section 140-100 for automobile parking space regulations.
SECTION 140-80F. LOADING SPACE. See Section 140-101.
46
SECTION 140-81. HI HEAVY INDUSTRY DISTRICTS.
SECTION 140-81A. APPLICATION. In HI Heavy Industry Districts, the following regulations shall apply, except as otherwise provided herein.
SECTION 140-81B. USE REGULATIONS.
A. Uses permitted in M Districts, excluding dwellings and dwelling units,
except those for employees having duties requiring them to live on the
premises. (Amended Ord. #1715 - 6/18/80)
B. Foundries.
C. Structural steel fabricating yards.
D. Any other use not otherwise prohibited by law, provided, however, that none of the following uses shall be established or reconstructed, structurally altered, enlarged, or moved unless the Zoning Hearing Board approves the issue of a permit therefore:
(1) Acid manufacture.
(2) Cement, lime, gypsum, or plaster of paris manufacture.
(3) Distillation of bones, coal, tar, petroleum, refuse, grain, or wood.
(4) Open dump.
(5) Drilling for or removal of oil, gas, or other hydrocarbon substance.
(6) Explosive manufacture or storage.
(7) Fat rendering.
(8) Fertilizer manufacture.
(9) Garbage, offal, or dead animal or fish reduction or dumping.
(10) Glue manufacture.
(11) Hog farm.
(12) Petroleum or petroleum refining.
(13) Smelting of ores.
(14) Stockyard or slaughter of animals, except poultry or rabbits.
(15) Tannery.
(16) Any other use which is objectionable by reason of emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas, vibration, or noise, or which may impose hazard to health or property.
47
SECTION 140-81C. AREA REGULATIONS.
A. Lot area. None.
B. Width regulations. None.
C. Coverage regulations. None.
D. Yard regulations.
(1) Front yard: The front yard shall have a depth of twenty-five (25') feet. Where the frontage is partly in the HI District and partly in the Residential District, the front yard requirements of the Residential District shall apply in the HI District.
(2) Side yard.
(a) Where the side of a lot in a HI District abuts the side of a lot in a Residential District or whose lot line is separated by an alley from the side lot line of a Residential District, there shall be a side yard of not less than eight (8') feet in width. Where the rear lot line of a corner lot of an HI District abuts the side lot line of a lot in a Residential District or where the rear lot line of a corner lot of an HI District is separated by an alley from the side lot line of a lot in a Residential District, a side yard on the street side of such corner lot shall not be less than one-half (1/2) of the front yard required on the lots in the rear of such corner lot, but such side yard need not exceed twelve (12') feet in width. In such case, however, the side yard on the street side corner lot should not be less than eight (8') feet. No accessory building on such corner lot shall project beyond the required front yard line of the lot in rear, nor be located less than eight (8') feet from the side lot line of the lot in the rear.
(b) Where the side lot line of an HI District abuts the rear lot line of a Residential District or where the side lot line of an HI District is separated by an alley from the rear lot line of lots in a Residential District, the side yard of the HI District adjacent to the Residential District will be a minimum of eight (8') feet.
(3) Rear yard. The rear yard shall have a depth of twenty (20') feet.
SECTION 140-81D. HEIGHT REGULATIONS. The maximum height of a building shall be fifty (50') feet. (Amended Ord. #1732 - 12/16/81).
SECTION 140-81E. AUTOMOBILE PARKING SPACE REGULATIONS. See Section 140-100 for automobile parking space regulations.
SECTION 140-81F. LOADING SPACE. See Section 140-101.
48
ARTICLE XII
OPEN SPACE DISTRICTS
SECTION 140-82. APPLICATION. In OS Open Space Districts, the following regulations shall apply except as otherwise provided herein.
SECTION 140-83. USE REGULATIONS. Land may be used or occupied for any of the following purposes and no other:
A. Historic sites.
B. Drainage ways or channels, watersheds, and general conservation of natural resource uses.
C. Parks, playgrounds, playfields and public markets (Amend. Ord. #2035,
1/26/00), (Amend. Ord. #2044 4/11/01), (Amend Ord. #2133 12/26/07).
D. Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any of
the above uses. (Amend. Ord. #1678 2/16/77)
ARTICLE XII-A
FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT PROVISIONS
SECTION 140-84. APPLICATION/FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT PROVISIONS. The following regulations shall apply except as otherwise provided herein.
A. All uses, activities, and development occurring within any Flood-plain District shall be undertaken only in strict compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and with all other applicable codes, regulations, and ordinances of the Borough of Hanover, including but not limited to the Land Subdivision Ordinance, the Plumbing Code, and the Building Permit Regulations. (Amended Ord. #1732 - 12/16/81).
B. All uses, activities, and development shall be undertaken only in compliance with applicable Federal and State laws, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Under no circumstances shall any use, activity, or development adversely affect the capacity of the channels of flood-ways of any watercourse, drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or system. (Amended Ord. #1732 - 12/16/81).
The Borough Manager shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State, or other source, as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements, or other development in Zone A, meet standards in Section 140-86, A-H. (Amended Ord. #1834 -9/02/87).
C. Prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of any stream, watercourse, etc., within the municipality, a permit shall be obtained from the Department of Environmental Resources, Dams and Encroachment Division. Further, notification of the proposal shall be given to all affected
49
adjacent municipalities. Copies of such notification shall be forwarded to both the Federal Insurance Administration and the Department of Community Affairs. (Amended Ord. #1732 - 12/16/81).
Description of Floodplain Areas
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
FW (Floodway Area) – the areas identified as “Floodway” in the AE Zone in the Flood Insurance Study prepared by the FEMA. The term shall also include floodway areas which have been identified in other available studies or sources of information for those floodplain areas where no floodway has been identified in the Flood Insurance Study.
FF (Flood-Fringe Area) – the remaining portions of the one hundred (100) year floodplain in those areas identified as an AE Zone in the Flood Insurance Study, where a floodway has been delineated.
The basis for the outermost boundary of this area shall be the one hundred (100) year flood elevations as shown in the flood profiles contained in the Flood Insurance Study.
FA (General Floodplain Area) – the areas identified as Zone A in the FIS for which no one hundred (100) year flood elevations have been provided. When available, information from other Federal, State, and other acceptable sources shall be used to determine the one hundred (100) year elevation, as well as a floodway area, if possible. When no other information is available, the one hundred (100) year elevation shall be determined by using a point on the boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site in questions.
In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the Borough. (Amended Ord. #2152A 9/9/2009)
SECTION 140-85. PERMITTED USES. In the Floodway District (FW) the following uses and activities are permitted, provided that they are in compliance with the provisions of the underlying district and are not prohibited by any other ordinance, and provided that they do not require structures, fill, or storage of materials and equipment.
A. Agricultural uses, such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.
B. Public and private recreational uses and activities, such as parks, day camps, picnic grounds, golf courses, boat launching and swimming areas, hiking and horseback riding trails, wildlife and nature preserves, game
50
farms, fish hatcheries, trap and set game ranges, and hunting and fishing areas.
C. Accessory residential uses, such as yard areas, gardens, play areas, and pervious parking areas.
D. Accessory industrial and commercial uses, such as yard areas, pervious parking and loading areas, airport landing strips, provided that there will be no new or substantially improved structure which (Amended Ord. #1857 5/17/89:
(1) Will be used for the production or storage of any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or,
(2) Will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 500 gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous materials or substances on the premises; or,
(3) Will involve the production, storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances;
(4) The following list of materials and substances are considered dangerous to human life:
(a) Acetone.
(b) Ammonia.
(c) Benzene
(d) Calcium carbide.
(e) Carbon disulfide.
(f) Celluloid.
(g) Chlorine.
(h) Hydrochloric acid.
(i) Hydrocyanic acid.
(j) Magnesium.
(k) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(l) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(m) Phosphorus.
(n) Potassium.
(o) Sodium.
51
(p) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(q) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
(r) Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated. (Amended Ord. #1732 12/16/81; Ord. #1857 5/17/89).
E. Space Below the Lowest Floor
1. Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (including basement) is prohibited.
2. Partially enclosed space below the lowest floor (including basement) which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement, shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of flood waters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term “partially enclosed space” also includes crawl spaces.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
a. A minimum of two (2) openings having a net total area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
b. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1’) foot above grade.
c. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc. or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. (Amended Ord. #2152A 9/9/2009)
E(2). The Standards and Specifications contained 34PA Code (Chapters 401-405), as amended and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to the above and other sections and subsections of this ordinance, to the extent that they are more restrictive and/or supplement the requirements of this ordinance.
International Building Code (IBC) 2003 or the latest edition thereof:
Sec. 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and Appendix G.
52
International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2003 or the latest edition thereof: Secs. R104, R105, R109, R323, Appendix AE101, Appendix E and Appendix J. (Amended Ord. #2152A 9/9/2009)
SECTION 140-86. USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION. The following uses and activities may be permitted by Special Exception provided that they are in compliance with the provisions of the underlying district and are not prohibited by any other ordinance:
A. Structures, except for manufactured homes accessory to the uses and activities in Section 140-85.
B. Utilities and public facilities and improvements such as railroads, streets, bridges, transmission lines, pipe lines, water and sewage treatment plants, and other similar or related uses.
C. Water related uses and activities, such as marinas, docks, wharves, piers, etc.
D. Extraction of sand, gravel, and other materials.
E. Temporary uses, such as circuses, carnivals, and similar activities.
F. Storage of materials and equipment, provided that they are not buoyant, flammable, or explosive, and are not subject to major damage by flooding, or provided that such materials and equipment are firmly anchored to prevent flotation or movement, and/or can be readily removed from the area within the time available after flood warning and do not violate the provisions of Section 140-85-D.
G. Other similar uses and activities, provided they cause no increase in flood heights and/or velocities. All uses, activities, and structural developments shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the flood proofing provisions contained in all other applicable codes and ordinances.
H. No residential development will be allowed by Special Exception in the floodway, including manufactured home parks and units; institutional facilities such as hospitals, nursing homes, and jails or prisons will not be permitted by Special Exception in the floodway. (Amended Ord. #1732 - 12/16/81)
SECTION 140-87. SPACE BELOW THE LOWEST FLOOR
A. Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (including basement) is prohibited.
B. Partially enclosed space below the lowest floor (including basement) which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement, shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of flood waters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term “partially enclosed space” also includes crawl spaces.
53
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
1. A minimum of two (2) openings having a net total area of not Less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
2. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1’) foot above grade.
3. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc. or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. (Amended Ord. #2152A 9/9/2009)
SECTION 140-88. GENERAL FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT (FA).
A. In the General Flood Plain District, no development, use, or activity (including fill, grading and/or substantial improvements to structures, etc.) shall be permitted unless the applicant for the proposed development, use, or activity has demonstrated that the proposed undertaking, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, uses and activities, will not increase the water surface elevation of the one hundred (100) year flood more than one (1') foot at any point. The engineering principle, equal reduction of conveyance, shall be used to make the determination of increases in flood height.
B. In the floodway portion of the District, no development shall be permitted except where the effect of such development on flood heights is fully offset by accompanying improvements. Only those uses and/or activities provided for in the Floodway District (FW) shall be permitted in the floodway portion of this District.
C. All uses, activities, and/or development shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the flood-proofing and related provisions contained in all other applicable codes and ordinances. (Amended Ord. #1732 - 12/16/81)
D. Space Below the Lowest Floor
1. Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (including basement) is prohibited.
2. Partially enclosed space below the lowest floor (including basement) which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement, shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of flood waters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term “partially enclosed space” also includes crawl spaces.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
54
a. A minimum of two (2) openings having a net total area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
b. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1’) foot above grade.
c. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc. or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. (Amended Ord. #2152A 9/9/2009)
SECTION 140-88A. PROHIBITED USES IN FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT - The following activities shall be prohibited from locating entirely or partially within any identified floodplain district and no variance shall be granted (Amended Ord. #1857 5-17-89):
A. The commencement of any of the following activities; or the construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals
(2) Nursing Homes
(3) Jails or Prisons
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision. Within any Floodway Area (FW) manufactured homes shall be prohibited.
C. Within any Floodway Area (FW) any development which may endanger human life is prohibited. (Amended Ord. #2152A 9/9/2009)
SECTION 140-89. SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS AND VARIANCES IN THE FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT - Additional factors to be considered.
In passing upon applications for Special Exceptions and Variances, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider all relevant factors and procedures specified in other sections of the Zoning Ordinance and the following:
A. The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments. No Special Exception or Variance shall be granted for any proposed use, development, or activity that will cause any increase in flood levels in the Floodway District or create residences, manufactured home parks, hospitals, nursing homes, or prisons.
B. The danger that materials may be swept on to other lands or downstream to the injury of others.
C. The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent diseases, contamination, and unsanitary conditions.
D. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owners.
55
E. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community.
F. The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.
G. The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use.
H. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
I. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and flood plain management program for the area.
J. The safety of access to the property in times of flood to ordinary and emergency vehicles.
K. The expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site.
L. No Variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or activity within any floodway area that would cause any increase in the one hundred (100) year flood elevation.
M. Except for a possible modification of the freeboard requirements involved,
no Variance shall be granted for any of the other requirements pertaining specifically to development regulated by Special Exception Section 140-86 or to development which may endanger human life. (Section 140-87) (Amended Ord. #1857 5/17/89).
N. If granted, a Variance shall involve only the least modification necessary to provide relief and be based on good and sufficient cause and notation that failure to grant would result in exceptional hardship. The granting of a variance will i) neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense; ii) nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public or conflict with other applicable State statute or regulation, or local ordinance or regulation.
O. Wherever a Variance is granted, the Zoning Hearing Board shall notify the applicant in writing that:
(1) The granting of the Variance may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance.
(2) Such Variance may increase the risks to life and property.
P. A report of all Variances granted during the year shall be included in the annual report to the Federal Insurance Administration.
Q. Not withstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the one
56
hundred (100) year flood.
R. Applicants for Special Exceptions shall provide five copies of the following items:
(1) A written request including a completed Building Permit Application Form.
(2) A small scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site is located.
(3) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one (1) inch being equal to one hundred (100) feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale and date.
(b) Topography based upon the North American Vertical Datum of 1929, showing existing and proposed contours at intervals of two (2) feet.
(c) All property and lot lines including dimensions, and the size of the site expressed in acres or square feet.
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, other access ways, and parking areas, with information concerning widths, pavement types and construction, and elevations.
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses, buildings, structures and other public or private facilities, including railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural and man made features affecting, or affected by, the proposed activity or development.
(f) The location of the floodplain boundary line, information and spot elevations concerning the one hundred (100) year flood elevations, and information concerning the flow of water including direction and velocities.
(g) The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities and any other improvements.
(h) Any other information which the municipality considers necessary for adequate review of the application.
(i) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements, clearly and legibly drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(1) Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings, including floor plans, sections, and exterior building elevations, as appropriate.
57
(2) For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) and as required, the elevation of any other floor.
(3) Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors associated with the one hundred (100) year flood.
(4) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing measures.
(5) Cross section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other access ways, and parking areas, showing all rights-of-way and pavement widths.
(6) Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives, and vehicular access ways including existing and proposed grades.
(7) Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer systems, water supply systems and any other utilities and facilities.
(j) The following data and documentation:
(1) Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the activity or development is proposed is an existing separate and single parcel, owned by the applicant or the client he represents.
(2) Certification from a registered professional engineer, architect, or landscape architect that the proposed construction has been adequately designed to protect against damage from the one hundred (100) year flood.
(3) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer, architect, landscape architect, or other qualified person which contains a complete and accurate description of the nature and extent of pollution that might possibly occur from the development during the course of a one hundred (100) year flood, including a statement concerning the effects such pollution may have on human life.
(4) A statement certified by a registered professional engineer, architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete and accurate description of the effects the proposed development will have on one hundred (100) year flood elevations and flows.
(5) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer, architect, or landscape architect, which
58
contains a complete and accurate description of the kinds and amounts of any loose buoyant materials or debris that may possibly exist or be located on the site below the hundred (100) year flood elevation and the effects such materials and debris may have on one hundred (100) year flood elevations and flows.
(6) The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental Protection’s “Planning Module for Land Development”.
(7) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection to implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control.
(8) Any other applicable permits such as, but not limited to, a permit for any activity regulated by the Department of Environmental Protection under Section 302 of Act 1978-166.
(9) An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which the site will be safety evacuated before or during the course of a one hundred (100) year flood.
(k) Upon receipt of an application for a Special Exception by the Borough, the following procedures shall apply in addition to those of Article II:
(1) A complete copy of the application and all accompanying documentation shall be forwarded to the County Planning Commission by registered or certified mail for its review and recommendations. Copies of the application shall also be forwarded to the Borough Planning Commission and Borough Engineer for review and comment.
(2) If an application is received that is incomplete, the Borough shall notify the applicant in writing, stating in what respect the application is deficient.
(3) If the Borough decides to disapprove an application, it shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval.
(4) If the Borough approves an application, it shall file written notification, together with the application and all pertinent information, with the Department of Community and Economic Development, by registered or certified mail after the date of approval.
(5) Before issuing the Special Exception, the Borough shall allow the Department of Community and
59
Economic Development thirty (30) days, after receipt of the notification by the Department, to review the application and decision made by the Borough.
(6) If the Borough does not receive any communication from the Department of Community and Economic Development during the thirty (30) day review period, it may issue a Special Exception to the applicant.
(7) If the Department of Community and Economic Development should decide to disapprove an application, it shall notify the Borough and the applicant, in writing of the reasons for the disapproval and the Borough shall not issue the Special Exception.
(l) In addition to the requirements of Article IV of this Ordinance, the following minimum requirements shall also apply to any proposed development requiring a Special Exception. If there is any conflict between any of the following requirements and those aforesaid of this Ordinance or in any other code, ordinance, or regulation, the more restrictive provision shall apply.
(m) No application for a Special Exception shall be approved unless it can be determined that the structure or activity will be located, constructed and maintained in a manner which will:
(1) Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and any occupants of the structure. At a minimum, all new structures shall be designed, located, and constructed so that:
a. The structure will survive inundation by waters of the one hundred (100) year flood without any lateral movement or damage to either the structure itself, or to any of its equipment or contents below the one hundred (100) year flood elevation.
b. The lowest floor (including basement) elevation will be at least one and one half (1 ½) feet above the one hundred (100) year flood elevation.
c. The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an indefinite period of time and be safely evacuated at any time during the one hundred (100) year flood.
(n) Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood levels or flows, or debris endangering life and property. All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of
60
demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc. shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the Borough and the Department of Community and Economic Development. (Amended Ord. #2152A 9/9/2009)
SECTION 140-90. ADMINISTRATION. A zoning permit shall be required for all construction and development which includes but is not limited to paving, filling, grading, excavation, mining, dredging, or drilling operations, etc.
ARTICLE XIII
NONCONFORMING BUILDING AND USES
SECTION 140-91. APPLICATION. All lawful buildings and uses of a building, sign, or other structures existing on the effective date of this ordinance may be continued, altered, restored, reconstructed, sold, or maintained even though such building or use may not conform to the use, height, area, yard, and other regulations of the district in which it is located, provided such nonconforming conditions shall comply with the following:
A. The owner of the premises occupied by a lawful Nonconforming Use existing at the effective date of this ordinance shall secure a Certificate of Nonconformance, which shall be for the purpose of insuring to the owner the right to continue a Nonconforming Use. (See Section 140-124.)
B. All nonconforming signs, billboards or advertising signboards, including poster panels, bulletins, and the like, shall be made to conform to all pertinent regulations or be removed within ten (10) years after the effective date of this ordinance. During this period, they may be continued and maintained.
C. In the event that a Nonconforming Use of any building or premises is discontinued for a period of one (1) year, the use of same shall there-after conform to the uses permitted in the district in which it is located.
D. A change in the use of a building or land that results in a condition that is substandard to a regulation for the district - the use of the resulting condition must meet the standard regulations for the district.
Such as: A parcel of land used for a two, three, or more family dwelling unit - when subdivided the use of each resulting parcel of land or lot must meet the district regulations. (Amended Ord. #1715 - 6/18/80)
SECTION 140-92. BUILDING PERMIT. Where a Building Permit has been issued less than ninety (90) days prior to the effective date of this ordinance and the proposed building or use does not conform to the requirements of this ordinance, the proposed building or use shall be considered the same as a lawful building or use and shall be regulated by the requirements of this Article, only if at least one (1) of the following conditions has been met prior to the effective date of this ordinance:
61
A. Construction other than excavation has been started;
B. A contract for construction other than excavation has been let.
SECTION 140-93. ALTERATION, RESTORATION, OR REPLACEMENT. A Nonconforming Building or a building occupied by a Nonconforming Use may be structurally altered, restored, or replaced with a new building.
SECTION 140-94. EXTENSIONS OR ENLARGEMENTS.
A. The types of extension and enlargement listed below are permitted for Nonconforming Uses and buildings existing on the effective date of this ordinance:
(1) The extension or enlargement of a conforming building occupied by a Nonconforming Use.
(2) The extension or enlargement of a Nonconforming Building occupied by a Nonconforming Use.
(3) The extension or enlargement of a Nonconforming Building occupied by a Conforming Use.
B. The foregoing extensions or enlargements shall be subject to the following conditions:
(1) The extension or enlargement shall conform to the height and yard regulations of the district in which it is located, except that existing buildings may be extended along natural lines as long as the extension does not reduce the existing conforming side or rear yard to less than the required minimum.
(2) Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided for the extension or enlargement, as required by Article XIV, and such extension or enlargement shall not reduce the existing off-street parking and loading space below the minimum standards.
(3) The extension or enlargement of the Nonconforming Use of land shall not interfere with or obstruct the logical and efficient expansion of public facilities and services such as streets, water mains, sewers, etc.
(4) The lands to be used for the extension or enlargement must be officially recorded prior to July 1, 1961, in the name of the owner of the Nonconforming Use. Furthermore, the land used for the extension or enlargement shall be a continuation of the land used for the Nonconforming Use and shall be confined to a block or limited by natural barriers such as streets, alleys, and rights-of-way.
(5) The owner of any structure used for a Conforming Use on lands registered on a Certificate of Nonconformance wishing to remove said structure, shall submit his specific plans (including size and type of structures to be erected, if any) for the land so vacated to the
62
Borough Planning Commission, and these plans shall be approved by the Borough Planning Commission and Borough Council before any action is taken toward the removal of the aforementioned structure used for a Conforming Use. The approved plans shall become a part of the Certificate of Nonconformance and cannot be altered without the approval of the Borough Planning Commission and Borough Council.
(6) The extension or enlargement shall conform to the height and yard regulations of the district in which it is located, except that existing buildings may be extended along natural lines as long as the extension does not reduce the existing conforming side or rear yard to less than the required minimum. (Amended Ord. #1168 - 1/16/63)
SECTION 140-95. DISCONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND. The lawful use of land for storage purposes which do not conform to the provisions of this ordinance shall be discontinued within three (3) years from the effective date of this ordinance, and the use of land for storage purposes which may become a Non-conforming Use by reason of an amendment to this ordinance, rezoning, or annexation, shall be discontinued within three (3) years from the effective date of the amendment, rezoning, or annexation.
SECTION 140-96. MAINTENANCE OF PREMISES FOR NONCONFORMING USES. The premises of a Nonconforming Use located in a Residential District shall be maintained in a manner that is comparable to that of the Residential District in which the Non-conforming Use is located.
SECTION 140-97. EXISTING PROPOSALS. Any proposed building or use formally approved by the Borough Planning Commission and so recorded in its minutes prior to the effective date of this ordinance, and the proposed building or use does not conform to the requirements of this ordinance, the proposed building or use shall have the same status as an established Nonconforming Building or Use. However, the proposed construction of the building for the Nonconforming Use must be started within a period of three (3) years from the effective date of this ordinance. If the construction of said building has not been started at the end of the three-year period, thereafter the proposed building or use must conform to the requirements of this ordinance. Furthermore, if construction other than excavation is started after the effective date of this ordinance, the proposed building or use is subject to the conditions set forth under Section 140-94B (1) through (5) inclusive. In any case, the owner of the aforementioned Non-conforming Building or Use, upon completion of the building or establishment of the use, must file a Certificate of Nonconformance the same as required of any Non-conforming Building or Use existing as of the effective date of this ordinance.
SECTION 140-98. CERTIFICATE REQUIRED. The owners of dwellings in Residential Districts which are used for professional or home occupations shall secure a Professional or Home Occupation Certificate (see Section 140-125) within ninety (90) days after the effective date of this ordinance for the purpose of insuring the owner the right to continue a professional or home occupation in a dwelling in a Residential District.
SECTION 140-99. CHANGES. The Zoning Hearing Board may as a Special Exception authorize a change in the Nonconforming Use of a building or land to a Nonconforming Building or Use of the same or a more restricted classification. Whenever a Nonconforming Use of a building or land has been changed to a use of a more restricted
63
classification or to a Conforming Use, such shall not thereafter be changed to a use of a less restricted classification. (Amended Ord. #1168 - 1/16/63)
ARTICLE XIV
PARKING AND LOADING SPACE
SECTION 140-100. PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided to lessen congestion in the streets. The facilities required herein shall be available to patrons throughout the hours of operation of the particular business or use for which such facilities are provided. As used herein, the term "parking space" includes either covered garage space or un-covered parking lot space located off the public right-of-way. Buildings or structures hereafter built, enlarged, or increased in capacity, in all districts except GB, shall provide off-street parking space as required. Any building listed below hereafter erected and any building hereafter converted into one (1) of the buildings listed below, and any open area hereafter used for commercial purposes, shall be provided with not less than minimum parking spaces as set forth below, which spaces shall be readily accessible to, and within a reasonable distance from, the buildings served thereby. Such spaces shall be on the same lot as the principal building or open area, except when otherwise authorized. A garage or carport may be located wholly or partly inside the walls of the principal building, or attached to the outer walls. If separated from the principal building, the garage shall conform to all accessory building requirements. The garage may be constructed under a yard or court. The space above the underground garage shall be deemed to be part of the open space of the lot on which it is located. Each parking space shall consist of not less than an average of two hundred seventy (270) square feet of usable area for each motor vehicle, including interior driveways and connecting the garage or parking space with a street or alley. Notwithstanding the above, all parking space shall be ample in size for the vehicles for which use is intended. The new parking space per vehicle shall be not less than nine (9') feet wide and twenty-two (22') feet long. Outdoor parking space and the approaches thereto shall be paved, or covered with gravel or stone. Such outdoor parking space shall be deemed to be part of the open space of the lot on which it is located. (Amended Ord. #1168 -1/16/63)
A. Dwellings:
(1) For one family detached dwellings and two family dwellings, one (1) parking space shall be provided on the lot for each dwelling unit.
(2) For existing dwellings, one (1) parking space shall be provided for each of the first four (4) dwelling units hereafter added to such dwelling, and one (1) parking space for one (1) unit thereafter added to such dwelling. (Amended Ord. #1588 - 6/20/73)
(3) For three and four-family dwellings, multiple dwelling groups, and apartments, two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit. (Amended Ord. #1505 - 5/19/71)
B. Mortuaries. At least ten (10) parking spaces shall be provided by a mortuary with facilities for one (1) viewing, and there shall be provided eight (8) additional parking spaces for each additional viewing facility.
64
C. Hotels, motels, and tourist houses. At least one (1) parking space for each guest room. If a restaurant in connection with the above is open to the public, the off-street parking facilities shall be not less than those required for restaurants, in addition to those required for guest rooms.
D. Theaters, auditoriums, churches, schools, stadiums, or any other place of public or private assembly. At least one (1) parking space for each five (5) seats provided for public or private assembly.
E. Retail stores, restaurants, and barrooms. At least one (1) parking space for each sixty (60) square feet of gross floor area, exclusive of areas not used for sale or display of merchandise.
F. Office buildings and professional offices. At least one (1) parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor area, or fraction thereof.
G. Industrial or wholesale establishments. At least one (1) parking space for each two (2) employees.
H. Public garages or automobile service stations. At least one (1) parking space for each four hundred (400) square feet of floor or ground area, or fraction thereof, devoted to repair or service facilities, which shall be in addition to the space allocated for the normal storage of motor vehicles.
I. Hospitals, sanitariums, and nursing homes. At least one (1) parking space for each five (5) patients for which accommodations are provided. In addition, one (1) parking space shall be provided for each two (2) staff or administrative personnel.
J. Dance halls, bowling alleys, swimming pools, roller rinks, clubs, lodges, and other similar places and other commercial buildings. At least one (1) parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor area.
K. Boarding houses and subsidized housing developments. Conveniently accessible off street parking spaces must be provided for all resident guests' or tenants' motor vehicles. For each boarding house guest at least one (1) parking space, and for each dwelling unit two (2) parking spaces shall be provided. Where these standards appear excessive, the Zoning Hearing Board may modify the parking space requirements in accordance with the Standards of Review - Section 140-135; but in no case are the requirements to be reduced to less than one (1) parking space for each of the four (4) boarding house guests or four (4) dwelling units.
SECTION 140-101. LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE.
A. In addition to the off street parking space required above, all commercial and industrial establishments, hospitals, or sanitariums, and other similar uses shall provide adequate off-street area for loading and unloading of supplies to and from vehicles.
B. At least one (1) loading berth shall be provided; however, should the gross floor area of the main building and buildings accessory thereto used for commercial and/or industrial purpose exceed ten thousand (10,000)
65
square feet, one (1) additional loading berth shall be provided for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross floor area. The off-street loading berth shall be not less than ten by fifty (10' x 50') feet in size.
C. Hotels shall have at least one (1) loading berth, with an additional loading berth when the gross floor area exceeds fifty thousand (50,000) square feet.
SECTION 140-102. REDUCTION IN REQUIRED PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES. The owner or lease holder of a property may apply to the Zoning Hearing Board for relief of the requirements for parking and loading for a specific use. The Zoning Hearing Board may authorize such exceptions as it deems appropriate in accordance with the provisions of Section 140-135 of this ordinance. (Amended Ord. #1715 - 6/18/80)
SECTION 140-103. EXCEPTIONS. When the required off-street parking space and off- street loading space is not available or not practical to continue on the lot occupied by the main building, the Zoning Hearing Board may authorize such exceptions as it deems appropriate in accordance with the provisions of Section 140-135. (Amended 1/16/63 ord. #1168)
ARTICLE XV
MOTOR VEHICLE ACCESS
SECTION 140-104. APPLICATION. Wherever motor vehicle access is provided from the street (or private road) onto the lot, the following regulations shall apply:
A. Driveways and curbs. Access to the lot shall comply with the following regulations:
(1) Access shall be by not more than two (2) driveways for each one hundred (100') feet frontage on any street.
(2) No two (2) of said driveways shall be closer to each other than twelve (12') feet, and no driveway shall be closer to a side property line than three (3') feet, and no flare shall cross an extended side property line.
(3) Each driveway shall not be more than thirty-five (35') feet in width, measured at right angles to the centerline of the driveway, except as increased by permissible curb return radii the entire flare of any return radius shall fall within the right-of-way.
(4) Driveways shall be no closer than ten (10') feet to the point of intersection of two (2) property lines at any corner, as measured along the property line, and shall not extend across such extended property line.
(5) In all cases where there is an existing curb and gutter or sidewalk on the street (or private road), a safety island along the entire frontage of the property shall be provided, except for the permitted driveways. On the two (2) ends and street (or private road) side of each such island shall be constructed a concrete curb, the height, location any structural specifications of which shall be approved by
66
the Borough Engineer. Maximum and minimum curb return radii permitted and minimum driveway approach angles to the center line of the street (or private road) are required as shown on Plate No. 1, attached to the end of this ordinance and made by this reference as much a part of this ordinance as if fully described and detailed herein.
B. Location of gasoline pumps. Gasoline pumps and all other service equipment shall be set back not less than twenty-five (25') feet from any lot line. If the pump island is set at an angle on the property, it shall be so located that an automobile stopped for service will not extend over the property line.
ARTICLE XVI
PARKING LOTS AND COMMUNITY GARAGES
SECTION 140-105. SUBMISSION OF PLANS.
A. Plans may be submitted to the Borough Zoning Hearing Board by the owner or lease holder of land for a public parking lot, a community garage, or for additional private parking and loading space for his vehicles, his employees, and/or customers. The Zoning Hearing Board shall examine and study the plans, taking into consideration the following uses and provisions for the parking lot or community garage:
(1) There shall be no sales, dead storage, repair work, dismantling, or servicing of any kind on said parking lot.
(2) Entrances and exits shall be approved as to location by the Borough Planning Commission.
(3) No parking shall be permitted nearer than one (1') foot from the side lot line.
(4) To maintain the required open area for front yards in the district and to provide privacy for the properties along boundary lines, a wall, screen planting, or fence not to exceed five (5') feet in height may be required.
(5) The lot shall be surfaced with a dustproof or hard surface meeting the standard specifications of the borough.
(6) No advertising signs shall be erected upon such lot, except not more than one (1) sign on each street side to indicate the operator and purpose of the lot. Such sign shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area.
(7) Lighting facilities, if required, shall be so arranged as to be reflected away from residentially zoned or used property.
67
(8) If at any time after the issue of the required permits any of the provisions in this section are not complied with, the permits shall be revoked.
B. If the Zoning Hearing Board approves the proposed plans for a parking lot or community garage and Borough Council approves all curb cuts, building permits shall be issued. (Amended Ord. #1715 - 6/18/80)
ARTICLE XVII
UNIT DEVELOPMENT PLAN
SECTION 140-106. RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
A. The owner or owners of any tract of land comprising an area of not less than ten (10) acres may submit to the Zoning Hearing Board a plan for the use and development of the land, primarily for residential purposes. The proposed development plan shall be submitted to the Borough Planning Commission for examination, study, and report, and for a public hearing. If the Borough Planning Commission approves the development plan, the plan, together with the recommendations of the Borough Planning Commission, shall be embodied in a report to the Zoning Hearing Board, stating the reasons for the approval of the plan and application, and specific evidence and facts showing that the proposed residential development plan has considered and made provisions for the following essential elements:
(1) That the appropriate use of property adjacent to the area included in the plan will be fully safeguarded.
(2) That the plan is consistent with the intent of this ordinance to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare.
(3) That the buildings shall be used primarily for single family or two family dwellings, apartments, or group houses, and the usual accessory uses such as garages, storage space, and community activities.
(4) That the area of the tract, excluding street area but including the area to be devoted to parks, parkways, and other open spaces, will provide the minimum lot area per family in the district, counting all families to be housed under the unit development plan, which is required for the most intensive use normally permitted in the district in which such development is to be located.
B. If the Zoning Hearing Board approves the proposed residential development plan, building permits and certificates of occupancy shall be issued, even though the use of the land, the location of the buildings to be erected in the area, and the yards and open spaces in the plan do not conform in certain respects to the regulations for the district in which the development is to be located.
68
ARTICLE XVIII
MOBILE HOME COMMUNITIES
SECTION 140-107. PROPOSALS.
A. The owner or owners of a tract of land in a district where mobile homes are permitted or where they are as a Special Exception may submit to the Zoning Hearing Board a plan for the use and development or redevelopment of the land for developing a mobile home community. The proposed plan shall be submitted to the Borough Planning Commission for examination, study, and report. (Amended Ord. #1643 - 8/20/75)
B. The Zoning Hearing Board may, after receipt of a favorable report on the proposal from the Borough Planning Commission and after public notice and hearing, grant a permit for the establishment of a mobile home community, provided that the proposal is not incongruous with the surrounding area and that the proposal will not substantially injure or detract from the surrounding property or from the character of the neighborhood, and that the use of the property adjacent to the area included in the proposed plan will not interfere with or obstruct the logical and efficient extension of public facilities and services such as streets, water, sewers, etc. Furthermore, the proposed plan for mobile home communities shall comply with the regulations set forth in this article.
C. Within any FW (Floodway Area), manufactured homes shall be prohibited.
D. Within any FA (General Floodplain Area), manufactured homes shall be prohibited within the area measured fifty (50) feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
E. Where permitted within any floodplain area, all manufactured homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:
1. Placed on a permanent foundation.
2. Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is one and one half (1 ½) feet or more above the elevation of the one hundred (100) year flood.
3. Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
4. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with the manufacturers’ installation instructions as provided by the manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2003 International Residential Building Code or the US Department of Housing and Urban Development’s Permanent Foundations for Manufactured Housing, 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto shall apply and 34 PA Code Chapter 401-405.
5. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the 2003 IBC (Appendix G, Sec. 501.1-3) and the 2003 IRC (Sec.
69
R323.2, R323.3, R102.7.1, and Appendix AE101, 604 and 605) or the most recent revisions thereto and 34 PA Code Chapter 401-405, as amended where appropriate and/or applicable to units where the manufacturers’ standards for anchoring cannot be provided or were not established for the unit(s) proposed installation. (Amended Ord. #2152A 9/9/2009)
SECTION 140-108. DEFINITIONS OF MOBILE HOME TERMS.
MANUFACTURED HOME - A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For flood plain management purposes the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the term "manufactured home" does not include park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles. (Amended Ord. #1834 - 9/2/87).
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. (Amended Ord. #1834 - 9/2/87).
MOBILE HOME COMMUNITIES - Shall mean any area, tract, site, or plot of land whereupon mobile homes as herein defined are placed, located, or maintained, for dwelling purposes only and upon a permanent or semi-permanent basis. (Amended Ord. #1643 - 8/20/75)
MOBILE HOME SPACE - Shall mean a plot of ground within a mobile home community which is designed for and designated as the location for only one (1) mobile home and not used for any other purposes whatsoever other than the customary accessory uses thereof.
SECTION 140-109. REGULATIONS. In locations where permitted, mobile home communities shall be subject to the following regulations:
A. The mobile home community shall conform to the following:
(1) Shall be located on a well drained site, properly graded to insure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water.
(2) Mobile home space shall be provided, consisting of a minimum of three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet for each space and which shall be clearly defined and marked, which shall include two hundred seventy (270) square feet for each off street parking space and additional area for driveways. (Amended Ord. #1643 - 8/20/75)
(3) Each mobile home space shall be provided with a paved patio of at least ninety-six (96) square feet.
(4) Mobile homes shall be harbored on each base so that there shall be at least fifteen (15') feet clearance between mobile homes and a setback of fifteen (15') feet from common driveways. No mobile home shall be located closer than fifteen (15') feet from any building
70
within the mobile home community or from any property line bounding the mobile home community. (Amended Ord. #1643 - 8/20/75)
(5) All mobile home spaces shall have adequate access to a driveway of not less than twenty (20') feet in width, which shall have unobstructed access to a public street or highway; and the sole vehicular access shall not be by an alley; and all dead end driveways shall include adequate vehicular turning space or cul-de-sac.
(6) Off-driveway parking shall be maintained at a minimum ratio of two (2) car spaces for each mobile home space. (Amended Ord. #1643 - 8/20/75)
(7) All driveways and walkways within the mobile home community shall be paved, or covered with gravel, stone, or cinders, maintained and lighted at night with electric lamps of not less than one hundred (100) watts for each space at intervals of not more than one hundred (100) feet or equivalent illumination as may be supplied by other approved sources.
(8) Outdoor laundry-drying space of adequate area and suitably located shall be provided and equipped with necessary clothesline and other essentials and/or acceptable mechanical drying devices.
(9) Natural or artificial barrier may be required to screen off the mobile home community (street, railroad, or screening by appropriate hedges or fences.)
B. Independent mobile homes are those which have a flush toilet and a bath or shower permanently installed within their interior. If a mobile home community has only independent mobile homes occupying its mobile home spaces, no service building shall be required.
C. Dependent mobile homes are those which do not have a flush toilet and/or a bath or shower permanently installed within their interior. If a mobile home community has any dependent mobile homes occupying its mobile home spaces, a service building with facilities and specifications as follows shall be provided:
(1) Located fifteen (15') feet or more away from any mobile home space.
(2) Adequately lighted.
(3) The interior finished with moisture-resistant material, to permit frequent washing and cleaning.
(4) For each ten (10) dependent mobile home spaces or fraction thereof, there shall be provided at least one (1) lavatory, one (1) water closet, and one (1) shower for each sex; and one (1) laundry tray, one (1) slop-water drain, and an adequate hot water supply for all facilities.
(5) Adequate heating facilities for the building.
71
(6) All rooms well ventilated, with all openings effectively screened.
D. Water supply shall be connected to the municipal water system or accept-able private system.
E. Each independent mobile home space shall be provided with at least a four-inch (4") sewer connection. The sewer connection shall be provided with suitable fittings so that a watertight connection can be made between the mobile home drain and the sewer connection. Such individual mobile
home connection shall be so constructed that it can be closed when not linked to a mobile home, and shall be trapped in such a manner as to maintain it in an odor-free condition.
F. All the sewer lines of a mobile home community shall be connected to the public sewer system.
ARTICLE XIX
SHOPPING CENTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN
SECTION 140-110. SUBMISSION OF PLANS. The owner or owners of any tract of land in an area zoned for a shopping center may submit to the Borough Planning Commission a plan or partial plan for the use and development of the land for commercial purposes. The plan shall specifically state the proposed commercial uses and shall provide plans of the floor area, loading docks, entrances, and parking areas. The following uses shall be permitted provided no objectionable emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas, vibration, or noise is produced or hazard to health or property is imposed.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Retail sales of goods and services, prepared foods and beverages. No more than ten (10%) percent of any business sales or display area shall be outdoors.
(2) Banks, business and professional offices.
(3) Commercial recreation.
(4) Medical and dental clinics and laboratories.
(5) Theaters.
(6) Accessory uses customarily incidental to permitted uses.
B. Parking. At least three times the gross floor area of the stores and offices to be included in the proposed development is provided in off-street parking areas which are integral parts of the design of the unit planned.
C. That the appropriate use of the property adjacent to the area included in the plan will be fully safeguarded.
D. That the plan is consistent with the intent of this ordinance to promote the health, safety, and general welfare.
72
The Zoning Hearing Board may authorize other commercial uses that are compatible to the growth and development of the shopping center.
SECTION 140-111. APPROVALS. If the Borough Planning Commission approves the plans for the proposed shopping center, they shall submit their recommendations to Council. After reviewing the Planning Commission's recommendations and Council approves the proposed plan for a shopping center, Building Permits and Certificates of Occupancy shall be issued.
ARTICLE XX
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT AND/OR CONDOMINIUM
SECTION 140-112. SUBMISSION OF PLANS. The owner of any tract of land, except in R-6, LM, M, and HI Districts, may submit a request for a Special Exception to the Borough Planning Commission for the use and development or redevelopment of the land by the erection of or the conversion to dwelling units, efficiency apartments, or a condominium. The Borough Planning Commission shall examine and study the plans; after a public hearing on the proposed plans they shall report their findings and recommendations to the Borough Zoning Hearing Board. The Planning Commission's report to the Zoning Hearing Board must have taken into consideration the following essential elements:
A. That the appropriate use of the property adjacent to the area included in the plan will be properly safeguarded.
B. That adequate front, side, and rear yards will be provided in Residential Districts.
C. That off street parking facilities for the proposed use are adequate for the area.
D. That entrances and exits to the property are consistent with the movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic requirements for the area.
E. That the architectural design of the building and the proposed landscape development of the open space area about the buildings are in harmony with the adjacent areas.
F. That the lot coverage by the structure and its yards in Residential Districts shall not be greater than the regulations for the District.
G. That the minimum habitable floor area for dwelling units shall be as stipulated in Section 140-19.
H. That dwelling units shall be limited to two (2) floors above grade in Residential Districts and the structure height is within the limits established for the district.
I. That the plan is consistent with the intent of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare. (Amended Ord. #1715 - 6/18/80)
73
SECTION 140-113. APPROVALS. If the Zoning Hearing Board approves a proposed plan of development for the apartments or dwelling units, Building Permits and Certificates of Occupancy shall be issued, even though the use of the land, the location of the buildings to be erected in the area, and the yards and open spaces in the plan do not conform in certain respects to the regulations for the district in which the development is to be located.
ARTICLE XXI
SIGNS (Amended Ord. #2051 2/27/2002)
SECTION 140-114. COMPLIANCE NECESSARY. After this ordinance becomes effective, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, place, alter, locate, relocate or maintain within the Borough of Hanover any sign or sign structure without complying with the procedures and requirements of this ordinance.
SECTION 140-115. SIGN. A lettered board, structure, wall, or other surface, or any other device used to visually announce, advertise, or convey information to the public for any purpose. Included would be:
A. A separate structure consisting of a face or faces upon which information is portrayed, including its supporting structural elements.
B. A structure or device erected in the form of a symbol or trademark.
C. A structure or device attached or fastened to another structure, such as on the wall or roof of a building.
D. A surface of a structure or device upon which lettered, pictorial, or other visual information is placed.
CLASSIFICATION OF SIGNS
115.1 - Advertising Sign - A sign which directs attention to a business, product, service, or activity, sold or conducted at a location other than upon the premises where the sign is located.
115.2 - Animated Sign - A sign with action or motion, flashing lights, or color changes requiring electronic or manufactured sources of supply, but not including wind actuated elements such as flags, banners, or pennants.
115.3 - Awning - Canopy or Marquee - Any structure made of cloth, metal, wood, or substitute material with a frame or rigid form attached to a building and projecting out from the building.
115.4 - Business Sign - A sign which announces or directs attention to a business, product, service, or activity sold or conducted on the premises where such sign is located.
115.5 - Directional Sign - A sign which is for directing patrons or attendants to an establishment off the main traveled thoroughfare or to service clubs, churches, or other nonprofit organizations.
74
115.6 - Ground Sign - (free-standing) - A sign which is supported by uprights, columns, etc., in or upon the ground and not attached to any building.
115.7 - Home Occupation - A sign depicting a use which is incidental or secondary to the residential use of a dwelling.
115.8 - Identification Sign - A sign which identifies only the occupant of the premises, the profession of the occupant, and/or the name of the building upon which the sign is placed.
115.9 - Illuminated Sign - A sign incorporating a source of light in order to make the message readable. Included are internally and externally lighted signs.
115.10 - Political Sign - A sign which takes sides in issues of public or group interest and/or advertises candidates involved therein.
115.11 - Projecting Sign - A sign which is attached to a building or other structure and extends beyond the line of said building or structure.
115.12 - Public Service Sign - A sign erected or located by a public agency providing information or instructions.
115.13 - Roof Sign - A sign erected upon or above the roof or parapet wall of a building and which is wholly or partially supported by said building.
115.14 - Street Clock - A timepiece used as a sign upon or in a frame or structure placed or located upon the sidewalk by a person or business for the convenience of the public and which also serves as a business sign.
115.15 - Temporary Sign - A sign placed or erected for a limited time only.
115.16 - Trespassing Sign - A sign indicating the private nature of a driveway or property.
115.17 - Wall Sign - A flat sign which is affixed in any manner against or parallel to any exterior wall of a building or structure and which does not extend above the parapet, eaves, or facade of the building to which it is attached.
115.18 - Buntings, Pennants, Banners, and Similar Materials - Are temporary signs announcing changes and/or openings for businesses and industry, and events concerning charitable, civic, and religious organizations. (Amended Ord. #1643 - 8/20/75)
115.19 - Sandwich Board Signs - A sign constructed of at least two (2) boards joined at the top, erected on the ground or a surface so as to form a triangular shape.
115.20 - Mobile Billboards - A sign constructed on a moveable framework, which can be moved from location to location. The sign has no permanent foundation in the form of footers or slab, in the ground.
75
SECTION 140-116. PERMITTED USE OF SIGNS. The following signs as classified in Section 115.1 - 115.20 are permitted in the Zoning Districts as indicated below. Specific regulations including size requirements must conform with the Borough Sign Ordinance of 1975. Where a permit is required, application must be filed with the Zoning Officer. No sign construction shall begin until a permit is issued.
Classification
Permit
Required
Where Permitted
(Zoning Districts)
Maximum Size & Regulations
Sign Ordinance
Page Number
102.1
X
HI
300 sq. ft.
46
102.2
X
M, HI
300 sq. ft.
42,46
102.3
A, R-6, R-5, R-3, O-A
20,23,26
102.3
X
LB, HB, GB, LM, M, HI
Section 107.4
36,40,45,49
102.4
X
SC, LB, HB, GB, LM
200 sq. ft.
29,34,37
102.4
X
M, HI
300 sq. ft.
42,46
102.5
X
A, R-6, R-5, R-3, O-A
8 sq. ft.
Section 104.2
18,21,24
102.5
X
SC, LB, HB, GB
30 sq. ft.
29,34
102.5
X
M, HI
50 sq. ft.
42,46
102.6
X
SC, LB, HB, GB, LM, M, HI
Section 107.3
30,33,39,44,47
102.7
X
All Districts
2 sq. ft.
Section 104.5
19,21,24,29, 34,37,42,46
102.8
X
A, R-6, R-5, R-3
2 sq. ft.
Section 105.14
19,21
102.8
X
O-A
6 sq. ft.
Section 105.14
24
102.8
X
SC, LB, HB, GB, LM
20 sq. ft.
Section 105.14
29,35,37
102.8
X
M, HI
300 sq. ft.
Section 105.14
42,46
102.9
X
All Districts
18,21,24,30, 34,39,45,47
102.10
X
SC, LB, HB, GB
30 sq. ft
29,35
102.10
X
M, HI
300 sq. ft.
42,47
102.11
X
SC, LB, HB, GB, LM
Section 107.2
28,33,38
102.12
X
All Districts
Section 104
18,21,24,30, 33,38,44,47
102.13
X
SC, LB, HB, GB, LM
80 sq. ft.
Section 107.6
32,41
102.13
X
M, HI
Section 107.6
43,50
102.14
X
SC, LB, HB, GB
Section 107.5
27,32
102.15
All Districts
Sections 104.6, 104.7, and 105.16
19,22,25,29,
35,37,43,48
102.16
X
A, R-6, R-5, R-3
2 sq. ft.
Section 105.15
19,22
102.16
X
SC, LB, HB, GB, LM
6 sq. ft.
Section 105.15
28,35,37
76
A sign may come under more than one classification; in such cases, all and/or the most restrictive regulations apply. A new sign for a nonconforming use or a new nonconforming sign or interpretation of the permitted use of signs shall be submitted to the Zoning Hearing Board for review in accordance with Section 140-135 of the Hanover Borough Zoning Ordinance.
*SC - Shopping Center (Amended Ord. #1643 - 8/20/75)
SECTION 140-117 & 140-118. Reserved.
SECTION 140-119. GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR ALL SIGNS. The following regulations shall apply to all permitted sign uses:
A. No sign shall be erected that by reason of position, shape or color may interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device.
B. Except for a sign or lettering painted or placed directly on a door, store window, door or window frame or building trim identifying the occupant or activity of a building or structure, no sign shall be painted directly on any surface which is not in itself the sign structure in the GB District.
C. Under no circumstance shall any sign or part thereof project over or extend beyond a point two feet inside the curbline or edge of street pavement.
D. No part of any sign shall project or extend over any pedestrian walkway for a distance of more than four feet, and every such sign projecting out for more than two feet shall have a clear space of at least eight feet below all projecting parts.
E. In computing the area upon which information or copy can be placed, only that face or faces which can be seen from any one direction at one time shall be counted.
F. No signs shall be attached to or placed on any public utility pole or tree located within any public right-of-way.
G. Illumination of any sign shall be indirect, shielded or otherwise arranged to prevent glare.
Classification
Permit
Required
Where Permitted
(Zoning Districts)
Maximum Size & Regulations
Sign Ordinance
Page Number
102.16
X
M, HI
12 sq. ft.
Section 105.15
43,48
102.17
X
All Districts
Section 107.1
18,22,25,28,
34,38,43,48
102.18
SC, LB, HB, GB, LM, M, HI
Section 105.16
30,33,39,44,47
102.19
X
SC, LB, HB, GB, LM, M, HI
32 sq. ft.
31,35,41,44,48
102.20
X
SC, LB, HB, GB, LM, M, HI
32 sq. ft.
31,35,41,44,49
77
H. All signs shall be constructed of durable materials and shall be kept in good condition and repair.
I. All signs shall be erected or located so that they will permit free ingress to or egress from any window, door or fire escape.
J. Indecent or obscene sign matter shall not be displayed in any manner.
K. Every sign for which a permit is required shall have its assigned number clearly displayed on the sign face or front.
L. Any sign erected prior to the adoption of this ordinance or as amended that does not conform if damaged to an extent of ½ its replacement value shall not be rebuilt. However, the normal maintenance, repainting or posting of these signs or structures shall not be a factor in determining the replacement costs.
M. The total aggregate square footage of sign area permitted for a single business or activity located or conducted on a single property (or individual store or shop in a shopping center) shall not be more than two square feet for each lineal foot of primary property street frontage (or individual store or shop frontage in a shopping center). Under no circumstances, however, shall the total permitted aggregate sign area for any such individual business or activity exceed 200 square feet per street frontage.
N. Identification signs, provided that:
(1) There is no more than one such sign for each business or activity.
(2) Such signs are attached to the building or structure in which the business or activity is located.
O. Trespassing sign. No more than one such sign shall be permitted for each driveway or property.
P. All temporary signs have a forty-five-day time limit unless otherwise provided for by this ordinance.
ARTICLE XXII
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 140-120. ENFORCEMENT. The Borough Council shall appoint a Zoning Administrative Officer to enforce the provisions of this ordinance. It shall be his duty to examine all applications for zoning permits, issue permits only for construction and uses which are in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance, record and file all applications for permits with accompanying plans and documents, and make such reports as Council may require. Permits for construction and uses which are a Special Exception to requirements to this ordinance shall be issued only upon order of the Zoning Hearing Board.
SECTION 140-121. REQUIREMENT OF ZONING PERMITS. A Zoning Permit shall be required prior to the erection or alteration of any building, structure, or portion thereof,
78
and prior to the use or change in use of a building or land, and prior to the change or extension of a Nonconforming Use. Farm buildings situated fifty (50') feet or more from any street or property line are exempted from the permit requirements of this Section, but all such farm buildings shall be erected in conformity with the use, area, and height regulations applicable in the district in which such farm buildings are located.
SECTION 140-122. APPLICATION FOR ZONING PERMITS. Application for zoning permits shall be made in writing to the Zoning Officer, on such forms as may be furnished by the Borough. Such application shall contain all information necessary for the Zoning Officer to ascertain whether the proposed erection, alteration, use, or change in use complies with the provisions of this ordinance.
SECTION 140-123. ISSUE OF ZONING PERMITS. Zoning permits shall be granted or refused within ten (10) days after date of application. Upon completion of the erection or alteration of any building or portion thereof authorized by a zoning permit, and prior to occupancy or use, the holder of such permit shall notify the Zoning Officer of such completion or intent to occupy. No permit shall be considered complete or permanently effective until the Zoning Officer has certified that the work has been inspected and approved as being in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance and other applicable ordinances. All applications with accompanying plans and documents shall become a public record after a permit is issued or denied.
SECTION 140-124. CERTIFICATE OF NONCONFORMANCE. An application for a Certificate of Nonconformance shall be made to the Zoning Officer by the owner of any property which, at the time of the effective date of this ordinance, does not conform to the provisions of this ordinance. Such application shall be made within ninety (90) days after the effective date of this ordinance and the certificate of nonconforming conditions of said property, and shall include a sketch of the land and improvements covered by the Certificate of Nonconformance. This sketch may be either on the back of the Certificate of Nonconformance or may be a map or sketch attached to the Certificate of Nonconformance. If desirable or required, photographs may be made a part of the record. This certificate shall be for the purpose of insuring to such owner the right to continue a Nonconforming Use in accordance with the regulations of this ordinance. A copy of the Certificate of Nonconformance shall be retained by the Zoning Officer.
SECTION 140-125. PROFESSIONAL OR HOME OCCUPATION CERTIFICATE. An application for a Professional or Home Occupation Certificate shall be made to the Zoning Officer by the owner of the property who, at the time of the effective date of this ordinance, has a professional or home occupation in his dwelling in a Residential District. Such application shall be made within ninety (90) days after the effective date of this ordinance, and the Professional or Home Occupation Certificate shall set forth in detail the nature of the occupation or business, floor area assigned to the business, and any other pertinent details. Also, if desired or required, photographs may be made a part of the record. This certificate shall be for the purpose of insuring to such owner the right to continue an established professional or home occupation if it is operated in accordance with the regulations of this ordinance. A copy of the Professional or Home Occupation Certificate shall be retained by the Zoning Officer.
SECTION 140-126. TEMPORARY PERMITS. A Temporary Permit may be authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board as a Special Exception for a nonconforming structure or use which it deems necessary to promote the proper development of the community, provided that such nonconforming structure or use shall be completely removed upon expiration of the permit without cost to the Borough. Such a permit shall be issued for a
79
specified period of time not exceeding one (1) year, and may be renewed annually for an aggregate period of not more than three (3) years.
SECTION 140-127. FEES. Fees for zoning permits shall be paid in accordance with a fee schedule to be adopted by resolution of the Borough Council, and all such fees shall be paid into the Borough Treasury. Each applicant for an appeal, special exception, variance, or change of zoning shall, at the time of making application, pay a fee in accordance with the aforementioned fee schedule for the cost of advertising and mailing notices as required by this ordinance and the rules of the Zoning Hearing Board.
ARTICLE XXIII
ZONING HEARING BOARD
SECTION 140-128. ZONING HEARING BOARD. For interpretation of this ordinance, the Borough Council shall appoint a Zoning Hearing Board consisting of three (3) members, one (1) of whom, at all times, shall be a member of the Borough Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall propose to Council all the names for appointment to the Board; Council may reject any name proposed. For the first Zoning Hearing Board, one (1) member-at-large shall be appointed to serve one (1) year, the other member shall be appointed to serve two (2) years, and the Chairman shall be appointed to serve three (3) years. Vacancies shall be filled within thirty (30) days for the unexpired term of any member.
SECTION 140-129. POWERS.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have the following powers:
(1) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in an order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of Article XXXIII of the Act of Assembly of July 10, 1947, No. 568, as amended, or of this ordinance.
(2) To hear and decide Special Exceptions to the terms of this ordinance upon which the Board is required to pass under this ordinance.
(3) To authorize, upon appeal, in specific cases, such variance from the terms of this ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice done.
B. In exercising the above mentioned powers, the Zoning Hearing Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that need shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
SECTION 140-130. RULES. The Zoning Hearing Board shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. Such rules shall include but shall not be limited to the manner of filing appeals, the manner of filing applications for Special Exceptions and
80
variances from the terms of this ordinance, and the manner of giving notice of public hearings where required under the terms of this ordinance.
SECTION 140-131. MEETINGS. Meetings of the Zoning Hearing Board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine. The chairman or acting chairman of the Board or the Hearing Officer presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to comply the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents requested by the parties.
SECTION 140-132. APPEALS TO THE ZONING HEARING BOARD. Appeals to the Zoning Hearing Board may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any office of the Borough affected by any decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days after such decision by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Zoning Hearing Board, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
SECTION 140-133. HEARINGS. The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with the following requirements:
A. Notice shall be given to the public, the applicant, the county planning agency, the zoning officer, such other persons as the governing body shall designate by ordinance, and to any person who has made timely request for the same. Notice shall be given at such time and in such manner as shall be prescribed by ordinance or, in the absence of ordinance provision, by rules of the Board. The governing body may establish reasonable fees, based on cost, to be paid by the applicant and by persons requesting any notice not required by ordinance.
B. The hearings shall be conducted by the Board, or the Board may appoint any member as a hearing officer. The decision, or, where no decision is called for, the findings, shall be made by the Board, but the parties may waive decision or findings by the Board and accept the decision or findings of the hearing officer as final.
C. The parties to the hearing shall be any person who is entitled to the notice under clause A without special request therefore who has made timely appearance of record before the Board and any other person permitted to appear by the Board.
D. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
E. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
F. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a record of the proceedings, either stenographically or by sound recording, and a transcript of the proceedings and copies of graphic or written material received in evidence shall be made available to any party at cost.
81
G. The Board or the hearing officer shall not communicate directly or indirectly with any party or his representatives in connection with any issue involved, except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to participate; shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda, or other materials unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the material so noticed; and shall not inspect the site or its surroundings with any party or his representative unless all parties are given an opportunity to be present.
H. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a written decision, or, when no decision is called for, make written findings on the application within forty-five (45) days. Each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon together with the reasons therefore. Conclusions based on any provisions of this act or of any ordinance, rule, or regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the facts found.
If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer and there has been no stipulation that his decision or findings are final, the Board shall make his report and recommendations available to the parties, and the parties shall be entitled to make written representations thereon to the Board prior to final decision or entry of findings. Where the Board has power to render a decision and the Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, fails to render the same within the period required by this clause, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant.
I. A copy of the final decision, or, where no decision is called for, of the findings, shall be delivered to the applicant personally, or mailed to him not later than the day following its date. To all other persons who have filed their name and address with the Board not later than the last day of the hearing, the Board shall provide by mail or otherwise, brief notice of the decision or findings and statement of the place at which the full decision or findings may be examined.
SECTION 140-134. APPEAL TO COURT. Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board or any taxpayer or any officer, department, Board or Bureau of the Borough, may present to a court of record a petition duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within thirty (30) days after filing of the decision in the office of the Zoning Hearing Board.
SECTION 140-135. STANDARD FOR REVIEW OF PROPOSED VARIANCES OR SPECIAL EXCEPTION.
A. Variance. The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is alleged that the provisions of the zoning ordinance inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. Subject to the provisions of Section 801, of Act 247, "Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code," the Board may by rule prescribe the form of application and may require preliminary application to the zoning officer. The Board may grant a variance provided the following findings are made where relevant in a given case:
82
1. That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the particular property, and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions, and not the circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of the zoning ordinance in the neighborhood or district in which the property is located.
2. That because of such physical circumstances or conditions there is no possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of the zoning ordinance and that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of property.
3. That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant.
4. That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare.
5. That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance that will afford relief and will represent the least modification possible of the regulation in issue.
In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this act and the zoning ordinance.
B. Special Exceptions. Where the provisions of this ordinance provide that the Zoning Hearing Board is to hear and/or decide Special Exceptions to the terms of this ordinance, they shall determine that:
1. The proposed change will not substantially injure or detract from the use of the neighboring property or from the character of the neighborhood, and that the use of the property adjacent to the area included in the proposed change or plan is adequately safeguarded.
2. The use and the operation in connection with the proposed change would be in harmony with the orderly and appropriate development of the zone, giving consideration to:
(a) Location of the use, including location with respect to the existing or future streets giving access to it.
(b) Nature and intensity of the operations involved.
(c) That adequate water, sewer, storm drainage, fire and police
protection are or can be provided for the use.
83
(d) That the use will not create traffic congestion or cause commercial or industrial traffic that would jeopardize public safety.
3. The proposed change will serve the best interests of the Borough, the convenience of the community (where applicable), and the public welfare.
The Zoning Hearing Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards considered necessary to implement the purposes and objectives of this act, to protect the public welfare and the Comprehensive Plan.
ARTICLE XXIV
AMENDMENTS
SECTION 140-136. AMENDMENT BY BOROUGH COUNCIL. The Borough Council may from time to time amend, supplement, change, modify, or repeal this ordinance, including the Zoning Map. No such amendment, supplement, change, modification, or repeal shall become effective until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least fifteen (15) days notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in an official paper or a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough, and notices thereof shall be mailed to all members of the Zoning Hearing Board, to every civic association or association of residents in the Borough who shall have registered their names and addresses for this purpose with the Secretary of the Zoning Hearing Board. The notices shall state the time and place of such hearing and the general nature of the proposed amendment.
SECTION 140-137. AMENDMENT BY CITIZENS' PETITIONS. Whenever the owners of fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage of any area, which shall be not less than the area contained between (2) streets, wherein a change of zoning regulations is sought, shall present to the Borough Council a petition, duly signed and acknowledged, requesting an amendment, supplement, change, modification, or repeal of the regulations prescribed for, or of the Zoning Map including such area, it shall be the duty of the Borough Council to hold a public hearing there-on, and cause notice thereof to be given in the manner prescribed in Section 140-136.
SECTION 140-138. CITIZEN PROTEST AGAINST AMENDMENTS. In case of a protest against such amendment, supplement, change, or modification signed by the owners of thirty-three and one-third percent (33-1/3%) or more, either of the area of the lots included in such proposed change on those immediately adjacent in the rear thereof extending on hundred (100') feet there from, or of those directly opposite thereto, extending one hundred (100') feet from the street frontage of such opposite lots, such amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all the members of Borough Council.
ARTICLE XXV
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION 140-139 REMEDIES. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building,
84
structure, or land is used in violation of this ordinance or any regulations made pursuant thereto, the proper Borough authorities, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or use, to restrain, correct, or abate such violation, to present the occupancy of said building, structure, or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about such premises.
SECTION 140-140. VIOLATION AND PENALTIES. For any and every violation of the provisions of this ordinance, the owner, general agent, or contractor of a building or premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist, and the lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist, the owner, general agent, contractor, lessee or tenant of any part of a building or premises in which part such violation has been committed or shall exist, and the general agent, architect, building contractor, or any other such violation shall exist, shall be liable on conviction thereof to a fine or penalty not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00), for each and every offense, which shall insure to the benefit and use of the Borough, with the costs of suit and default of payment thereof, the offender shall be committed to prison in the county jail for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days for each and every offense. Whenever such persons shall have been officially notified by the Zoning Administrative Officer or by service of a summons in a prosecution, or in any other official manner, that he is committing a violation, each day's continuance of such violation after such notification shall constitute a separate offense punishable by a like fine or penalty. Such fines shall be collected as like fines are now collected by law.
SECTION 140-141. SEVERABILITY. The provisions of this ordinance are severable. If any section, clause, sentence, part or provision thereof shall be held illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision of the court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining sections, clauses, sentences, parts, or provisions of this ordinance. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough Council that this ordinance would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional section, clause, sentence, part, or provisions had not been included herein.
SECTION 140-142. INCONSISTENT ORDINANCES REPEALED. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
85
SECTION 140-143. SUMMARY OF STANDARDIZED ZONING REGULATIONS.
86
PLATE I
87
PLATE II