THE BOROUGH OF
HIGHSPIRE,
DAUPHIN COUNTY, PA
ZONING ORDINANCE
CHAPTER 27
OF THE CODIFIED ORDINANCES
OF THE BOROUGH OF HIGHSPIRE,
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009
Amended: November 15, 2011
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY BLANK
THE BOROUGH OF HIGHSPIRE, DAUPHIN COUNTY, PA
ZONING ORDINANCE
CHAPTER 27 OF THE CODIFIED ORDINANCES
OF THE BOROUGH OF HIGHSPIRE
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009
Amended: November 15, 2011
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART 1. AUTHORITY, TITLE, PURPOSE OF ENACTMENT,
INTERPRETATION, APPLICABILITY,MUNICIPALITY
LIABILITY, DISCLAIMER, SEVERABILITY,
& REPEALER
PART 2. DEFINITIONS
PART 3. ADMINISTRATION & ENFORCEMENT
PART 4. GENERAL REGULATIONS
PART 5. NONCONFORMITIES
PART 6. DESIGNATION OF ZONING DISTRICTS, ADOPTION OF
ZONING MAP, & PERMITTED USE TABLES
PART 7. “R-L” RESIDENTIAL LOWINTENSITY ZONING
DISTRICT
PART 8. “R-M” RESIDENTIAL MODERATE INTENSITY ZONING
DISTRICT
PART 9. “MN/C” MIXED NEIGHBORHOOD / COMMERCIAL ZONING
DISTRICT
PART 10. “CBD” CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT ZONING DISTRICT
PART 11. “C-G” COMMERCIAL GENERAL ZONING DISTRICT
PART 12. “I” INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICT
PART 13. “PR/OS” PARKS AND RECREATION / OPEN SPACE ZONING
DISTRICT
PART 14. SPECIFIC CRITERIA AND SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
FOR SPECIFIC USES
PART 15. “FP” FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS
PART 16. “NCS” NEIGHBORHOOD COMPATIBILITY STANDARDS
OVERLAY DISTRICT
PART 17. “APZ” AIRPORT ZONING OVERLAY DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
PART 18. SIGN REGULATIONS
PART 19. LOT ACCESS, PARKING, AND LOADING REGULATIONS
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 1)
PART 1-1
Authority, Title, Purpose of Enactment, Interpretation,
Applicability, Municipal Liability, Disclaimer, Severability,
And Repealer
PART 1
AUTHORITY, TITLE, PURPOSE OF ENACTMENT, INTERPRETATION, APPLICABILITY,
MUNICIPALITY LIABILITY, DISCLAIMER, SEVERABILITY, & REPEALER
Section 100. Authority. This Chapter is enacted and ordained under the grant of powers contained in the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (MPC).
Section 101. Title. This Chapter shall be known as and may be cited as “The Borough of Highspire Zoning
Ordinance”.
Section 102. Purpose of Enactment. This Chapter is enacted for the following purposes:
A. To promote , protect, and facilitate one or more of the following: the public health, safety, morals, general
welfare, the provision of adequate light and air, and other public requirements.
B. To prevent one or more of the following: overcrowding, blight, loss of health, life or property from fire,
flood, or other dangers.
C. To adopt a Zoning Map dividing the Borough of Highspire into zoning districts with varying regulations.
D. To permit, prohibit, regulate and determine the uses of land, watercourses and other bodies of water, the
size, height, bulk, location, erection, construction, repair, expansion, razing, removal and use of buildings
and structures, as well as yards and other open areas to be left unoccupied.
E. To establish the requirements for density and intensity of uses.
F. To protect existing neighborhoods.
G. To promote innovative design and encourage the creation of a sense of community.
H. To provide diverse housing opportunities, including housing that is affordable.
I. To encourage adaptive reuse, replacement, and infill development.
J. To serve as a tool as part of an overall plan for the orderly growth and development of the Borough of
Highspire and as such seek to implement the most recent version of the Highspire Borough Comprehensive
Plan.
K. To effect any additional purposes provided for in Article I, VI, and VII-A of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
Section 103. Interpretation.
A. In interpreting and applying this Chapter, its provisions shall be held to be the minimum requirements for
promotion of health, safety, morals and general welfare of the Borough of Highspire. Any use permitted
subject to the regulations prescribed by the provisions of this Chapter shall conform with all the regulations
of the zoning district in which it is located and with all other pertinent regulations of this and other related
chapters, ordinances, standards, and/or rules. This Chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, annul,
supersede, or cancel any easements, covenants, restrictions or reservations contained in deeds or other
agreements, but if this Chapter imposes more stringent restrictions upon the use of buildings, structures,
and land than are elsewhere established, the provisions of this Chapter shall prevail. Wherever and
whenever the requirements of this Chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted laws, rules, regulations, chapters, or ordinances, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 1)
PART 1-2
Authority, Title, Purpose of Enactment, Interpretation,
Applicability, Municipal Liability, Disclaimer, Severability,
And Repealer
standards shall govern. In interpreting the language of this Chapter to determine the extent of the restriction
upon the use of property, the language shall be interpreted, where doubt exists as to the intended meaning
of the adopted language, in favor of the property owner and against any implied extension of the restriction.
Section 104. Applicability.
A. Any of the following activities or any other activity regulated by this Chapter shall only be carried out in
conformity with this Chapter:
1. Use, occupation, erection, construction, reconstruction, movement, alteration, razing, demolition,
removal, placement, of or extension (vertical or horizontal) of a structure, building or sign.
2. Change of the type of use or expansion of the use of a structure, building or area of land.
3. Creation of a lot or alteration of lot lines.
4. Creation of a new use.
5. Other activities required to have a permit by this Chapter.
6. The alteration or development of any improvement or unimproved real estate, including, but not
limited to, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations for
underground utilities provided the final grade is not altered.
7. The construction or installation of lakes, ponds, dams, or other water retention basins;
8. No zoning permit shall be required for repairs or routine maintenance of any structure, building, or
land provided such repairs or maintenance do not change the use or the exterior dimensions of the
structure, building, or otherwise violate the provisions of this Chapter;
B. This Chapter shall not apply to an existing or proposed building or extension thereof, used or to be used by
a public utility corporation, if upon petition of the corporation, the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission
(PUC) shall, after a public hearing, decide that the present or proposed situation of the building in question
is reasonably necessary for the convenience or welfare of the public. It shall be the responsibility of the
PUC to ensure that both the corporation and the Borough of Highspire have notice of the hearing and are
granted as opportunity to appear, present witnesses, cross-examine witnesses presented by other parties,
and otherwise exercise the rights of a party to the proceedings.
C. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the requirements of this Chapter shall not apply to municipal owned uses,
land, facilities or structures owned by the Borough of Highspire, nor to land, uses or structures owned by
those municipal authorities or agent authorized or created by it to provide governmental or public health
and safety services. Further, the requirements of this Chapter do not apply to private uses permitted by the
Borough of Highspire, or its authorized municipal authorities or agents, to be conducted on, upon, or in
Borough/Authority land or structures. In any instance in which applicable zoning provisions would be
violated but for the exemption provided herein, the Borough Council shall provide at least twenty-one (21)
days prior written notice to the owners of property within two hundred (200) feet of the exempt tract.
Section 105. Municipality Liability.
A. The granting of a Zoning Permit for the erection and/or use of a structure, building or lot shall not
constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind or nature by the Borough of Highspire, or an
official or employee, thereof, of the safety of any structure, building, use or other proposed plan from cause
whatsoever, and shall create no liability upon or a course of action against such public official or employee
for any damage that may be pursuant thereto.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 1)
PART 1-3
Authority, Title, Purpose of Enactment, Interpretation,
Applicability, Municipal Liability, Disclaimer, Severability,
And Repealer
Section 106. Disclaimer.
A. It is recognized that:
• the Act of June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987, NO. 394) known as “The Clean Streams Law”;
• the Act of May 31, 1945 (P.L. 1198, No 418) known as the “Surface Mining Conservation and
Reclamation Act”;
• the Act of April 27, 1966 (1st
• the Act of September 24, 1968 (P.L. 1040, No. 318) known as the “Coal Refuse Disposal Control
Act”;
Special Session, P.L. 31, No. 1) known as “The Bituminous Mine
Subsidence and Land Conservation Act”;
• the Act of December 19, 1984 (P.L. 1140, No. 223) known as the “Noncoal Surface Mining
Conservation and Reclamation Act”;
• the Act of June 30, 1981 (P.L. 128, No. 43) known as the “Agricultural Area Security Law”; the
Act of June 10, 1982 (P.L. 454, No. 133) entitled “An act protecting agricultural operations from
nuisance suits and ordinances under certain circumstances”: and
• the Act of May 20, 1993 (P.L. 12, No 6) known as the “Nutrient Management Act”
preempt zoning ordinances.
Therefore, suggestions, recommendations, options or directives contained herein are intended to be
implemented only to the extent that they are consistent with and do not exceed the requirements of those
Acts. Nothing contrary to those Acts shall be mandated by this Chapter.
Section 107. Severability.
A It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that if a court of competent jurisdiction declares any
provisions of this Chapter to be invalid or ineffective in whole or in part, the effect of such decision shall be
limited to those provisions which are expressly stated in the decision to be invalid or ineffective, and all
other provisions of this Chapter shall continue to be separately and fully effective.
Section 108. Repealer.
A. The pre-existing Chapter 27 of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire, relating to zoning
also known as the Borough of Highspire Zoning Ordinance, as amended, is hereby expressly repealed;
provided, further that nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in
any court, or any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any permit issued or approval granted or any cause
or causes of action arising prior to the enactment of this Chapter. All chapters and ordinances or parts of
chapters and ordinances and all resolutions or parts of resolutions which are inconsistent herewith by virtue
of references or incorporation of requirements contained in the pre-existing Chapter 27 of the Codified
Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire, relating to zoning, as amended shall, as nearly as possible, be
construed to reference this Chapter.
Section 109. Effective Date.
A. This Chapter shall take effect on the 4h day of November, 2009 as enacted and ordained by the Borough
Council of the Borough of Highspire on the 15th day of December, 2009.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-1
Definitions
PART 2
DEFINITIONS
Section 200. General Rules of Construction.
A. The language and words set forth in this Part are defined in order to facilitate the interpretation of the
Chapter for administrative purposes and in the carrying out of duties by appropriate officers. Unless
otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall, for the purpose of this Chapter, have the meaning
herein indicated.
1. Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
2. The singular includes the plural.
3. The word “person” includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated
association, or any other similar entity.
4. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. The feminine gender includes the neuter
and masculine. The neuter gender includes the feminine and masculine.
5. The terms “shall and will”, “will” and “must” are always mandatory.
6. The words “should” or “may” are permissive.
7. The word “used” or “occupied” as applied to any land, structure, or building shall be construed to
include the words, “intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied”.
8. The word “erected” shall be inclusive of the words “constructed, altered or moved.”
9. For those words used in this Chapter but not defined herein, the definitions found in various
chapters of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire specifically including but not
limited to Chapter 22 relating to subdivision and land development, Chapter 5 relating to
buildings, Chapter 9 relating to grading and stormwater, Chapter 21 relating to streets and
sidewalks, and Chapter 25 relating to shade trees shall apply.
10. For those words used in this Chapter but not defined herein or any the definitions found in various
chapters of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire, the most recent edition of
Webster’s Unabridged Dictionary shall apply.
B. Illustrations and Tables.
1. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this Chapter and any
caption, illustration or table, the text shall control. No caption, illustration or table shall be
construed to limit the scope or intent of the text of this Chapter.
Section 201. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ABANDONMENT: The relinquishment of property, or a cessation of the use of the property, by the owner with the
intention neither of transferring rights to the property of another owner nor of resuming the use of the property.
ABUT or ABUTTING: Areas of contiguous lots that share a common property or lot line, or being separated by a
common border including easements, but excluding lots entirely separated by a public right-of-way for a street or
alley. See also ADJOIN or ADJOINING.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-2
Definitions
ACCESS DRIVE: A public or private drive, other than a driveway, providing vehicular access to and between
parking areas for more than two (2) parking spaces within a Land Development; or any drive servicing three (3) or
more units of occupancy on a single Lot.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure customarily incidental and subordinate to and detached from the main or
principal building or structure on the same lot, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the principal
building or structure on the lot. An accessory structure shall exclude any vehicle as defined by the Pennsylvania
Motor Vehicle Code.
ACCESSORY USE: A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or the principal structure or
building and located on the same lot with such principal use or principal structure or building. If no principal use or
principal structure or building exists on a lot with a lawful accessory use, then such accessory use shall only be
considered a principal use, if the use would otherwise be allowed as a permitted principal use in the zoning district,
and which shall then be subject to provisions in this Chapter relating to principal uses.
ACTIVITY: The use of land, structure, or building for a specific purpose.
ADAPTIVE REUSE: The development of a new use for an older structure or building or for a structure or building
originally designed for a special or specific purpose.
ADDITION: Any construction which increases the size of a structure or building, including but not limited to a
porch, attached garage or carport, or a new room or wing.
ADJACENT: Two (2) or more abutting or adjoining lots or two (2) or more lots separated only by a public right-ofway
for a street or alley or another lot.
ADJOIN or ADJOINING: See also ABUT or ABUTTING.
ADULT-RELATED USES: A business or club that engages in one or more of the following areas of sales, services
or entertainment:
ADULT BATH HOUSE: An establishment or business that provides the services of baths of all kinds,
including all forms and methods of hydrotherapy during which specified anatomical areas are displayed or
specified sexual activity occurs. This section shall not apply to hydrotherapy treatment practiced by, or
under the supervision of a medical practitioner. A medical practitioner, for the purpose of this Chapter,
shall be a medical doctor, physician, chiropractor, physical therapist or similar professional licensed by the
Commonwealth.
ADULT BODY PAINTING STUDIO: Any establishment or business that provides the service of applying
paint or other substance whether transparent or nontransparent to or on the human body when specified
anatomical areas are exposed.
ADULT BOOKSTORE: Any establishment that has a substantial or significant-portion of its stock in trade:
- Books, films, magazines or other periodicals or other forms of audio or visual
representation which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and
- Instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with
specified sexual activities.
ADULT CABARET: A nightclub, theater, bar or other establishment that features live or media
representations of performances by topless or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers,
or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-3
Definitions
ADULT MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: Any establishment or business that provides the services of
massage and body manipulation, including exercises, heat and light treatments of the body, and all forms
and methods of physiotherapy, unless operated by a medical practitioner, chiropractor or professional
physical therapist licensed by the Commonwealth, or a person having graduated from a massage therapy
training program approved by the Pennsylvania State Board of Private Licensed Schools or equivalent
agency if trained in another state; by a person certified through a massage therapy certification examination
approved by the National Commission for Certifying Agencies; by a person certified through the National
Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork; or is a practitioner or member of either of the
American Massage Therapy Association (AMTA), Associated Bodywork and Massage Professionals
(ABMP), or International Massage Association (IMA). This definition does not include an athletic club,
health club, massage therapy establishment school, gymnasium, reducing salon, spa or similar
establishment where massage or similar manipulation of the human body is offered as an incidental or
accessory service.
ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed or unenclosed building or structure with a
capacity of less than fifty (50) persons used for presenting any form of audio or visual material, and in
which a substantial portion of the total presentation time measured on an annual basis is devoted to the
showing of material that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULTMODEL STUDIO: Any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, figure models who
display specified anatomical areas are provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed or similarly depicted by persons paying such consideration or gratuity, except that this
provision shall not apply to any “figure studio” or “school of art” or similar establishment that meets the
requirements established in the Education Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for the issuance or
conferring of, and is in fact authorized thereunder to issue and confer, a diploma.
ADULT MOTEL: A motel or similar establishment offering public accommodations for any consideration,
that provides patrons with material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
coin or slug operated or electronically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per
machine at anyone time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed or unenclosed building or structure with a capacity
of fifty (50) or more persons used for presenting any form of audio or visual material, and in which a
substantial portion of the total presentation time, measured on an annual basis, is devoted to the showing of
material that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT NEWS RACK: Any coin-operated machine or device that dispenses material substantially devoted
to the depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT OUT-CALL SERVICE ACTIVITY: Any establishment or business that provides an out-call
service that consists of individuals leaving the premises upon request or by appointment to visit other
premises for a period of time for the purpose of providing any service during which time specified
anatomical areas are displayed or specified sexual activity occurs.
ADULT SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER: Any business, agency, or person who, for any form of
consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two (2) or more persons, not all members of the same
family may congregate, assemble or associate for the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activity or
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-4
Definitions
exposing specified anatomical areas, excluding psychosexual workshops operated by a medical practitioner
licensed by the Commonwealth to engage in sexual therapy.
ADULT THEATER: A theater, concert hall, auditorium or other similar establishment, either indoor or
outdoor in nature that regularly features live performances that are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities or by exposure of specified anatomical areas for observation by
patrons.
ADULT VIDEO STORE: A commercial use that has fifty (50) percent or more of its stock in trade
consisting of video tapes, video discs, or both, which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis,
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT OTHER: Any other business or establishment that offers its patrons services or entertainment
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas.”
AESTHETIC: The perception of artistic elements, or elements in the natural or man-made environment which are
pleasing to the eye.
AGRICULTURE: The use of land which shall include, but not be limited to, the tilling of the soil, the raising of
crops, horticulture, apiculture, floriculture, vitaculture and gardening. The production, keeping or maintenance, for
sale, lease or personal use, of plants and animals useful to man, including but not limited to: forages and sod crops;
grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy products, poultry and poultry products: livestock, including beef
cattle, sheep, swine horses ponies, mules, or goats, or any mutations or hybrids thereof, including the breeding and
grazing of any or all of such animals: bees and apiary products; fur animals; trees and forest products: fruits of all
kinds, including grapes, nuts and berries; vegetables; nursery, floral, ornamental and greenhouse products; or lands
devoted to a soil conservation or forestry management program.
AGRICULTURAL OPERATION: An enterprise that is actively engaged in the commercial production and
preparation for market of crops, livestock and livestock products and in the production, harvesting and preparation
for market or use of agricultural, agronomic, horticultural, silvicultural and aquacultural crops and commodities.
The term includes an enterprise that implements changes in production practices and procedures or types of crops,
livestock, livestock products or commodities produced consistent with practices and procedures that are normally
engaged in by farmers or are consistent with technological development within the agricultural industry. Agriculture
activities do not include community gardens and market gardens.
AIR RIGHTS: The right to use space above ground level.
AIRPORT ZONING OVERLAY DISTRICT TERMS & PHRASES: Unless specifically defined elsewhere herein
this Part, the following words and phrases when used in Part 17 of this Chapter relating to the Airport Zoning
OverlayDistrict shall have the meaning given to them herein this subsection:
AIRPORT(S) – HARRISBURG INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT (MDT) AND CAPITAL CITY AIRPORT
(CXY): Any area of land or water which is used, or intended to be used, for the landing and takeoff of
aircraft and any appurtenant areas which are used, or intended to be used, for airport buildings or air
navigation facilities for rights-of-way, together with all airport buildings and facilities thereon.
AIRPORT ELEVATION: The highest point of an airport’s usable land area measured in feet above sea
level. The Airport Elevation for Harrisburg International Airport is three hundred ten (310) feet; the Airport
Elevation for Capital City Airport is three hundred forty seven (347) feet.
AIRPORT HAZARD: Any structure or object, natural or manmade, or use of land which obstructs the
airspace required for flight or aircraft landing or taking off at an airport or is otherwise hazardous as
defined in 14 CFR Part 77 and 74 Pa. Cons. Stat. §5102.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-5
Definitions
AIRPORT HAZARD AREA: Any area of land or water upon which an airport hazard might be established
if not prevented as provided for in Part 17 of this Chapter and Act 164 of 1984 (Pennsylvania Laws
Relating to Aviation).
APPROACH SURFACE ZONE: An imaginary surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway
centerline and extending outward and upward from each end of the primary surface. An approach surface is
applied to each end of the runway based on the planned approach. The inner edge of the approach surface is
the same width as the primary surface and expands uniformly depending on the planned approach. The
approach surface zone is derived from the approach surface.
CONICAL SURFACE ZONE: An imaginary surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of
the horizontal surface at a slope of twenty (20) feet horizontally to one (1) foot vertically or (20:1) for a
horizontal distance of four thousand (4,000) feet. The conical surface zone is based on the conical surface.
FAA: Federal Aviation Administration of the United States Department of Transportation.
HEIGHT: For the purpose of determining the height limits in all Airport Overlay Zoning District related
zones set forth in Part 17 of this Chapter and shown on the Airport Zoning Overlay District Map, the datum
shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
HORIZONTAL SURFACE ZONE: An imaginary plane one hundred fifty (150) feet above the established
airport elevation that is constructed by swinging arcs of various radii from the center of the end of the
primary surface and then connecting the adjacent arc by tangent lines. The radius of each arc is based on
the planned approach. The horizontal surface zone is derived from the horizontal surface.
LARGER THAN UTILITY RUNWAY: A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by
propeller driven aircraft of greater than twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) pounds maximum gross
weight and jet powered aircraft.
NON-PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY: A runway having an existing instrument approach
procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area type navigation
equipment, for which a straight-in non-precision instrument approach procedure has been approved or
planned.
OBSTRUCTION: Any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a
limiting height set forth by Part 17 of this Chapter.
PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY: A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure
utilizing an Instrument Landing System (ILS) or a Precisions Approach Radar (PAR). It also means a
runway for which a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved airport layout
plan or any other planning document.
PRIMARY SURFACE ZONE: An imaginary surface longitudinally centered on the runway, extending two
hundred (200) feet beyond the end of paved runways or ending at each end of turf runways. The elevation
of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway
centerline. The primary surface zone is derived from the primary surface.
RUNWAY: A defined area of an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft.
TRANSITIONAL SURFACE ZONE: An imaginary surface that extends outward and upward from the
edge of the primary surface to the horizontal surface at a slope of seven (7) feet horizontally to one (1) foot
vertically (7:1). The transitional surface zone is derived from the transitional surface.
TREE: Any object of natural vegetative growth.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-6
Definitions
UTILITY RUNWAY: A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft
of twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) pounds maximum gross weight or less.
VISUAL RUNWAY: A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach
procedures.
AISLE: The traveled way bywhich cars enter and depart parking spaces.
ALTERATIONS: Any change or rearrangement in the supporting members of an existing structure or building,
such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, or interior partitions, as well as any change in doors, windows,
means of ingress or egress, or any enlargement to or diminution of a building or structure, whether horizontally or
vertically, or the moving of a building or structure from one location to another.
AMENDMENT: A change in use in any district or change in zoning district, which includes revisions to the zoning
text and/or the official zoning map.
AMORTIZATION: A method of eliminating nonconforming uses by requiring the termination of the
nonconforming use after a specified period of time.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL/VETERINARY OFFICE: An establishment involved in the treatment, housing or boarding
of small domestic and usual house pets animals such as dogs, cats, rabbits, and birds or fowl by a veterinarian,
which includes reception areas, offices, consultation rooms, and x-rays, as well as kennels.
ANTENNA STANDARD: A device, partially or wholly exterior to a structure or building, that is used for receiving
electronic signals (other than a satellite dish antenna which is treated separately) or for transmitting short-wave or
citizens band radio frequencies. This shall include antennae used by an amateur ham radio operator or by a
contracting business or utility to communicate with its employees, but shall not include a “Commercial
Communications Antenna.” This term includes any accessory supporting structures.
ANTENNA HEIGHT: The measurement of the overall vertical length of antenna and its support structure above the
average finished grade. If such system is located on a building or other structure, the overall vertical length shall be
measured and shall include the height of the building or other structure upon which the antenna and its structure is
situated.
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURES: Any structure, mast, pole, tripod or tower, including any guy wires and
braces utilized for the purpose of supporting an antenna or antennas.
APARTMENT: An individual independent dwelling unit within a multi-family dwelling/apartment building,
located above a permitted ground floor non-residential use, or as otherwise provided in this Chapter.
APARTMENT, ACCESSORY: An individual independent dwelling unit, incorporated into the principal or
accessory building or structure located on an owner occupied lot upon which the permitted principal use is a single
family detached dwelling.
APARTMENT, CONVERSION: The creation of not more than three (3) (where permitted) multi-family dwelling
units/apartments by converting an existing single-family detached dwelling without substantially altering the
exterior of the building.
APPLICANT: A landowner and/or developer, as hereinafter defined, including his heirs, successors and assigns,
who filed an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT: Every application, whether preliminary or final, required to be filed and
approved prior to start of construction or development, including, but not limited to, an application for a building or
zoning permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or plan, or for the approval of a development plan. This shall
include adaptive reuse, replacement, infill, and redevelopment.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-7
Definitions
ARCADE: A continuous passageway parallel to and open to a street, open space, or building, usually covered by a
canopy or permanent roofing, and accessible and open to the public.
AREA, BUILDING: The total of area, in square feet, of all floors, excluding basement, of the principal building
and/or structure and all accessory buildings and structures, exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces, and steps.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY: Coordinated and centrally managed housing including self-contained units
designed to provide a supportive environment and to accommodate a relatively independent lifestyle. Such a
development may contain a limited number of supportive services, such as meals, transportation, housekeeping,
linen and organized social activities for residents and their invited guests. Such a use shall primarily serve persons
55 and older, persons with physical handicaps and/or the developmentally disabled. Assisted Living Facilities shall
be licensed as Personal Care Centers by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
ATTIC: That part of a building or structure which is wholly or partly within the roof framing.
AUTHORITY: A body politic and corporate created pursuant to the Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No. 162), as
amended, known as the “Municipalities Authorities Act of 1945”.
AUTOMATED BANKING FACILITY: An establishment whereby automated devices that perform banking or
financial functions are operated by the consumer or patron primarily for those who remain in their automobile, but
may also be operated by those customers who walk up to the device.
AUTOMATIC CAR WASH: A structure containing facilities for washing automobiles using a chain conveyor or
other method of moving the cars along, and automatic or semiautomatic application of cleaner, brushes, rinse water
and heat for drying.
AUTOMOBILE, BOAT, HEAVY EQUIPMENT, MOBILE HOME, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE AND
SIMILAR MOTOR VEHICLE RENTAL, REPAIR, SALES, SERVICE & WASHING: An establishment
involving the indoor and/or outdoor display, sale, or rental of new and used motor vehicles including cars,
motorcycles, trailers, boats, heavy equipment and construction vehicles, mobile homes, recreational vehicles and
motorhomes, trucks, other similar motor vehicles, and mobile homes, and which may include washing and polishing
of vehicles, major and minor mechanical repairs and body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding or
rebuilding or transmissions state inspections, oil changes and lubrications, and tune-ups be conducted within an
completely enclosed building or structure. Additionally, this use includes the retail dispensing or sales of vehicular
fuels; the sale and installation of lubricants, tires, batteries, and similar vehicle accessories.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING, JUNK AND SCRAP STORAGE & SALES ESTABLISHMENTS An
establishment used for the storage, collection, baling, packing, sorting, handling, disassembling, recycling, resource
recovery, purchase or sale of any material which has been used, salvaged, scrapped or reclaimed, but is capable of
being reused in some form including, but not limited to, metals, fiber, paper, cloth and rags, rubber, rope, bottles,
machinery, tools, appliances, fixtures, utensils, lumber, boxes, crates, pipe and pipe fittings, tires, two (2) or more
motor vehicles which are inoperable and do not have a current and valid inspection sticker as required by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and motor vehicle parts, but not including garbage or other organic wastes. No
material which fails to meet this definition because it is discarded and incapable of being reused in some form shall
be placed in any establishment as herein defined. In no district shall this use be considered to be accessory or
incidental to another use.
AWNING: A roof-like cover that is temporary or permanent in nature and that projects from the wall of a building
or structure for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window from the elements and can be periodically retracted
onto the face of a building or structure.
BANK: An establishment in which money is kept for saving or commercial purposes or is invested, supplied for
loans or is exchanged and that has routine interactions with the public. A bank may also provide financial
counseling, planning, and services related to moneymanagement.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-8
Definitions
BASEMENT: A space having one-half or more of its floor-to-ceiling height above the average level of the
adjoining ground and with a floor-to-ceiling height of not less than six and a half (6 ½) feet.
BED AND BREAKFAST: An owner-occupied or manager-occupied business which occupies a single family
detached dwelling and associated accessory structures where limited overnight lodging and breakfast is provided for
compensation to guests and where said use may or may not also host accommodations for private events (e.g. such
as weddings and conferences). The dwelling may or may not include a publicly accessible restaurant as a related
use. Overnight lodging occurs within individual guest rooms which do not contain cooking facilities.
BERM: A mound of soil, either natural or man-made, used to obstruct views.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Activities, facilities, designs, measures or procedures used to
manage stormwater impacts from Regulated Activities, to meet State Water Quality Requirements, to promote
groundwater recharge and to otherwise meet the purposes of this Ordinance. Stormwater BMPs are commonly
grouped into one (1) of two (2) broad categories or measures: "non-structural" or "structural". "Non-structural"
BMPs are measures referred to as operational and/or behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the contact
of pollutants with stormwater runoff whereas "structural" BMPs are measures that consist of a physical device or
practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff. "Structural" BMPs include, but are not limited to, a
wide variety of practices and devices, from large-scale wet ponds and constructed wetlands, to small-scale
underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips, low impact design, bioretention, wet ponds,
permeable paving, grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and manufactured
devices. "Structural" stormwater BMPs are permanent appurtenances to the project site.
BILLBOARD: See “signs”.
BLOCK: Land surrounded on all sides by streets (measured at the right-of-way) or other transportation or utility
rights-of-way, or by physical barriers such as bodies of water or public open spaces.
BOARDING HOUSE (INCLUDING “ROOMING HOUSE”): A residential use in which: (a) room(s) that do not
meet the definition of a lawful dwelling unit are rented for habitation, or (b) a dwelling unit includes greater than the
permitted maximum number of unrelated persons. A boarding house shall not include a use that meets the definition
of a treatment center, hotel, motel, life care center, personal care, bed and breakfast, group home, group care facility,
nursing home, or similar type group living use. A boarding house may either involve or not involve the providing of
meals to residents, but shall not include a restaurant open to the public. A boarding house shall primarily serve
persons residing on-site for five (5) or more consecutive days.
BOAT LAUNCHING FACILITY: An area of land, structure or facility to launch and retrieve recreational boats
from a trailer.
BOAT STORAGE FACILITY: Any area of land or any structure principally used for the temporary storage of boats
for financial gain.
BOROUGH COUNCIL: The Highspire Borough Council also may be referenced as the Borough Council of the
Borough of Highspire. See also governing body.
BUFFER: An open area of land located between two (2) uses, that is intended to mitigate negative impacts, such as
visual and noise, of the more intense use on the less intense/dense use and/or zoning district on the less
intense/dense use and/or zoning district.
BUFFER YARD: An open area of land located between two (2) uses, that is intended to mitigate negative impacts,
such as visual and noise, of the more intense/intense/dense use and/or zoning district on the less intense/dense use
and/or zoning district, whose dimensions normally exceed, but may include where specified, the required building
setback or yard requirements, and which is generally planted and may include required screening, and within which
no building, structure, or otherwise shall be permitted except those used as part of required screening, or other
features as provided in this Chapter.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-9
Definitions
BUILDABLE AREA: The area of lot remaining after the yard and open space requirements of this Chapter have
been met.
BUILDING: Any enclosed or open structure, other than a boundary wall or fence, occupying more than four (4)
square feet in area and/or having a roof supported by columns or walls, intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure
of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods or materials of any kind.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY: A detached, subordinate building or structure, the use of which is customarily
incidental and subordinate to that of the principal building, structure or otherwise principal use of the lot, which is
located on the same lot as that occupied by the principal building, structure or otherwise principal use of the lot.
BUILDING, ATTACHED: A building connected to another building or structure via one or more common party
wall(s).
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building surrounded by open space on the same lot.
BUILDING CODE OFFICIAL: One who is certified by the Pa. Department of Labor and Industry to manage,
supervises and administer code enforcement activities under the authority of the Pa. Uniform Construction Code
pursuant to Chapter 5 relating to buildings of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire, relating to
buildings
BUILDING FACADE: The front exterior face or elevation of a principal building, often the side of the building
facing the public street right-of-way (excluding alleys)
BUILDING FOOTPRINT: The area of a building or structure measured from the exterior surface of the exterior
walls at grade level. Where a building or structure is elevated above grade level, the building footprint is the area
the building would cover if it were located at ground level.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-10
Definitions
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the average finished grade in front of the building where the
address is taken to:
(1) the top of the highest roof beams on a flat or shed roof,
(2) the deck level on a mansard roof, and
(3) the average distance between the eaves and the ridge level for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.
BUILDING LINE: A line parallel to the front, side, and/or rear lot line touching that part of the structure closest to
said lot line.
BUILDING, NON-CONFORMING: See Non-Conforming Structure or Building.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building or structure that is enclosed within exterior walls or firewalls, and is built,
erected and framed of component structural parts. The principal building is also designed for housing, shelter,
enclosure and support of individuals, animals or property of any kind, and is a main structure on a given lot.
BUILDING PERMIT: A document signed by the Building Code Official, as required in Chapter 5 relating to
buildings of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire, relating to buildings, as a condition precedent to
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-11
Definitions
the commencement the erection, construction, reconstruction, restoration, alteration, conversion or installation of a
structure or building, that acknowledges that such building or structure complies with the provisions of Chapter 5
relating to buildings, and this Chapter 27 relating to zoning of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire.
Also see Zoning Permit.
BUSINESS SERVICES: Those activities limited to the service and repair of furniture, office equipment, medical
supplies and equipment and commercial appliances; the supply and servicing of vending machines; frozen food
lockers; the painting and assembly of signs; printing, copy and photocopying services; arts, crafts, drafting and
stationary supplies; interior decorating; taxidermy; and upholstering. Uses which shall not be interpreted to be
business service establishments are retail shops and stores; gasoline and motor vehicle stations; vehicular sales,
service and repair; funeral homes, mortuaries; warehouses and distribution facilities; and contractor’s offices.
CALIPER, TREE: The diameter of a tree trunk.
CAMPER: Any individual who occupies a campsite or otherwise assumes charge of, or is placed in charge of, a
campsite.
CAMPGROUND OR CAMP: A state-permitted facility, through the Pennsylvania Department of Health, in which a
portion of land is used for the purpose of providing a space for recreational vehicles, trailers or tents for camping
purposes, regardless of whether a fee has been charged for the leasing, renting or occupancy of the space, in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Code, Title 28, Chapter 19. The campground may be an organized camp which
includes a combination of programs and facilities established for the primary purpose of providing an outdoor group
living experience for children, youth and adults with social, recreational, and educational objectives and operated
and used for five (5) or more consecutive days during one or more seasons a year.
CAMP SITE: Any plot of ground within a campground intended for exclusive occupancy by a camping unit or units
under the control of a camper.
CAMPING UNIT: Any tent, trailer, cabin, lean-to, recreation vehicle, or similar structure established or maintained
and operated in a campground as a temporary living quarters for recreation, education, or vacation purposes.
CANOPY: See Awning.
CARPORT: A roofed structure providing space for the parking of motor vehicles and enclosed on not more than
three (3) sides, and is accessory to a principal or accessory building or structure.
CARTWAY: The portion of a street right-of-way, paved or unpaved, customarily used by motorized and nonmotorized
vehicles in the regular course of travel over the street, but not including unimproved shoulders, and curbs,
sidewalks or swales.
CELLAR: A space with less than one-half of its floor-to-ceiling height above the average finished grade of the
adjoining ground or with a floor-to-ceiling height of less than six and a half (6 ½) feet.
CEMETERY: A parcel of land used as a burial ground for human or animal remains.
CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY: The certificate issued by a duly authorized Borough officer which
permits the use of a building or structure in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and which
certifies compliance with the provisions of law for the use and occupancy of the land and structure in its several
parts, together with any special stipulations or conditions of the building permit and/or zoning permit (see Section
303).
CHANGE OF USE: Any use that substantially differs from the previous use of a structure, building/ or land.
CHIMNEY: A structure containing one or more flues for drawing off emissions from stationary sources of
combustion.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-12
Definitions
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE: An area of unobstructed vision at street intersections defined by lines of sight
between points at a given distance from the intersection of the street centerlines.
CLINIC, MEDICAL: An establishment where patients are admitted for examination and treatment to the general
public without overnight accommodation and shall include such uses as reception areas, offices, consultation rooms,
and x-ray, but may also include a pharmacy provided that such use has access only from the interior of the building
or structure, on an outpatient basis by three (3) or more licensed medical professionals including physicians,
dentists, opticians, psychologists, other similar medical personnel and vocations.
CLUB, CLUBHOUSE OR LODGE, PRIVATE: A building, structure, or part thereof, used to house an
organization catering exclusively to members and their guests, or premises or buildings for social, recreational and
administrative purposes which are not conducted for profit, provided there are not conducted any vending stands,
merchandising or commercial activities except as required for the membership or fundraising of such club. This use
shall not include bar, boarding house, nightclub, restaurant, or tavern open to the general public, or an auditorium,
unless that particular use is permitted in that district and the applicable requirements of that use are met, provided
they are operated primarily to serve members and their guests.
CLUB, PRIVATE: an organization catering exclusively to members and their guests and not the general public.
Private clubs shall include but not be limited to, educational, fraternal, service and political organizations, labor
unions and social and athletic clubs.
COLD-FRAME: An unheated outdoor structure consisting of a wooden or concrete frame and a top of glass or
plastic, used for protecting seedlings and plants from the cold.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION: An establishment operated as a gainful business whose main purpose is to provide
the general public with an amusing or entertaining activity, and where tickets are sold or fees are collected for the
activity:
INDOOR COMMERCIAL RECREATION: An establishment operated as a gainful business, open to the
public, for the purpose of leisure time activities, public recreation or entertainment, including, but not
limited to, amusement arcade, arena, assembly hall, bingo parlor, bowling alley, gymnasium, health and
fitness club, miniature golf course, skating rink, swimming pool, dance or gymnastic instructional school,
tennis courts, etc., when operated within a completely enclosed building or structure. This use does not
include a theatre.
OUTDOOR COMMERCIAL RECREATION: An establishment operated as a gainful business and open to
the public upon open land, wholly or partially outside of a building or structure, for the purpose of leisure
time activities, public recreation or entertainment such as a swimming pool, tennis court, batting and
pitching cages, go-cart track, and skating rinks, but also including amusement rides or regular live
entertainment. This use excludes a park, golf course and an outdoor shooting range.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as a commercial
vehicle.
COMMON AREA: The area in a subdivision or planned residential development, including common open space,
owned or leased and maintained by an association or other combination of persons for the benefit of the residents of
the residential development and, if owned under the Pennsylvania Unit Property Act, including all common
elements designated for the use of all dwelling unit owners.
COMMON ELEMENTS: Means and includes:
(1) The land on which a building is located and portions of the building which are not included in a unit;
(2) The foundations, structural parts, supports, main walls, roofs, basements, halls, corridors, lobbies,
stairways and entrances and exits of a building (not including those elements of a building held in
ownership by a private resident);
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-13
Definitions
(3) The yards, parking area and driveways;
(4) Portions of land and building used exclusively for the management, operation or maintenance of the
common elements;
(5) Installations of all central services and utilities;
(6) All other elements of a building necessary or convenient to its existence, management, operation,
maintenance and safety or normally in common use; and
(7) Such other facilities as are designated as “common elements”.
COMMON FACILITIES: When referring to a development, these facilities are common or community open space,
recreational facilities, community sewage facilities, community water supply facilities, stormwater management
facilities, common parking areas and driveways, preservation areas, private streets, or other community facilities.
COMMON OPEN SPACE: A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water, or a combination of land and the water,
within the development site, designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of the development, not
including Streets, off-Street parking areas, and areas set aside for public facilities.
COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA: Any device used for the transmission or reception of radio, television, wireless
telephone, pager, commercial mobile radio service or any other wireless communications signals, including without
limitation omni-directional or whip antennas and directional or panel antennas, owned or operated by any person or
entity licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to operate such device. This definition shall not
include private residence mounted satellite dishes or television antennas or amateur radio equipment, including
without limitation ham or citizen ban radio antennas.
COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING: An unmanned building or cabinet containing communications
equipment required for the operation of communications antennas and covering an area on the ground not greater
than 250 square feet.
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER: A structure other than a building, such as a monopole, self-supporting or guyed
tower, designed and used to support communications antenna.
COMMUNICATIONS TRANSMITTING AND RECEIVING FACILITY: A communications tower or other
facilitywhich transmits or receives a radio, television or other communications signal.
COMMUNITY GARDEN: An area of land managed and maintained by a group of individuals to grow and harvest
food crops and/or non-food, ornamental crops, such as flowers, for personal or group use, consumption or donation.
Community gardens may be divided into separate plots for cultivation by one (1) or more individuals or may be used
collectively by members of the group and may include common areas maintained and use by group members.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The official public document prepared in accordance with the MPC, consisting of
maps, charts and textual material that constitutes decisions about the physical and social development of the
Borough of Highspire, as amended from time to time.
COMPOSTING: The mixing of decomposing refuse matter for the purpose of creating fertilizer material.
CONDITIONAL USE: A use permitted (and approved by the governing body) in a particular zoning district upon
showing that such use in a specified location will comply with all the conditions and standards for the location or
operation of the use as specified in this Chapter.
CONDOMINIUM: A form of ownership of real property, as defined in the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium
Act of 1980, which includes a multiple unit land development in which there is a system of separate ownership of
individual units of occupancy and undivided interest of land and common facilities.
CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATION: The community association that owns, administers and maintains the common
property and common elements of a condominium.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-14
Definitions
CONSERVATION AREA: Environmentally sensitive areas with characteristics such as steep slopes, wetlands,
floodplains, high water tables, forest areas, endangered species habitat, dunes, or areas of significant biological
productivity of uniqueness that have been designated for protection from any activity that would significantly alter
their ecological integrity, balance, or character.
CONSTRUCTION: The construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, extension, expansion, alteration or
relocation of a building or structure, including the placement of mobile homes.
CONTIGUOUS: Next to, abutting, or touching and having a boundary, or portion thereof, that is coterminous. To
physically touch or border upon, or to share a common property line, but not overlap.
CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY: An age-restricted development that provides a continuum
of accommodations and care, from independent living to long-term bed care, and enters into contracts to provide
lifelong care in exchange for the payment of monthly fees and an entrance fee.
CONTRACTOR’S OFFICE & STORAGE YARD: An establishment of any general contractor or builder where
equipment and materials are stored or where a contractor performs shop or assembly work but does not include any
other yard or establishment otherwise defined or classified herein.
CONVENIENCE STORE: An establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of frequently or reoccurring needed
goods for household consumption.
GENERAL CONVENIENCE STORE: A convenience store which generally includes the retail sale of fuel
for passenger vehicles, oil, grease, automobile accessories, propane, kerosene, along with prepackaged food
and beverages, foods prepared on site, magazines, lottery tickets, tobacco products, and limited household
supplies, and hardware.
NEIGHBORHOOD CONVENIENCE STORE: A convenience store which generally includes the retail
sale of prepackaged food and beverages, foods prepared on site, magazines, lottery tickets, tobacco
products, and limited household supplies, and hardware. Neighborhood convenience stores shall not
include gas/fuel pumps, selling of gas/fuel for motor vehicles, nor automatic car washing facilities.
CRAFTSMAN OR ARTISAN STUDIO: An establishment primarily engaged in the on-site production, display and
sale of goods created on-site by hand manufacturing involving only the use of hand tools or domestic mechanical
equipment not exceeding eight (8) kilowatts. Typical uses include painting and other media-art, ceramics, fabric
crafts, candle-making, and jewelry manufacturing. All such production associated with this use shall occur within a
completely enclosed building.
CURB: A stone, concrete, or other improved boundary usually marking the edge of the roadway or paved area.
CURB CUT: The opening along the curb line at which point vehicles may enter or leave the roadway.
DAYCARE: The offering of care or supervision of persons under the age of sixteen (16), special needs adults in lieu
of care or supervision by family members, or elderly persons (generally 60 years of age and older) and/or mentally
retarded and/or physically handicapped who need such daily assistance because of their limited physical abilities,
Alzheimer’s disease, mental abilities or mental retardation. This use shall not include persons who need oversight
because of behavior that is criminal or violent. This use may involve occasional overnight stays, but shall not
primarily be a residential use. The use shall involve typical stays of less than a total of sixty (60) hours per week per
person:
DAYCARE, ACCESSORY: An accessory use to a dwelling unit, whereby care and supervision is offered
to no more than three (3) nonresidents of the site during any calendar day. An accessory daycare does not
require zoning approval.
DAYCARE, COMMERCIAL: An establishment operated as a gainful business which the care and
supervision to more than six (6) nonresidents of the site during any calendar day. Commercial daycare
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-15
Definitions
facilities can be operated as principal uses or as accessory uses associated with other uses (e.g., schools,
places of worship, industries, residential complex, etc.); however, in no case shall a commercial daycare be
considered an accessory use to an individual dwelling unit. Commercial daycare facilities shall include
“group child daycare homes” and “child daycare centers,” as defined and regulated by the Department of
PublicWelfare of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
DAYCARE, FAMILY: An accessory use to a single-family detached dwelling, in which the care and
supervision is offered to between four (4) and six (6) nonresidents of the site during any calendar day.
Family daycare facilities must be registered with the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
DECIDUOUS: Plants that drop their leaves before becoming dormant in winter.
DEED RESTRICTION: A restriction on the use of the land set forth in the deed or instrument of conveyance. Such
restriction usually runs with the land and is binding upon subsequent owners of the property. The governing body is
not responsible for enforcing a deed restriction, unless the restriction resulted from a condition or stipulation of the
subdivision or land development approval process.
DENSITY, NET: The number of dwelling units or units of occupancy per lot area acre (i.e. the total area within the
deeded property lines, inclusive of any space within easements, but exclusive of rights-of-way).
DEP: Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DEVELOPER: Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with the permission of such landowner,
including a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation as well as an individual, for
whom development plans are being or have been made.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN: The provisions for a planned development, including a plat of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of development,
streets, ways and parking facilities, common open-space and public facilities.
DISH ANTENNA: A parabolic dish or devices whose purpose is to receive television, radio, microwave, and other
electrical signals, or may one of the same from space satellites. (see satellite dish def)
DISTRIBUTION CENTER: An establishment engaged in the receipt, storage, and distribution of goods, products,
cargo, and materials, including transhipment by boat, rail, air, or motor vehicle.
DOG DAY CARE: An establishment operated as a gainful business which the care and supervision to more than
one (1) non-resident small domestic and usual house pets animals such as dogs and cats during any calendar day.
DOG KENNEL: A structure where three (3) or more dogs that are more than six (6) months old are kept.
DORMER: A projection from a sloping roof which contains a window.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT: The land required for the installation of storm sewer or drainage facilities, or required
along a natural Stream or Watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of water therein, or to
safeguard the public against flood damage.
DRIVE-IN: A business establishment, including an eating establishment, offering refreshments, entertainment,
goods or services to patrons, who purchase and/or consume such refreshments, entertainment or services on the
premises and/or outside of the building or structure, including patrons who may receive services, obtain goods, or be
entertained while remaining in their motor vehicles.
DRIVE THRU: A portion of a business establishment dependent on providing an access drive approach or parking
spaces for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons while in the motor vehicle rather than within a building or structure.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-16
Definitions
DRIVEWAY: A private drive, other than an access drive, providing vehicular access between a street or access
drive and a parking area for not more than two (2) or less residential units of occupancy.
DUMP: A lot or land or part thereof used primarily for the disposal by abandonment, dumping, burial, burning, or
other means and for whatever purpose, of garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, junk, discarded machinery, vehicles or part
thereof, or waste material of any kind.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY/APARTMENT: A building designed, occupied and used by three (3) or more
families living independently of each other, wherein each dwelling unit or apartment shall contain its own private
bath and kitchen facilities. Includes apartment houses/homes. (i.e. three [3] or more dwelling units on one [1] lot.)
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-17
Definitions
DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY ATTACHED: A building containing one (1) dwelling unit occupied and used by
one (1) family, having at least one (1) party wall in common with other buildings (single family attached
dwelling[s]), and generally located on its own lot. For units having one (1) party wall, there shall be one (1) side
yard, and for units having two (2) party walls, there shall be no side yards (except on corner lots). Standards and
regulations of this Chapter shall apply to individual units, whether on a common lot or on individual lots. Includes
townhouses/homes and row houses/homes.
DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY, DETACHED: A building containing one (1) dwelling unit occupied and used by
one (1) family, and having two (2) side yards (except on corner lots). (i.e. one [1] dwelling unit on one [1] lot.)
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-18
Definitions
DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY SEMI-DETACHED: A building containing one (1) dwelling unit occupied and
used by one (1) family, and having one (1) party wall in common with another building (single family semidetached
dwelling), and one (1) side yard (except on corner lots). (i.e. each dwelling unit is located on its own lot.)
DWELLING, TWO FAMILY, DETACHED: A building containing two (2) dwelling units each occupied and used
by only one (1) family, with one dwelling unit arranged, beside the other, and having two (2) side yards (except on
corner lots). (i.e. two [2] dwelling units on one [1] lot.)
DWELLING, UNIT: One or more rooms used for living and sleeping purposes and having a kitchen(s) with fixed
cooking facilities, toilet and bathroom facilities and arranged for occupancy by not more than one family.
EASEMENT: A strip of land granted for limited use of property by the landowner for a public or quasi-public or
private purpose, and within which the owner of the property shall not have the right to make use of the land in a
manner that violates the right of the grantee.
EMPLOYEES: The highest number of workers (including both part-time and full-time) both compensated and
volunteer and both employees and contractors present on a lot at any one time, other than clearly temporary and
occasional persons working on physical improvements to the site.
ENLARGEMENT: An increase in the size of an existing structure or use, including physical size of the property,
structure, building, parking, and other improvements.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-19
Definitions
EROSION: The removal of surface materials by the action of natural elements.
ESSENTIAL SERVICE :the provision by public utilities, municipal or other governmental units regulated by the
Public Utility Commission (PUC) or other governmental agencies of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam
or water pipes, sewer and storm sewer facilities, and wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm
boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith, reasonably necessary
for the furnishing of adequate services by such public utilities or municipal or governmental units or for the public
health, safety or general welfare.
EXCAVATION: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar materials is dug into, cut, quarried,
uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated or bulldozed. It shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
EXISTING USE: An activity or use of land occurring on a lot or parcel as of the effective date of this Chapter.
FAMILY: One or more persons related by blood, marriage, legal guardianship, licensed or court-appointed foster
care or legal adoption, including any domestic servants or gratuitous guests thereof, who maintain one common
household and reside in one dwelling unit; or no more than four (4) persons who are not related to each other by
blood, marriage, legal guardianship, licensed or court-appointed foster care, or legal adoption. A roomer, boarder or
lodger is not considered a family member; any number of persons possessing a handicap within the meaning of the
Fair Housing Act (42 USC Section 3602(h), or successor legislation) who reside in one dwelling unit and live and
cook together as a single housekeeping unit. This term shall also include the number(s) of unrelated persons defined
by and consider those living in a Group Care and Group Home.
FARMERS/FLEA MARKET: An indoor and/or outdoor establishment used for the sale of assorted new and used
goods by auctioneers or by vendors on a periodic basis.
FENCE: Any freestanding and uninhabitable structure constructed of wood, glass, metal, plastic materials, wire,
wire mesh, or masonry, singularly or in combination, erected for the purpose of screening or dividing one property
from another to assure privacy, or to protect the property so screened or divided, or to define and mark the property
line. For the purpose of this Chapter a freestanding masonry wall when so located is considered to be a fence; also
for the purpose of this Chapter when the term “lot line” is used in relation to fences it shall be synonymous with
“rear lot lines”, “side lot lines”, “front lot lines.
FILL: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is placed, pushed, dumped, pulled,
transported or moved to a new location above the natural surface of the ground or on top of the stripped surface. It
shall include the conditions resulting there from. The difference in elevation between a point on the original ground
and a designated point of higher elevation on the final grade.
FINANCIAL SERVICE, OTHER : An establishment, excluding a bank, where the principal business is the receipt,
disbursement, or exchange of funds and currencies such as savings, loans, credit unions or check cashing
establishments.
FINISHED GRADE: The elevation of the land surface of a site after completion of all site preparation work.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT OVERLAY WORDS & PHRASES. Unless specifically defined elsewhere herein
this Part, the following words and phrases when used in Part 15 of this Chapter relating to the Floodplain Overlay
District shall have the meaning given to them herein this subsection unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
BASE FLOOD: A flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year
(also called the "100-year flood").
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for
Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one -
percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-20
Definitions
BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its lowest floor below ground level on all sides.
COMPLETELY DRY SPACE: A space which will remain totally dry during flooding; the structure is
designed and constructed to prevent the passage of water and water vapor.
CONSTRUCTION, EXISTING: Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before
4/15/77, the established effective date of the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) of the Borough of
Highspire, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania. Existing construction may also be referred to as existing
structures.
CONSTRUCTION, NEW: For floodplain management purposes, “new construction” means structures for
which the “start of construction” commenced on or after 4/15/77, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
DEVELOPMENT: Any man made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not
limited to the construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other
structures; the placement of manufactured homes; streets or other paving; utilities; filling, grading, and
excavation; mining; dredging; or drilling operations; storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision
of land.
ESSENTIALLY DRY SPACE: A space which will remain dry during flooding, except for the passage of
some water vapor or minor seepage; the structure is substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes
are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by the Borough of Highspire.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the
manufacturing homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: Federal EmergencyManagement Agency.
FIA: Federal Insurance Administration.
FLOOD: A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): The official map on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): The official report provided by the Federal EmergencyManagement
Agency that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway
Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN: (1) a relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream, or watercourse which is
subject to partial or complete inundation; (2) an area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of
runoff or surface waters from any surface.
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR: The administrative officer appointed by the Highspire Borough
Council to administer the provisions of Part 15 of this Chapter relating to the Floodplain Overlay District.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-21
Definitions
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments
to proposed or existing structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real
property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than one (1) foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction
next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register.
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior.
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation
programs that have been certified either:
(a) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior.
(b) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished
or flood resistant partially enclosed area, usable solely for parking vehicles, building access or storage in an
area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such space is not built so that the structure is
in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this Chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided
into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term "manufactured home" also includes park
trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days. The one hundred eighty (180) day provision shall not be applicable in instances where a
park trailer, travel trailer or other similar vehicle is being stored on the owner's property, providing there is
a principal structure on the property and the recreational equipment is mobile. For insurance purposes the
term "manufactured home" does not include park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles.
MINOR REPAIR: The replacement of existing work with equivalent materials for the purpose of its routine
maintenance and upkeep, but not including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the removal or change of any required
means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall
minor repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply,
sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent, or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other
work affecting public health or general safety.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-22
Definitions
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after April 15,
1977 adopted by the community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. Any
construction started after August 2, 2012 and before April 15, 1977 is subject to the ordinance in effect at
the time the permit was issued, provided the start of construction was within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or subdivision
for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or th pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain
management regulations adopted by the Borough.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is a) built on a single chassis; b) not more than 400 square
feet, measured at the largest horizontal projections; c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable
by a light-duty truck; and d) not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters
for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION: The BFE as indicated on profiles of the FIS for the Borough of
Highspire, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
REGULATORY FLOOD: The flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. The flood that has been selected to serve as the basis upon which the "flood damage control"
standards of this Chapter have been prepared; for this Chapter, the one hundred (100) year flood.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): An area in the floodplain subject to a 1 percent or greater
chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, or, AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development
and means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days from
the date of the permit, and shall be completed within twelve (12) months after the date of issuance of the
permit unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The actual start
means either the first (1st) placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring
of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first (1st), alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally
above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage from any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the
structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred "substantial damage” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however,
include any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official
and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-23
Definitions
Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement as
defined in this Ordinance, must comply with all ordinance requirements that do not preclude the structure’s
continued designation as a historic structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance requirement will
cause removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of
Historic places must be obtained from the Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation
Officer. Any exemption from ordinance requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC): The statewide building code adopted by The Pennsylvania
General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new construction in all municipalities whether administered by the
municipality, a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to residential and
commercial buildings, The Code adopted The International Residential Code (IRC) and the International
Building Code (IBC), by reference, as the construction standard applicable with the State floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made specifically to various sections
of the IRC and the IBC.
VIOLATION: Means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with Highspire
Borough's flood plain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR Section 60.3(b)(5),
(c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building or structure from
the exterior face of exterior walls, or from the centerline of a wall separating two (2) buildings, excluding cellar and
basement areas used only for storage and the operation and maintenance of the building.
FLOOR AREA, NET: The total of all floor areas of a building or structure, excluding stair-wells and elevator
shafts, equipment rooms, interior vehicular parking or loading; and all floors below the first or ground floor, except
when used or intended to be used for human habitation or service to the public.
FLOOR AREA, HABITABLE: The aggregate of the horizontal areas of all rooms used for habitation, such as living
room, dining room, kitchen, bedroom, but not including hallways, stairways, cellars, attics, service rooms or utility
rooms, bathroom, closets, nor unheated areas such as enclosed porches, nor rooms without at least one window or
skylight opening onto an outside yard or court. At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable room shall have
a ceiling height of not less than seven (7) feet and the floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling height is
less than five (5) feet shall not be considered as part of the habitable floor area.
FLOOR AREA RETAIL, NET: All that space relegated to use by the customer and the retail employee to
consummate retail sales; and to include display area used to indicate the variety of goods available for the customer:
but not to include office space, storage space and other general administrative areas.
FLOOR ELEVATION: The elevation of the lowest level of a particular building, including the basement.
FOOD SERVICE FACILITY: An establishment in which food is processed and/or prepared on the premises, and
which may be sold and consumed on the premise. This term shall also include bakeries and catering establishments.
FORESTRY (TIMBER HARVESTING): The management of forests and timberlands, when practiced in
accordance with accepted silvicultural principles, through developing, cultivating, harvesting, transporting and
selling trees for commercial purposes, which does not involve land development.
FORM: Generally refers to the type of building or structure (e.g. two-story structure) and its architectural
characteristics.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-24
Definitions
FUNERAL HOME: An establishment conducting embalming and cremation which may include the viewing of the
deceased and ceremonies connected therewith prior to burial or cremation, but not including cemeteries,
columbariums, mausoleums, and entombments.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory enclosed or covered space for the storage of one or more vehicles, provided
that no business, occupation, or service is conducted for profit therein nor space therein.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: Any garage other than a private garage, and which is used for parking or storage of motor
vehicles.
GOVERNING BODY: The council in cities and boroughs, the board of commissioners in townships of the first
class, the board of supervisors in townships of the second class, or any other similar body with the final decisionmaking,
budgeting and appointing authority of a general purpose unit of government. See also Borough Council.
GREENHOUSE: A building or structure whose roof and sides are made largely of glass or other transparent or
translucent material and in which the temperature and humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of delicate or
out-of-season plants for subsequent sale or for personal enjoyment.
GREENWAY: A greenway may be any one or combination of the following:
(1) a linear open space established along either a natural corridor, such as a riverfront, stream valley
or ridgeline, or over land along a railroad right-of-way converted to recreational use, a canal, a
scenic road, or other route;
(2) a natural or landscaped course for pedestrian or bicycle passage;
(3) an open space connector linking parks, natural reserves, cultural features or historic sites with each
other and with populated areas; and
(4) strip or linear parks designated as a parkway or greenbelt.
GROSS BUILDING AREA: The total area of a building or structure available for construction or use, as measured
from the exterior walls of the building or structure. Gross building area should be used in computing all square
footage measurements for buildings or structures as well as dimension requirements.
GROUP CARE FACILITY: A facility providing shelter, counseling, and other rehabilitative services in a familylike
environment for nine (9) but fewer than fifteen (15) residents, plus such minimum supervisory personnel as may
be required to meet standards of the licensing agency. Residents may not be legally related to the facility operators
or supervisors and, by reason of mental or physical disability, chemical or alcohol dependency, or family or school
adjustment problems, require a minimum level of supervision but do not require medical or nursing care or general
supervision. A group care facility must be licenses and/or approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Public
Welfare.
GROUP HOME: A dwelling inhabited by not more than eight (8) handicapped persons, as identified and provided
for by the Fair Housing Act and this chapter. This definition does not include persons occupying a hotel, motel, bed
and breakfast, halfway house, boarding house, treatment center or institution. A group home involves persons
functioning as a common household unit, providing non-routine support services and oversight to persons who need
such assistance to avoid being placed within an institution because of physical disability, old age, or mental
retardation/developmental disability, or that the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer meets the
definition of “handicap”, as defined by applicable federal law. (NOTE: The Federal Fair Housing Act amendments
define “handicap” as follows: “(1) a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such
person’s major life activities; (2) a record of having such an impairment; or (3) being regarded as having such an
impairment, but such term does not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined in
Section 802 of Title 21.” This definition was subsequently adjusted by Section 512 of the Americans with
Disabilities Act to address certain situations related to substance abuse treatment.)
HALFWAY HOUSE: A noninstitutional living arrangement with treatment and support services for persons with
substance abuse problems or for inmates and parolees approaching parole release date or release from a corrections
institution. The halfway house (community corrections center) operates under the rules and regulations of the
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-25
Definitions
Pennsylvania Department of Health or Department of Corrections or similar authorities. The residents are provided
full-time supervision and counseling on employment, vocations, finances and community living.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL: Materials which are classified by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, or the Borough of Highspire as having the potential to
damage health or impair safety. Hazardous materials include but are not limited to inorganic mineral acids or sulfur,
fluorine, chlorine, nitrogen, chromium, phosphorous, selenium, arsenic and their common salts, lead, coal tar acids,
such as phenols and cresols and their salts, petroleum products, and radioactive material. Also included are floatable
materials with the potential to cause physical damage, such as logs, storage tanks and large containers, located in
flood prone areas.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Any substance classified by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection or the Township as having the potential to damage health or impair safety,
including garbage, refuse, sludge from an industrial or other wastewater treatment plant, sludge from a water supply
treatment plant or air pollution facility, and other discarded material including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained
gaseous material resulting from municipal, commercial, industrial, institutional, mining or agricultural operations,
and from community activities, or any combination of the above, which, because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, may:
(1) Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in morbidity in either an
individual or the total population; or,
(2) Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly
treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
(NOTE: “Hazardous Waste” shall also include any added components from the Solid Waste Management Act
of July 7, 1980, P.L. 380, No. 97, as amended).
HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITY: Any structure, group of structures, above ground or under ground storage
tanks, or any other area, structures, or buildings used for the purpose of permanently housing or temporarily holding
hazardous waste for the storage or treatment for any time span other than the normal transportation time through the
Borough.
HEIGHT: The vertical distance of a structure measured from the average elevation of the finished grade
surrounding the structure to the highest point of the structure. See also Building Height
HEIGHT OF COMMUNICATION TOWER: The vertical distance measured from the ground level to the highest
point on a communications tower, including antennas mounted on the tower.
HOME IMPROVEMENT CENTER, LUMBER, BUILDING MATERIALS SALES FACILITY – An establishment
providing for the sale of home, lawn, and garden supplies, lumber, and other similar building materials and products,
including hardware stores.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any activity carried out for gain by a resident and conducted as a customary, incidental,
and accessory use to the resident’s principal dwelling. Also see No-Impact Home Based Business.
HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION: A community association which is organized in a development in which
individual owners share common interests in open space or facilities.
HOOPHOUSE: A structure made of piping or other material covered with translucent plastic, constructed in a “halfround”
or hoop shape.
HOSPITAL: A building or part thereof used for medical, psychiatric, obstetrical, or surgical care on a twenty-fourhour
basis. The term “hospital” shall include facilities used for medical research and training for health-care
professions, general hospitals, mental hospitals, tuberculosis hospitals, children’s hospitals, and any such other
facilities which provide inpatient care. A hospital use can also include attached and detached accessory uses,
provided that all uses are contained upon the hospital property. A hospital shall be licensed as such by the
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-26
Definitions
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The term “hospital” shall not include any facility in which is conducted the
housing of the criminally insane or provides treatment for persons actively charged with or serving a sentence after
being convicted of a felony.
HOTEL: An establishment which provides transient lodging accommodations to the general public in sleeping units
which each have separate access to a common interior corridor and which may provide such additional supporting
services such as restaurants, meeting rooms, recreation facilities and living quarters for a resident manager or
proprietor.
HOUSEHOLD: Persons living together in a single dwelling unit, with common access to, and common use of, all
living and eating areas and all areas and facilities for the preparation and storage of food within the dwelling unit.
See also Family.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA): A surface that prevents the infiltration of water into the ground.
Impervious surfaces (or areas) shall include, but are not limited to: roofs, additional indoor living spaces, patios,
garages, storage sheds and similar structures, and any new streets and sidewalks. Decks, parking areas, and driveway
areas are not counted as impervious areas if they do not prevent infiltration. Any surface area proposed to initially be
gravel or crushed stone shall be assumed to be impervious, unless designed as an infiltration BMP. This term shall
also include impervious surface.
IMPOUNDMENT: A body of water, such as a pond, confined by a dam, dike, floodgate, or other barrier.
IMPROVEMENTS: Physical changes to the land, including installations and changes required to render land
suitable for the use intended, including, but not limited to, grading, paving, buildings, streets, curbs, gutters,
streetlights and signs, water mains, hydrants, sanitary sewer mains, including laterals to the street right-of-way lines,
storm drainage lines, stormwater management facilities, sidewalks, walkways, recreational facilities, open space
improvements, shade trees, landscaping, buffering, and screening, and all other additions to the tract which are
required by ordinance or regulation, or are deemed necessary to result in a complete subdivision or land
development in the fullest sense of the term.
INCINERATOR: An approved device in which combustible material, other than garbage, is burned to ashes.
INDUSTRIAL USES:
GENERAL INDUSTRIAL: An industrial use:
(1) involving the processing and manufacturing of semi-finished and/or finished materials or
products predominately from extracted, raw, and/or recycled materials; and/or
(2) engaged in the storage of, manufacturing processes using, and/or shipping of flammable
or explosive materials; and/or
(3) engaged in the storage, manufacturing processes, and/or shipping of materials or products
that potentially involve hazardous or commonly offensive conditions; and
(4) due to the more intensive nature of the processes, materials, products, etc. such uses may
disturb or endanger neighboring properties.
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL: An industrial use:
(1) involving the manufacturing, predominately from previously prepared semi-finished or
finished materials products or parts, finished materials and products, including
processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage, sales and
distribution, as well as the repair of such finished products; but
(2) excluding the processing of extracted, raw, and/or recycled materials; and
(3) due to the lower intensity nature of processes, materials, or products, produce no noise,
vibration, air pollution, fire hazard or noxious emission, which would disturb or endanger
neighboring properties.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-27
Definitions
Establishments involved in the production and/or repair services when such facilities are in a
completely enclosed building or structure including home appliances; electrical instruments;
office machines; precision instruments; electronic devices; timepieces; jewelry; optical goods;
musical instruments; novelties; mass-produced furniture; wood products such as cabinetry,
printed material; lithographic plates; type composition; machine tools; dies and gauges;
ceramics; apparel; lightweight metal castings; film processing; light sheet metal products;
tinsmithing, welding, plumbing, heating, ventilating and air-conditioning plastic goods;
pharmaceutical goods; and food products, but not animal slaughtering or curing nor rendering
of fats.
INDUSTRY: The manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembly, or treatment of materials, articles, or
merchandise.
INFILL: Development of land within the Borough accessible to infrastructure that is generally surrounded by
development and has been bypassed, remained vacant, and/or is underused.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE: A vehicle intended to be self-propelled that shall not be operable under its
own power for any reason, or a vehicle that shall be without a valid current registration plate or valid current
certificate of inspection, or any vehicle in a major or severe state of disrepair.
JUNK: Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material, or debris, whether or not stored, for sale or in the process of being
dismantled, destroyed, processed, salvaged, stored, baled, disposed, or other use or disposition.
JUNK YARD: Any area, lot, land, parcel, building, or structure, or part thereof, used for the storage, collection,
processing, purchase, sale, salvage, or disposal of junk.
JUNK VEHICLE: Includes any vehicle or trailer that meets any of the following conditions:
(1) Cannot be moved under its own power, in regards to a vehicle designed to move under its own
power, other than a vehicle clearly needing onlyminor repairs,
(2) Cannot be towed, in regards to a trailer designed to be towed,
(3) Has been separated from its axles, engine, body or chassis, and/or
(4) Includes only the axle, engine, body parts and/or chassis, separated from the remainder of the
vehicle.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL: An establishment operated as a gainful business licensed through the Department of
Agriculture, containing indoor and outdoor housing facilities for the sheltering of four (4) or more canines in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Code, Title 7, Chapter 21, as amended or revised.
LAND DEVELOPMENT:
(1) The improvement of one or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for any purpose
involving,
(a) A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether
proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single non-residential building on a lot
or lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure, or;
(b) The division or allocation of land between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets, common
areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other features;
(2) A subdivision of land.
(3) The following are exempted from the definition of Land Development:
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-28
Definitions
(a) The conversion of an existing single family detached dwelling or single family
semi-detached dwelling into not more than 3 residential units, unless such units
are intended to be a condominium;
(b) The addition of an accessory building, including a farm building, on a lot or lots
subordinate to an existing principal building; or
(c) The addition or conversion of a building for rides within the confines of an
enterprise, which would be considered an amusement park. For the purpose of
this subsection, an amusement park is defined as a tract or area used principally
as a location for a permanent amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall
not comply to newly acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial land
for the expanded area have been approved by the proper authorities.
LANDOWNER: The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including the holder of an option or contract to
purchase (whether or not such option or contract is subject to any conditions), a lessee if he is authorized under the
lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having a proprietary interest in land.
LAUNDRY AND DRY CLEANING ESTABLISHMENT (INDUSTRIAL): A business premises equipped with
large-scale clothes-washing and dry cleaning equipment.
LAUNDRY AND DRY CLEANING ESTABLISHMENT (PERSONAL): A business premises equipped with
individual clothes-washing equipment for the use of retail customers or the drop off and pick up of clothing for dry
cleaning (off site).
LEASE: A contractual agreement for the use of lands, structures, buildings, or parts thereof for a fixed time and
consideration.
LIBRARY: A place in which literary, musical, artistic or reference material (such as books, manuscripts, recordings
or films) are kept for use but not for sale.
LIGHTING:
(1) Diffused: That form of lighting wherein the light passes from the source through a translucent
cover or shade.
(2) Direct or Flood: That form of lighting wherein the source is visible and the light is distributed
directly from it to the object to be illuminated.
(3) Indirect: That form of lighting wherein the light source is entirely
hidden, the light being projected to a suitable reflector from which it is reflected to the object to be
illuminated.
LOADING SPACE: Except as otherwise provided in Part 19, an off-street loading / unloading space upon an area
of land, open or enclosed, other than a street, used primarily for the standing, loading or unloading of motor trucks,
tractors and trailers, and/or other service vehicles so as to avoid undue interference with the public use of streets. .
LONG TERM CARE NURSING FACILITY: A facility defined and licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania Department of Health in accordance with Title 28 of the Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 201. The facility
provides skilled or intermediate nursing care services twenty four (24) hours a day and seven (7) days a week to
individuals who do not require more intensive hospital-based care.
LOT: A designated parcel, tract, plat or area of land established by a plat or otherwise as permitted by law and to be
used, developed or built upon as a unit.
LOT, CORNER: A lot at the junction of and abutting on two (2) or more intersecting streets (excluding alleys) or at
the point of abrupt change of a single street, where the interior angle is less than one hundred thirty-five (135)
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-29
Definitions
degrees or the radius of the street line is less than ten (10) feet. A corner lot shall have two (2) front lot lines and one
(1) side lot line, and one (1) rear lot line. The rear lot line for a corner lot shall coincide with the lot line abutting any
alley, otherwise it shall be the lot line opposite the lot line along the street of address.
LOT, DEPTH: The horizontal distance measured between the street right-of-way and the closest rear property line
on a corner and reverse frontage lot, the depth shall be measured from the street right-of-way line of the street
address to the directly opposite property line.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE or THROUGH LOT: An interior lot that abuts two (2) or more parallel or nonintersecting
streets (excluding alleys) generally at the front and rear lot lines.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot whose side lot lines do not abut upon any street (excluding alleys); a lot other than a corner
lot. Lots abutting and bounded by one street, two (2) alleys, and one other lot shall be considered interior lots.
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE: An interior through or double frontage lot that is not accessible from one of the
parallel or non-intersecting streets upon which it abuts and fronts.
LOT ACCESS: A way or means of approach to provide vehicular access to a property.
LOT AREA. The area contained within the property lines of the individual parcel of land, excluding space within
the street right-of-way. The lot area includes the area of any utility easement or stormwater management facility.
LOT COVERAGE: That portion or percentage of the lot area covered by impervious materials.
LOT FRONTAGE: That portion of a lot abutting on the street right-of-way (excluding alleys) and regarded as the
front of the lot.
Corner
Lot
Corner
Lot
Interior
Lot
Interior
Lot
Interior
Lot
Interior
Lot
Interior
Lot
Interior
Lot
Corner
Lot
Corner
Lot
Reverse Frontage
Lot / Double
Frontage Lot /
Through Lot
Reverse Frontage
Lot / Double
Frontage Lot /
Through Lot
Corner
Lot
Corner
Lot
Interior
Lot Interior
Lot
Interior
Lot
Flag Lot
Reverse Frontage
Lot / Double
Frontage Lot /
Through Lot
Street
Street
Alley
Street
Alley
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-30
Definitions
LOT LINE, FRONT: The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way (excluding alleys). In the case of
corner lot abutting a street right-of-way on more than one side there shall be two (2) front lot lines, one (1) side lot
line and one (1) rear lot line.
LOT LINE, REAR: The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of triangular or
otherwise irregularly shaped lots, a line ten (10) feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum
distance from the front lot line. A corner lot shall have two (2) front lot lines and one (1) side lot line, and one (1)
rear lot line. The rear lot line for a corner lot shall coincide with the lot line abutting any alley, otherwise it shall be
the lot line opposite the lot line along the street of address.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A corner lot shall have two (2) front lot lines and
one (1) side lot line, and one (1) rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the plan of which was recorded, or a parcel of land, the
deed of which was recorded in the office of the Dauphin County Recorder of Deeds prior to the adoption of this
Chapter.
MARKET GARDEN: An area of land managed and maintained by an individual or group of individuals, typically
of residential scale, to grow and harvest food crops and/or non-food, ornamental crops, such as flowers, to be sold
for profit.
MARINA: A facility providing a boat dock and launch and which may include facilities for renting, storing,
servicing, fueling, berthing and securing boats as well as eating and retail facilities and the sale of fuel.
MARQUEE: Any hood, canopy, awning or permanent construction that projects from a wall of a building, usually
above an entrance.
MASSAGE THERAPY ESTABLISHMENT -: any business or part thereof, other than an adult massage
establishment, where massage services are provided by a person having graduated from a massage therapy training
program approved by the Pennsylvania State Board of Private Licensed Schools or equivalent agency if trained in
another state; by a person certified through a massage therapy certification examination approved by the National
Commission for Certifying Agencies; by a person certified through the National Certification Board for Therapeutic
Massage and Bodywork; or is a practitioner or member of either of the American Massage Therapy Association
(AMTA), Associated Bodywork andMassage Professionals (ABMP), or International Massage Association (IMA).
MASSING: Generally refers to the scale of a building or structure in relationship to those in vicinity (on abutting or
adjacent lots, or neighborhood) to it.
MEAN: The average of a series of figures computed by adding up all the figures and dividing by the number of
figures.
MINI STORAGE WAREHOUSES: A facility providing for the enclosed storage of household items or recreational
equipment, where said items are retained for direct use by their owner, who shall have direct access thereto without
intermediate handling by the proprietor of the facility.
MIXED USE: Occupancy of a structure, building or land for more than one use, generally a permitted nonresidential
and permitted residential use, but may include more than one (1) permitted non-residential use.
MOBILE HOME: A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, contained in one unit
or in two or more units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated
towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and
assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent foundation.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has been so designed and improved that it
contains two or more mobilehome lots for the placement thereon of mobilehomes.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-31
Definitions
MOBILE HOME STAND OR PAD: That part of an individual mobile home space which has been reserved for the
placement of a mobile home and appurtenant structures and connections.
MOTEL: An establishment which provides transient lodging accommodations to the general public in sleeping units
which each have separate access directly to the outside and which may provide such additional supporting services
as restaurants, recreation facilities and living quarters for a resident manager or proprietor.
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER: A qualified, professional engineer licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the Borough Engineer. See also borough engineer.
MUNICIPAL OWNED USES: Any establishment, use, facility, and/or structure owned and/or operated by
Borough of Highspire, or its authorized municipal authorities or agents.
MUNICIPAL SOLICITOR: The licensed attorney designated by the Highspire Borough Council to furnish legal
assistance for the administration of this Chapter. See also borough solicitor.
NEW USE: Any new activity or use of land in a lot or parcel that was not occurring as of the effective date of this
Chapter.
NIGHTCLUB: An establishment operated as a business for the on-site consumption of alcoholic or nonalcoholic
beverages where live entertainment can be offered. For the purposes of this definition, “live entertainment” is meant
to include the use of disc jockeys for the purposes of supplying musical entertainment. Nightclubs can offer the
retail sale of carry-out beer consumption of food. Additionally, nightclubs can offer the retail sale of carry-out beer
and sine as an accessory use. Nightclub includes an “Under 21” club which features entertainment.
NO IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS: A business or commercial activity administered or conducted as an
accessory use which is clearly secondary to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client
or patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the premises in
excess of those normally associated with residential use. [Also see Home Occupation]
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE OR BUILDING: A structure or building, the size, dimensions, or location of
which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment to this Chapter but that fails by reason of such
adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use or activity that was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this
Chapter but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of
the zoning district.
OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL BUSINESS: An establishment in which one (1) more persons are employed in the
management, direction or conducting of business/commerce and whose staffs/employees serve clients who seek
advice and consultation regarding business/commerce. A business office may include the administrative, corporate
or professional offices for profit, non-profit or charitable organizations, but also includes real estate, stock and bond
brokers, accountants, adjusters, appraisers, utility companies, lawyers, clergymen, teachers, architects, engineers,
planners, insurance agents, and similar office-oriented uses.
OFFICE, MEDICAL: An establishment where patients are admitted for examination and treatment to the general
public without overnight accommodation and without a pharmacy, and shall include such uses as reception areas,
offices, consultation rooms, and x-ray provided that such uses have access only from the interior of the building or
structure, on an outpatient basis by not more than (2) licensed medical professionals including physicians, dentists,
opticians, psychologists, other similar medical personnel and vocations.
OFF-STREET PARKING: A temporary storage (surface or structure) for a motor vehicle that is directly accessible
to an access aisle and that is not located on a dedication right-of-way, and is located upon the same lot as a principal
use or, in the case of joint parking, within close proximity.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-32
Definitions
ON-STREET PARKING: A temporary storage (surface) for a motor vehicle within a dedicated right-of-way in
accordance with Part 19 of this Chapter.
OPACITY/OPAQUE: Not transparent or translucent; impenetrable to light; not allowing light to pass through,
measured by the observation of any two (2) square-yard area lying between one (1) foot above the established grade
of the area to be concealed and the top or the highest point of the required screen.
OPEN SPACE: Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved and set aside, dedication, designed, or
reserved for public or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners, occupants, and their guests.
OPEN SPACE, PRIVATE: Open space held in private ownership, the use of which is normally limited to the
occupants of a single dwelling or building.
OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC: Open space owned by a public agency and maintained by it for the use and enjoyment of
the general public.
ORIENTATION: Generally refers to the manner in which a building or structure is positioned on a lot (e.g. a front
building façade parallel to a front lot line.)
OUTDOOR CAFÉ/ DINING – an exterior seating area associated with a restaurant or a tavern/bar.
OUTDOOR LIGHTING: An illumination source outside any building or structure, including but not limited to an
incandescent bulb, LED, mercury, sodium or neon-filled bulb, and the hardware containing the illumination source
and supporting it. Lighting fixtures underneath a roof of an open-sided building, including but not limited to storage
sheds, canopies and gas station marquees over gas pumps, are deemed to be “outdoor lighting.”
OUTDOOR STORAGE: A facility providing for the unenclosed storage of recreational equipment, where said
items are retained for direct use by their owner, who shall have direct access thereto without intermediate handling
by the proprietor of the facility.
OVERLAY DISTRICT: A zoning district that encompasses one or more underlying zoning districts and that
imposes additional or other requirements than required by the underlying zoning districts.
OWNER: See Landowner.
PARCEL: Also see lot.
PARK: A use of land, which may include accessory buildings and structures, for active and/or passive outdoor
recreation for the purpose of pleasure, leisure, fellowship or exercise, commonly involving a sporting activity,
camping, hiking, jogging, bicycling, swimming, picnicking and other related activities which is open to the public.
A park may include amenities such as ball fields, tennis courts, trails, playground equipment, restrooms, picnic
tables, cooking grills and similar facilities. For purposes of this ordinance, parks shall not include improvements for
or permit uses considered commercial recreational uses.
PARKING COMPOUND: A public or private lot, building or structure that is designed and used for the temporary
off-street storage and parking of passenger vehicles. This use shall include surface parking lots and parking
structures including buildings and decks.
PARKING LOT: Any area of a lot used for off street parking facilities, providing for the transient storage of
automobiles or motor-driven vehicles. Such parking services may be provided as a free service or may be provided
for a fee.
PARKING STRUCTURE: A building or structure where passenger vehicles may be stored for temporary off-street
parking, including decks and buildings
PARKING SHARED: Joint use of a parking area for more than one use.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-33
Definitions
PARKING SPACE: A space within an off-street parking compound or within a dedicated public right-of-way, for
the parking of passenger vehicles.
PARTY WALL: A common shared wall between two separate structures, buildings, or dwelling units.
PEDESTRIAN WALKWAY: A specified easement, walkway, path, sidewalk or other reservation which is
designed and used exclusively by pedestrians.
PERMITTED BY RIGHT USES: Allowed uses in which zoning matters may be approved by the Zoning Officer,
provided the application complies with all requirements of this Chapter. A “nonconforming use” shall not be
considered to be a permitted by right use, a special exception use or a conditional use.
PERSON: A corporation, company, association, society, firm, partnership, or joint stock company, as well as an
individual, a state, and all political subdivisions of a state or any agency or instrumentality thereof, or any other legal
entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
PERSONAL CARE HOME: A facility defined and licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of
Public Welfare in accordance with Title 55 of the Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 2620. A personal care home is a
premises in which food, shelter and personal assistance or supervision are provided for a period exceeding 24 hours
for four or more adults who are not relatives of the operator, who do not require the services in or of a licensed longterm-
care facility, but who do require assistance or supervision in matters such as dressing, bathing, diet, financial
management, evacuation of a residence in the event of an emergency or medication prescribed for selfadministration.
A “halfway house” is not a personal care home.
PERSONAL CARE HOME CENTER: See “Assisted Living Facility”.
PERSONAL SERVICE BUSINESS: An establishment where service oriented activities for personal needs are
provided to the general public, but, which do not involve primarily retail sales of goods or does not involve
professional advisory services. Such activities shall include and be similar to barbershops, beauty salons, health
spas; photographic studios; radio and television repair, repair shops for home appliances and tools, bicycles, guns,
locks, shoes and watches; tailor and dressmaking shops; and pet grooming with no overnight boarding. Personal
service establishments shall not be construed to be adult regulated facilities as defined herein.
PERVIOUS AREA (PERVIOUS SURFACE): Any area not defined as impervious. This term shall also include
pervious material.
PLACE OF ASSEMBLY: Any public or private lot, building or structure that is designed for the assembly or
collection of persons at any one time, or adapted or used for purpose of assembly, where persons may congregate for
civic, political, religious, educational, social, recreation and amusement purpose. A place of assembly shall include
uses such as a performing arts theater.
PLACE OF WORSHIP: An establishment wherein persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which is
maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship, together with all buildings
accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily associated with such primary purpose including rectories,
convents and church-related schools and daycare facilities. Includes synagogue, temple, mosque, or other such place
for worship and religious activities.
PLANT NURSERY: An business establishment involving the cultivation, propagation, growing and/or selling trees,
shrubs, vines, and other plants primarily grown on the premises, including the buildings, structures, and equipment
customarily incidental and accessory to the primary use.
PLAT: The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether preliminary or final. For the purpose of this
Chapter, the terms “plat” and “plan” have the same meaning.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-34
Definitions
PORCH: A roofed (covered) open area providing shelter and shade, attached to or part of and with direct access to
or from a building, which creates space for a sociable transition from the public sidewalk / street or adjacent
property, to the building which it is attached.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE: The main, primary, or predominant structure on a given lot, tract, or parcel.
PRINCIPAL USE: The main, primary, or predominant use of any lot or parcel of land.
PRIVATE: Not publicly owned, operated, or controlled.
PUBLIC GROUNDS: Includes:
(1) Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other public areas;
(2) Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly owned and operated facilities;
(3) Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites. (MPC)
PUBLIC LAND: Owned, operated or controlled by a government agency (Federal, state, or local) including a
corporation created by law for the performance of certain specialized governmental functions or any public school
district.
PUBLIC HEARING: A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice, intended to inform and obtain public
comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this Chapter and/or the MPC.
PUBLIC MEETING: A forum held pursuant to notice under the act of July 3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as
the ‘Sunshine Act”.
PUBLIC NOTICE: A notice published once each week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Borough. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the
matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be more than thirty (30) days and the second
publication shall not be less than seven (7) days from the date of the hearing.
PUBLIC STREET/ROAD: A street ordained or maintained or dedicated and accepted by a Borough, City,
Township, County, State or Federal governments and open to public use.
PUBLIC/PRIVATE WORKS FACILITY : The erection, construction, alteration, operation or maintenance of
buildings, power plants, towers, substations, water treatment plants or pumping stations, sewage disposal or
pumping plants, public transportation and road maintenance facilities, and other similar public service structures by
a utility, whether publicly or privately owned, or by government agency other than the Borough of Highspire (its
Authorities or agents), including the furnishing of electrical, gas, communication, water supply and sewage disposal
services.
RECREATION: Any activity, whether structured or not, in which individuals voluntarily engage during their
leisure, including but not limited to:
(1) Sports (individual, dual, team, coed recreational, and combative), athletics; both land and water based.
(2) Arts and crafts, spectating, picnicking, nature study, and board games.
(3) Dance, drama, music, games, social recreation, special events, hiking/walking, cycling, hobbies,
outdoor educational activities, and cultural activities.
RECREATION ACTIVE: Leisure-time activities, usually of a formal nature and often performed with others,
requiring equipment and taking place at prescribed places, sites, or fields.
RECREATION, OPEN SPACE: The area of land suitable for the development of specific active recreation facilities
for leisure-time activities, usually of a formal nature and often performed with others, requiring equipment and
taking place at prescribed places, sites or fields, including but not limited to baseball fields, soccer fields, football
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-35
Definitions
fields, tennis, basketball and other court games, hockey facilities, multipurpose fields and community swimming
pools and attendance.
RECREATION, PASSIVE: Activities that involve relatively inactive or less energetic activities, such as walking,
sitting, picnicking, card games, checkers, and similar table games.
RECREATION AREA, ACTIVE: Any area developed in such a manner as to be conducive to those activities that
fall within the range of active recreation. Examples: athletic fields and hard-surfaced courts, pools, large dams,
bicycle and walking trails, open turf areas, and apparatus areas.
RECREATION AREA, PASSIVE: Any area developed in such a manner as to be conducive of those activities that
fall within the range of passive recreation. Examples: scenic vistas, natural areas, craft areas, meeting areas, sitting
areas, walkways, sunbathing, gardens, streams and impoundments, social events, picnicking, and spectating areas.
REDEVELOPMENT: Public and/or private investment made to re-create the fabric of an area or neighborhood by
renovating previously developed land. Replacing, remodeling, or reusing existing buildings and structures
accommodating new development within the context of existing streets.
REPLACEMENT: Remodeling or reusing an existing building or structure for new development.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT : any establishment which carries on investigations in the natural, physical,
technical or social science or engineering and development as an extension of such investigation with the objective
of creating end products.
RESEARCH LABORATORY: A building or groups of buildings in which are located facilities for scientific
research, investigation, testing or experimentation but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products except as
accessory and incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory.
RESTAURANT: An establishment that sells ready to consume food or drink and that routinely involves the
consumption of at least a portion of such food on the premises. A restaurant may include the accessory sale of
alcoholic beverages. However, if such sales is a primary or substantial portion of the total trade, the requirement of a
tavern or bar as applicable must be met.
RETAIL BUSINESS: An establishment which sells goods or merchandise and repair services for goods or similar
merchandise sold on the premises to the general public for personal and household consumption and rendering
services incidental to the sale of such goods. This use shall not include adult-related uses as defined herein.
RETIREMENT COMMUNITY: Planned development designed to meet the needs of, and exclusively for, the
residence of senior citizens.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription or
condemnation and intended to be occupied or occupied by a road, street, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission
lines, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary, storm sewer, and other similar uses, whether public or private.
ROAD: See “Street”.
SANITARY FACILITY, LANDFILL OR INCINERATOR: Land, structures and other appurtenances or
improvements where municipal or residual waste disposal or processing is permitted or takes place or where
hazardous waste is treated, stored or disposed. The term includes land thereby used or affected during the lifetime
of operations, including areas where solid waste management actually occurs, support facilities, offices, equipment
sheds, air and water pollution control and treatment systems, access roads, associated on-site or contiguous
collection, transportation and storage facilities, closure and post-closure care and maintenance activities, contiguous
borrow areas and other activities in which the natural land surface has been disturbed or used as a result of or
incidental to operation of the facility. A waste facility must meet the requirements of Title 25 of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania Code, Articles VII to Article IX, and any state or federal act or laws, as applicable and amended,
such as the Solid Waste Management Act, the Clean Streams Law, and all applicable federal regulation, such as the
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-36
Definitions
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), 42 U.S.C. Sections 6901 to 6992 and 40 CFR Parts 260 to 279.
A waste disposal or processing plant may include landfills, incinerators, impoundment, transfer facilities,
composting facilities or resource recovery facilities, as defined in the Pennsylvania Code.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA: A device incorporating a reflective surface, which is solid, open mesh or barconfigured
and is in the shape of a shallow dish, cone, horn or cornucopia, and including its pedestal and other
attachments. Such device shall be used to transmit and/or receive radio or other electromagnetic waves between
terrestrially and/or orbitally based uses. This definition is meant to include but not be limited to what are commonly
referred to as “satellite earth stations,” “television receivers only” or TCROs, and “satellite microwave antennas.”
(see dish antenna)
SAWMILL: An industrial use consisting of a building, structure, or area where timber is cut, sawed or planed, either
to finished lumber, or as an intermediary step and may include facilities for the kiln drying of lumber and may
include the distribution of such products on a wholesale or retail basis.
SCHOOL: Any place offering instruction in any branch of knowledge under the supervision of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania or a lawfully constituted ecclesiastical governing body, person, partnership or corporation meeting
the requirements of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
SCHOOL, COMMERCIAL: A school conducted for profit for such instruction as business, art, drama, music,
handicraft, dancing, and other similar type low impact uses conducted within a completely enclosed structure.
SCHOOL, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE: Any public, sectarian, or private non-profit establishment approved by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania offering formal academic instruction and services for State-required or largely
state-funded programs at the kindergarten, elementary, and secondary levels. This term shall not include those uses
considered commercial schools.
SCHOOL, VOCATIONAL: Same as public or private school except that the primary activity is training in a trade or
vocation, which may be conducted wholly or partially outside of an enclosed structure. This term shall not include
those uses considered commercial schools.
SCREEN: To inhibit view of/from.
SCREENING: The provision of a barrier to visibility, air borne particles, glare and noise between adjacent
properties, uses, and/or zoning districts composed of a mixture of landscaping trees, berms, shrubs, fences, walls
and/or other similar type materials, that is intended to mitigate negative impacts, such as visual and noise, of the
more intense/dense use and/or zoning district on the less intense/dense use and/or zoning district.
SCREEN PLANTING: A vegetative material of sufficient height and density to conceal from the view of uses,
building, and structures on the premises on which the screen planting is located, from occupants on abutting and/or
adjacent properties.
SETBACK: The required horizontal distance between a required setback line and an abutting lot line or street
right-of-way line, as applicable.
(1). SETBACK, FRONT: The distance between the street right-of-way line and the required front
setback line. Corner lots shall have two (2) front setbacks.
(2). SETBACK, REAR: The distance between the rear lot line and the required rear setback line.
Corner lots shall have one rear setback.
(3). SETBACK, SIDE: The distance between the side lot line and the required side setback line.
SETBACK LINE: The line within a property defining the required distance between a use, structure, and/or
building and the abutting right-of-way line, or otherwise, front, rear, and side lot lines that establishes the area in
which said use, structure, or building must be established, erected, and/or placed. In the case of lot where a front
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-37
Definitions
and/or rear lot line does not coincide with a recorded right-of-way, the building setback line shall be measured from
the associated recorded right-of-way.
SIDEWALK: A paved, surfaced, or leveled area, paralleling and usually separated from the street, used as a
pedestrian walkway.
SIDEWALK AREA: That portion of the right-of-way that lies between the edge of the right-of-way line and curb
line, regardless of whether the sidewalk exists.
SIGHT DISTANCE: The length of road visible to the driver of a vehicle at any given point in the road when
viewing is unobstructed by traffic.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-38
Definitions
SIGN: Any object, device, display, or structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors or indoors, which is used to
advertise, identify, display, direct, or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business,
product, service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors,
illumination or projected images. This excludes national or state flags, window displays, graffiti, athletic
scoreboards, or the official announcements or signs of governments.
SIGN, AREA: The area of a sign including all lettering, wording, and accompanying design and symbols,
together with the background, whether open or enclosed, on which they are displayed, including any border
framing or decorative attachments, but not including any supporting framework or bracing incidental to the
display itself. Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to a building, wall or
window, the area of the sign shall be considered to be that of the smallest rectangle or other regular
geometric shape which encompasses all of the letters and symbols.
SIGN, AWNING, CANOPY OR MARQUEE: A sign that is mounted, painted or attached to an awning,
canopy or marquee that is otherwise permitted by this Chapter.
SIGN, BILLBOARD: A sign that directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment
conducted, sold, or offered at a location other than the premises on which the sign is located.
SIGN, CONSTRUCTION: A temporary sign erected on the premises on which construction is taking
place, during the period of such construction, indicating the names of the architects, engineers, landscape
architects, contractors or similar artisans, and the owners, financial supporters, sponsors, and similar
individuals or firms having a role or interest with respect to the structure or project.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL: Signs limited to directional messages, principally for pedestrian or vehicular
traffic, such as “one-way”, “entrance”, and “exit”.
SIGN, FACE: The area or display surface used for the message.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-39
Definitions
SIGN, FREESTANDING: A sign which is self-supporting upon the ground or which is primarily
supported by poles attached to the ground and not primarily supported by a building.
SIGN, GROUND: Any sign, other than a pole sign, in which the entire bottom is in contact with or is close
to the ground and is independent of any other structure.
SIGN, HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the average surrounding ground level surrounding a
sign to the highest point of the sign and its supporting structure. Religious symbols, when not accompanied
by lettering, shall not be restricted by the sign heights of this Chapter when attached to a tower or spire of a
House of Worship.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION: A sign giving the nature, logo, trademark, or other identifying symbol, and
address of a building, business development, or establishment in the premises where it is located.
SIGN, INFLATABLE: Any display capable of being expanded by air or other gas and used in a temporary
basis to advertise a product or event.
SIGN, OFF-PREMISE: A sign which directs attention to an object, product, service, place, activity,
person, institution, organization, or business that is primarily offered or located at a location other than the
lot upon which the sign is located.
SIGN, PROJECTING: A sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon a building for support and that
projects more than twelve (12) inches from such building.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE: A sign relating to the property upon which it is located, offering such property for
sale or lease.
SIGN, ROOF: A sign that is mounted on the roof of a building or that is wholly dependent upon a building
for support and that projects above the top walk or edge of a building with a flat roof the eave line of a
building with a gambled or gable or hip roof, or the deck line of a building with a mansard roof.
SIGN, TEMPORARY: Any sign, or advertising display constructed of cloth fabric, plywood, or other light
material and designed or intended to be displayed for a short period of time.
SIGN, WALL: A sign primarily supported or painted on a wall of a building. A Wall Sign shall also
include a sign displayed upon an awning, marquee or canopy.
SIGN, WINDOW: A sign which is attached to a window or transparent door or that can be read through a
window or transparent door.
SIMILAR USE: A use that has the same characteristics as the specifically cited uses in terms of the following: trip
generation and type of traffic, parking and circulation, utility demands, environmental impacts, physical space
needs, and clientele. See CHANGE OF USE
SITE: A parcel of land located in a municipality, established by a plat or otherwise as permitted by law, which is
the subject of an application for development. A site may include more than one lot.
SITE PLAN: An accurately scaled development plan that illustrates the existing conditions on a land parcel as well
as depicting details of a proposed development.
SKETCH PLAN: See “Plan, Sketch”.
SKILLED OR INTERMEDIATE NURSING CARE: Professionally supervised nursing care and related medical
and other health services provided for a period exceeding 24 hours to an individual not in need of hospitalization,
but whose needs are above the level of room and board and can only be met in a long-term-care nursing facility or
an inpatient basis because of age, illness, disease, injury, convalescence or physical or mental infirmity.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-40
Definitions
SLOPE: The face of an embankment or cut section; any ground whose surface makes an angle with the plane of the
horizon. Slopes are usually expressed in a percentage based upon vertical difference in feet per one hundred (100)
feet of horizontal distance.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: Any solar collector consisting of one or more cell(s), panel(s), or array(s) designed to
collect and convert solar power into another form of energy such as electricity or heat, and other structures and
buildings, used in the conversion, storage, and distribution including electrical infrastructure, transmission lines, and
other appurtenant structures and facilities.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES: A use permitted in a particular zoning district and approved by the Zoning Hearing
Board pursuant to the provisions of Articles VI and IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. A special
exception use must be approved by the Zoning Hearing Board.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: (1) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
regions; buttocks; and female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and (2) Human male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: (1) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; (2) Acts of
human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; and (3) Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic region, buttocks or female breasts.
STEEP SLOPE: Land with a fifteen (15) feet or greater change in elevation one hundred (100) feet or less in
horizontal distance or, in other terms, fifteen (15) percent or greater on the average. The following formula is the
acceptable method of determining average slope:
S = 0.0023 I x L
A
S = Average percent slope of site
I = Contour interval in feet
L = Sum of the length of contours in feet
A = Land area in areas of parcel being considered
STOOP: A covered or uncovered area at the front, side or rear door.
STORAGE SHED: A structure not intended for residential occupancy which is accessory to the principal use of the
property as a place to store personal property.
STORY: That portion of a building or structure included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the
floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it and
including those basements used for the principal use.
STORY, HALF: A space under a sloping roof that has the line of intersection of the roof and wall face not more
than three feet above the floor level and in which space the possible floor area with head room of five (5) feet or less
occupies at least forty (40) percent of the total floor area of the story directly beneath.
STREAM: A body of water flowing in a channel within a defined bed and banks.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-41
Definitions
STREET: A strip of land, including the entire Right-of-Way, publicly or privately owned, serving primarily as a
means of motorized and non-motorized vehicular and pedestrian travel, and furnishing access to Abutting properties.
This term shall include the terms avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, parkway, lane, Alley, viaduct or any
other way used for similar purposes. Streets shall conform to one of the following categories:
1. ALLEY: A service road that is generally parallel to a primary local, collector, or arterial street,
and which is generally abuts and provides access to the rear of lots. Alleys are on the same level as
a local street, and are used in cases of narrow lot frontages. Alleys shall be designed to discourage
through traffic. Alleys may be designed as one-lane streets. For purposes of this Chapter, alleys
shall include the following:
Name
Bank Avenue or Alley
Bessemer Avenue or Alley
Cedar Avenue or Alley
Center Avenue or Alley
Charles Avenue or Alley
Cherry Avenue or Alley
Chestnut Avenue or Alley
Church Avenue or Alley
Concord Avenue or Alley
Eastern Avenue or Alley
George Avenue or Alley
Hancock Avenue or Alley
Hickory Avenue or Alley
Hill Avenue or Alley
Iron Avenue or Alley
Legion Avenue or Alley
Logan Avenue or Alley
Lusk Avenue or Alley
Maple Avenue or Alley
Martin Avenue or Alley
Mary Avenue or Alley
Moyer Avenue or Alley
Nora Avenue or Alley
Penn Avenue or Alley
Poplar Avenue or Alley
Rhoda Avenue or Alley
Steel Avenue or Alley
Stoner Avenue or Alley
Wetzel Avenue or Alley
Whiteside Avenue or Alley
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-42
Definitions
Name
Any other public street / alley with a less than or
equal to twenty (20) foot wide right-of-way.
2. ARTERIAL: An interregional road in the street hierarchy system that carries vehicle traffic to and
from the region as well as any through traffic. This street should be a controlled access street
(designed to the capacity analysis of the intersection (LOS) Level of Service). ). For purposes of
this Chapter, arterial streets shall include the following:
Name
2nd Street (SR 0230)
Eisenhower Boulevard
3. COLLECTOR: A street that provide connections with local and arterial streets. This street may
serve a traffic corridor connecting communities, neighborhoods, and other business areas on an
intra-County or Borough basis. For purposes of this Chapter, collector streets shall include the
following:
Name
Lumber Street
Rosedale Avenue
White House Lane
4. CUL-DE-SAC: A street with a single means of ingress and egress and having a turnaround. The
design of the turnaround may vary.
5. LOCAL: This classification provides direct access to adjacent land and includes connections to
individual residences and commercial properties, and to higher classes of highway systems. For
purposes of this Chapter, local streets shall include all roads and streets not otherwise identified as
arterial streets, collector streets, or alleys.
STREET GRADE: The officially established grade of the street upon which a lot fronts or in its absence the
established grade of other streets upon which the lot abuts, at the midpoint of the frontage of the lot thereon. If there
is no officially established grade, the existing grade of the street at such midpoint shall be taken as the street grade.
Includes established grade.
STREET LINE: The dividing line between the street and the lot, also known as right-of-way line.
STRUCTURE: Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or in land or water, whether or
not affixed to the land.
STRUCTURE, NON-CONFORMING: A structure or part of a structure that does not comply with the applicable
provisions in this chapter or amendment theretofore or hereafter enacted, where such structure lawfully existed prior
to the enactment of this chapter or amendment or prior to the application of this chapter or amendment to its location
by reason of annexation. Such nonconforming structures include, but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY: A structure without any foundation or footings and which is removed when the
designated time period, activity, or use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased.
STUDENT: An individual registered for instruction from an educational institution, whether public or private,
within a given calendar year.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-43
Definitions
SUBDIVISION: The division or re-division of a single lot, tract or parcel of land by any means into two (2) or more
lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devises, transfer of ownership, or
building, or lot development.
SWALE: A low-lying stretch of land that gathers or carries surface water runoff.
SWIMMING, BATHING OR OTHER POOL: Any structure and inflatable device intended for swimming or
recreational bathing, not located within a completely enclosed building, and containing, or normally capable of
containing, water to a depth at any point greater than twenty-four (24) inches. Ornamental ponds, stormwater basins
and/or lakes are not included, provided that swimming was not the primary purpose for their construction.
Furthermore, this definition includes all above ground and below ground, permanent and temporary/portable types
of pools, spas and jacuzzis.
TAVERN/BAR: An establishment which serves primarily alcoholic beverages for mostly on-premises consumption
and which is licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board. Taverns may also serve food.
TEMPORARY ROADSIDE STAND: A prospective use, intended for limited duration, for the display and retail
sale of agricultural products grown and produced by the seller.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE: See Structure Temporary.
TEMPORARY USE: A use established for a limited duration with the intent to discontinue such use upon the
expiration of the time period.
THEATER, INDOOR: A building or part of a building devoted to the showing of moving pictures or theatrical
productions on a commercial basis.
THEATER, OUTDOOR AND DRIVE-IN: An open lot or part thereof, with its appurtenant facilities, devoted
primarily to the showing of moving pictures or theatrical productions, on a paid admission basis, to patrons seated in
automobiles, or on outdoor seats.
TREATMENT CENTER: A use (other than a prison or a hospital) providing housing for three (3) or more
unrelated persons who need specialized housing, treatment and/or counseling because of:
(1) Criminal rehabilitation, such as a criminal halfway house;
(2) Current addition to alcohol or a controlled substance that was used in an illegal manner; and/or
(3) A type of mental illness or other behavior that causes a person to be a threat to the physical safety
of others.
TURBINE HEIGHT: The distance measured from the highest point of the wind turbine rotor plane to the ground
level.
UNDEVELOPED LAND: Any lot, tract or parcel of land which has not been graded or in any other manner
prepared for the construction of a building or structure.
UNIT OF OCCUPANCY: An allocation of space within a building or structure that is independent of other such
space and that constitutes a separate use. This shall include both fee simple ownership and leaseholds.
USE: The specific purpose or activity for which land, structures, or buildings are designed, arranged, or intended or
for which land, structures, or buildings are occupied or maintained.
USE, NONCONFORMING: A use, whether of land or of structure, which does not comply with the applicable use
provisions in this Chapter or amendment thereto or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully in existence prior
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-44
Definitions
to the enactment of such Chapter or amendment, or prior to the application of such Chapter or amendment to its
location by reason of annexation.
UTILITY LINE: A line built and maintained in order to transport materials, utilities or services by underground or
above ground means, including gas, electric, oil, cable, water, sewage, telephone, fiber optic cables, stormwater,
computer lines and other lines.
VARIANCE, HARDSHIP: A departure from the provisions of this Chapter relating to setbacks, side yards, frontage
requirements, and lot size that, if applied to a specific lot, would significantly interfere with the use of the property.
The hardship variance can be granted when the strict enforcement of this Chapter as it applies to a specific lot would
present practical difficulties in the use of the property. The hardship relates to the physical characteristics of the
property, and without the variance, the property becomes unusable.
VEGETATIVE COVERAGE: An area covered with a vegetative material: grass, shrubs, vines and trees.
VEHICLE, DISMANTLED OR NONOPERABLE: A vehicle which does not display the current Pennsylvania state
inspection certificate and is manifestly incapable of being locomotive in its existing condition. This does not
include agricultural machinery and equipment.
VETERINARIAN: A qualified professional trained in the care and treatment of animals and in particular domestic
animals. For the purpose of this Chapter the term “veterinarian” includes the office, waiting room, examination
room, treatment area and overnight quarters for the usual house pets (dogs, cats, birds, hamsters and the like).
VETERINARY: See “Animal Hospital”.
VESTED RIGHT: A right that cannot be changed or altered by changes in regulation.
WAREHOUSE : An establishment used primarily for the indoor storage and handling of products, supplies,
equipment, but not including the maintenance or fueling of commercial vehicles.
WAREHOUSING, DISTRIBUTION AND WHOLESALING : A use engaged in the storage, wholesale and/or
distribution of manufactured products, supplies and equipment, but excluding bulk storage of materials that are
inflammable or explosive or that create hazard or commonly recognized offensive conditions, and also excluding
any heavy equipment or truck washing, servicing and/or repair, unless such uses are specifically permitted in that
zoning district. Wholesaling of products, supplies and equipment shall not be open to or accessible by the general
public, unless incidental to the principal warehousing operation.
WATER FACILITY: Any waterworks, water supply works, water distribution system or part thereof, designed,
intended or constructed to provide or distribute potable water.
WATERCOURSE: A channel or conveyance of surface water, such as a stream or
creek, having defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with
perennial or intermittent flow.
WETLANDS: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration
sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted
for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. (The term includes but is
not limited to wetland areas listed in the State Water Plan, the United States Forest Service Wetlands Inventory of
Pennsylvania, the Pennsylvania Coastal Zone Management Plan and a wetland area designated by a river basin
commission. This definition is used by the United States Environmental Protection Agency [USEPA] and the United
States Army Corps of Engineers [USACOE].)
WIND CHARGER: A wind energy system direct-current generator used for charging storage batteries.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM: A device such as a wind charger, wind turbine and/or other electric generation facility
designed to convert wind power into another form of energy such as electricity or heat, consisting of one or more
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-45
Definitions
wind turbines and other structures and buildings, including meteorological towers, electrical infrastructure,
transmission lines, and other appurtenant structures and facilities.
WINDMILL: A device that runs on the energy generated by a wheel of adjustable blades or slats rotated by the
wind.
WIND TURBINE: A device that converts wind energy into electricity through the use of a wind turbine generator,
and includes the nacelle, rotor, tower and pad transformer, if any.
WIND TURBINE TOWER: The vertical component of a wind energy conversion system that elevates the wind
turbine generator and attached blades above the ground.
YARD: An unoccupied and unobstructed open space of land between the permitted structures and the adjoining lot
line.
(INTERIOR LOT)
Front
Rear
Side
Side
Street
Alley
Sidewalk
Yard
Setback
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-46
Definitions
(CORNER LOT)
YARD, FRONT: The yard area extending across the full width of the lot contained between the building line of the
principal structure and the front lot line or street line (excluding alleys), measured perpendicular to the building line
of said structure at the closest point to the front lot line. Corner lots shall have two (2) front yards.
YARD, REAR: The yard area extending across the full width of the lot contained between the building line of the
principal structure and the rear lot line, which may include street lines created by alleys, measured perpendicular to
the building line of said structure at the closest point to the rear lot line. Corner lots shall have one rear yard,
extending from the applicable front yard to the side lot line as well as from the rear lot line to the side yard.
YARD, SIDE: The yard area(s) extending from the front yard to the rear yard contained between the building line
of the principal structure and any side lot line(s), measured perpendicular to the building line of said structure at the
closest point to the nearest side lot line. Corner lots shall have one side yard.
ZONING: A police power measure, enacted primarily by general purpose units of local government, in which the
community is divided into districts or zones within which permitted and special uses are established as well as
regulations governing lot size, building bulk, placement and other development standards.
ZONING DISTRICT: A section of the Borough of Highspire designated in this Chapter text and delineated on the
Zoning Map, in which requirements for the use of land, structures, and building and development standards are
prescribed.
Street of Address
Alley
Sidewalk
Front
Rear
Front
Side
Yard
Setback
Street
Sidewalk
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 2)
PART 2-47
Definitions
ZONING MAP: The map setting forth the boundaries of the Zoning Districts of the Borough of Highspire which
shall be part of this Chapter.
ZONING OFFICER: The administrative officer appointed by the Highspire Borough Council to administer this
Chapter and issue zoning permits.
ZONING PERMIT: A document signed by a zoning officer, as required in this Chapter, as a condition precedent to
the commencement of a use, or the erection, construction, reconstruction, restoration, alteration, conversion or
installation of a structure or building, that acknowledges that such use, structure or building complies with the
provisions of this Chapter or authorized variance therefrom. Also see Building Permit.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 3)
PART 3-1
Administration & Enforcement
PART 3
ADMINISTRATION & ENFORCEMENT
Section. 300. Applicability of this Chapter
A. This Chapter shall apply throughout Highspire Borough, Dauphin County, PA. Any activity regulated by
this Chapter shall only occur in such a way that conforms with the regulations of this Chapter.
Section. 301. Administration
A. The provisions of this Chapter shall be enforced by an agent, to be appointed by the Borough Council of
the Borough of Highspire who shall be known as the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer may have
designated an employee of the Borough of Highspire as his Assistant, who shall exercise all the powers of
the Zoning Officer during the temporary absence or disability of the Zoning Officer.
B. The duties of the Zoning Officer shall be:
1. Administer this Chapter in accordance with its literal terms;
2. To receive, examine and process all applications and permits as provided by the terms of this
Chapter. The Zoning Officer shall also issue zoning permits for special exception and conditional
uses, or for variances after the same have been approved by the body having the respective
jurisdiction;
3. To record and file all applications for zoning permits, certificates of use and occupancy, and other
permits as may be set forth in this Chapter and accompanying plans and documents, and keep
them for public record;
4. To inspect properties to determine compliance with all provisions of this Chapter as well as
conditions attached to the approval of variances, special exceptions, conditional uses and curative
amendments;
5. Determine the date before which steps for compliance must be commenced and the date before
which the steps must be completed. The Zoning Officer shall determine an appropriate duration of
time for compliance of the specified activity, not to exceed thirty (30) days. Extensions up to a
total of ninety (90) days from the date of receipt of the enforcement notice may be granted at the
discretion of the Zoning Officer if applied for in writing;
6. Upon the request of the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire or the Zoning Hearing
Board, present to such bodies facts, records, and any similar information on specific requests, to
assist such bodies in reaching their decisions;
7. To be responsible for keeping this Chapter and the Official Zoning Map up to date, including any
amendments thereto;
8. To revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of this Chapter in case of any false
statement or misrepresentation of fact in the application or on the plans on which the permit or
approval was based or for any other cause set forth in this Chapter, or otherwise permitted by law;
9. To review proposed subdivisions and land developments for compliance with this Chapter;
10. To take enforcement actions as provided by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code
(MPC), as amended; and
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 3)
PART 3-2
Administration & Enforcement
11. To administer and enforce the floodplain regulations of Part 15 and serve as Floodplain
Administrator.
Section. 302. Permits & Certificates
A. A Zoning Permit indicates that a zoning application complies with this Chapter to the best knowledge of
the Zoning Officer or his designee. No zoning permit or certificate of use and occupancy shall be granted
by him for any purpose except in compliance with the literal provisions of this Chapter. The Zoning
Officer may be authorized to institute civil enforcement proceedings as a means of enforcement when
acting within his scope of employment.
1. A Zoning Permit is required to be issued prior to the start of any of the following activities:
a. Use, occupation, erection, construction, reconstruction, movement, alteration, razing,
demolition, removal, placement, of or extension (vertical or horizontal) of a structure,
building or sign.
b. Change of the type of use or expansion of the use of a structure, building or area of land.
c. Creation of a lot or alteration of lot lines.
d. Creation of a new use.
e. Other activities required to have a permit by this Chapter
f. The alteration or development of any improvement or unimproved real estate, including,
but not limited to, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations for underground utilities provided the final grade is not altered.
h. The construction or installation of lakes, ponds, dams, or other water retention basins;
i. No zoning permit shall be required for repairs or routine maintenance of any structure,
building, or land provided such repairs or maintenance do not change the use or the
exterior dimensions of the structure, building, or otherwise violate the provisions of this
Chapter;
2. The Borough of Highspire may, at its option, issue combined or separate Building Permits and
Zoning Permits (and related Certificates of Use and Occupancy) and/or may utilize a single or
separate application for the permits.
3. The only determination by the Zoning Officer that shall be official shall be a written determination
after the Zoning Officer receives a duly submitted written official application.
4. Such zoning permits shall be granted or refused within ninety (90) days from date of application.
5. No zoning permit shall be issued except in conformitywith:
a. All applicable regulations of this Chapter;
b. Any conditions imposed upon the site by the Zoning Hearing Board or the Borough
Council of the Borough of Highspire; and
c. Any recorded subdivision or land development plan.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 3)
PART 3-3
Administration & Enforcement
6. In all instances in which the Zoning Officer expresses a reasonable doubt as to the ability of a
proposed use to meet all of the above-described requirements, it will be incumbent upon the
applicant to furnish adequate evidence in support of his application. If such evidence is not
presented, the zoning permit will be denied.
7. Application for a zoning permit shall be made by the owner or lessee of any building, structure, or
land, or the agent of either; provided, however, that if the application is made by a person other
than the owner or lessee, it shall be accompanied by a written authorization of the owner or the
qualified person making the application, that the proposed work is authorized by this owner. The
full names and addresses of the owner, lessee, applicant, and of the responsible officers, if the
owner or lessee is a corporate body, shall be stated in the application.
8. The Zoning Officer may call upon other Borough of Highspire staff and/or Borough of Highspire
appointed consultants in the review of submitted materials for applications.
9. The Zoning Officer may revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of this Chapter in
case of any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in the application or on the plans which the
permit or approval was based or for any other cause set forth in this Chapter.
10. Where a zoning permit is required by this Chapter, but the work is commenced or changed prior to
obtaining such permit, and after notice by the Borough of Highspire the fees set by ordinance or
resolution of the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire for such permit shall be doubled.
The doubling of the permit fee shall be required to reflect the additional expense incurred by the
Borough of Highspire resulting from the need to inspect the property, respond to any complaints,
issue any enforcement notices and/or process the application as soon as it is received. The
payment of such increased permit fee shall not relieve any person from complying with all
requirements of this Chapter or any other applicable Borough of Highspire chapters, ordinances,
regulations, or from any penalties or enforcement actions authorized by this Chapter.
11. Issuance of Permits. Upon receiving the application, the Zoning Officer shall examine the same
within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or plans do not conform to the provisions
of all pertinent local laws, he shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefore.
He shall inform the applicant of his right to appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board in the event such
application is rejected. If satisfied that the proposed work and/or use conforms to the provisions
of this Chapter and all laws and ordinances applicable thereto, and that the certificate of use and
occupancy as required herein has been applied for, he shall issue a permit therefore as soon as
practical but not later than ninety (90) days from receipt of the application.
12. Reconsideration of Application. An applicant whose request for a zoning permit has been denied
by the Zoning Officer may make a later application for a permit provided all deficiencies which
were the basis for the prior denial of the permit have been eliminated. Additional fees may apply
as set by the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire.
13. Expiration of Zoning Permit. The permit shall expire after one (1) year from the date of issuance;
provided, however, that the same may be extended one time for one (1) additional year, upon
written request by the applicant at least thirty (30) days prior to the permit expiration date, and
upon subsequent approval by the Zoning Officer, on a form provided by the Borough of
Highspire.
14. Compliance with this Chapter. The permit shall be a license to proceed with the work and should
not be construed as authority to violate, cancel, or set aside any of the provisions this Chapter,
except as stipulated by the Zoning Hearing Board.
15. Compliance with Permit and Plot/Site Plan. All work or uses shall conform to the approved
application and plans for which the permit has been issued as well as the approved plot/site plan.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 3)
PART 3-4
Administration & Enforcement
16. Display of Zoning Permit. All approved zoning permits shall be prominently displayed on the
subject property during construction, renovation, reconstruction, repair, remodeling or the conduct
of other site improvements. Such permit displays shall occur within five (5) days of permit
issuance, or prior to the commencement of actual work on the site, whichever occurs first. Such
permit display shall be continuous until the site receives its certificate of use and occupancy.
17. Inspections. Inspections of the property in question by the Zoning Officer or other duly appointed
official may be required at various intervals during the construction, renovation, reconstruction,
repair, remodeling or the conduct of other site improvements process. By submitting an
application for a zoning permit, the landowner or applicant authorizes the Borough of Highspire to
perform such inspections as required.
Section. 303. Certificate of Use and Occupancy
A. It shall be unlawful to use and/or occupy any structure, sign, land area or portion thereof for which a
Zoning Permit is required until a Certificate of Use and Occupancy for such activity has been issued by the
Zoning Officer.
B. The Borough of Highspire staff may permit the Building Permit and Zoning Permit application to serve as
the application for the Certificate of Use and Occupancy.
C. The Certificate of Use and Occupancy shall only be issued by the Zoning Officer if the Zoning Officer
determines that the activity complies with this Chapter, to the best knowledge of the Zoning Officer.
D. The applicant shall keep a copy of the Certificate of Use and Occupancy available for inspection.
E. Upon request of the applicant, the Zoning Officer may issue a temporaryCertificate of Use and Occupancy.
Such temporary Certificate may permit as activity to occur in all or part of a structure or on all or part of
the land before the entire work covered by the zoning permit has been completed.
1. However, such temporary Certificate shall only be issued if the applicant proves to the Zoning
Officer that the activity or occupancy can occur safely without endangering public health or
safety.
2. The temporary Certificate shall establish in writing a maximum time period under which it is
valid. A six (6) month maximum time period shall apply if not otherwise specified.
3. Failure to receive a permanent Certificate of Use and Occupancy within such time period shall be
a violation of this Chapter.
4. The temporary Certificate may be conditioned upon compliance with certain specific requirements
within certain time periods.
F. The Zoning Officer shall inspect any structure, building, or land within ten (10) days upon notification that
the proposed work that was listed under a zoning permit has been completed and if satisfied that the work is
in conformity and compliance with the work listed in the issued permit and all other pertinent laws, he shall
issue a Certificate of Use and Occupancy for the intended use listed in the original application. Where a
building permit is required under Chapter 5 relating to buildings, of the Codified Ordinances of the
Borough of Highspire, a certificate of use and occupancy shall not be issued until a final inspection by the
Building Code Official is complete and found to be satisfactory.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 3)
PART 3-5
Administration & Enforcement
Section. 304. Zoning Permit for Temporary Uses and Structures
A. A Zoning Permit for a temporary use or structure may be issued by the Zoning Officer for any of the
following:
1. Customary, routine and accessory short-term special events, provided that only a well-established
nonprofit organization or a permitted place of worship proposing a temporary use demonstrates clearly
that the proposed use will primarily serve a charitable, public service or religious purpose in order to
be eligible to receive approval for commercial-type activities in a zoning district where a commercial
use would not otherwise be permitted;
2. Temporary storage and office trailers that are necessary to serve on-site construction, while such
construction is actively underway;
3. Such other activities that the applicant proves are routine, customary and temporary, including those
specific “temporary” uses and structures set forth in Part 4
B. Time Period. The Zoning Officer shall state a reasonable maximum time period on the temporary permit.
If no time limit is stated or otherwise specifically provided in Part 4, then a six (6) month maximum period
shall apply. A temporary permit may be renewed for just cause.
Section. 305. Types of Uses
A. Permitted By Right Uses. The Zoning Officer shall issue a zoning permit under this Chapter in response to
an application for a use that is “permitted by right” if it meets all of the requirements of this Chapter.
B. Special Exception Use. A zoning permit under this Chapter for a use requiring a special exception shall be
issued by the Zoning Officer only in response to a written approval by the Zoning Hearing Board,
following a hearing, and compliance with any conditions by the Zoning Hearing Board and any conditions
required by this Chapter.
C. Conditional Use. A zoning permit under this Chapter for a use requiring a conditional use shall be issued
by the Zoning Officer only in response to a written approval by the Borough Council of the Borough of
Highspire, following a hearing, and compliance with any conditions by the Borough Council of the
Borough of Highspire and any conditions required by this Chapter.
D. Application Requiring a Variance. A permit under this Chapter for a use requiring a variance shall be
issued by the Zoning Officer only in response to a written approval by the Zoning Hearing Board,
following a hearing, and compliance with any conditions by the Zoning Hearing Board.
Section 306. Applications for Zoning Permits
A. Submittal. All applications for a Zoning Permit shall be made in writing on a form provided by the
Borough of Highspire. Such completed application, with required fees, shall be submitted to a designated
Borough of Highspire employee.
B. Plot/Site Plan. The applicant shall submit a minimum of two (2) copies of a plot/site plan with the
application. The plot/site plan shall be drawn to scale and show the following:
1. The approximate layout of the lot, with lot width, lot area and other applicable dimensional
requirements.
2. The total number of lots, units of occupancy, density and proposed land use (if multiple land uses
are proposed, the location of each land use shall be indicated).
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 3)
PART 3-6
Administration & Enforcement
3. The approximate location and configuration of existing and proposed buildings, structures,
parking compounds, loading areas, streets, access drives, driveways, alleys, sidewalks, easements,
and general stormwater facility locations, with existing features clearly distinguished from
proposed features.
4. Building setback lines, with notes showing the dimensions of all structures and buildings from lot
lines and street rights-of way.
5. Location of anywatercourses and any one hundred (100) year floodplain.
C. Additional Information. Any application under this Chapter shall include the following information, unless
the Zoning Officer determines such information is unnecessary to determine compliance with this Chapter:
1. Address of the lot.
2. Name and address of the applicant, and of the owner of the property if different from the
applicant.
3. Description of the proposed use of the property.
4. All other applicable information listed on the official Borough of Highspire application form.
5. Such additional information that the Zoning Officer may determine is reasonably necessary to
determine compliance with this Chapter.
6. Applications for Permits in the MN/C and CBD Zoning Districts and the NCS OverlayDistrict
In addition to the information, required in Section 306 above, applications for the construction of
new principal buildings or structures or additions / alterations to existing principal buildings or
structures in the MN/C and CBD zoning districts and NCS Overlay district shall be submitted with
the following information:
a. A complete set of calculations (i.e. averages of heights, setbacks, etc.) used to determine and
demonstrate compliance with all applicable standards set forth in the Dimensional
Requirements of Parts 7 – 10 of this Chapter.
b. A schematic architectural drawing of the principal building's front façade(s).
D. Application for Zoning Permits for Non-Residential Uses (excluding demolition permits) shall include the
following:
1. A location plan showing the tract to be developed, zone boundaries, adjoining tracts, significant
natural features (such as wetlands, stands of trees, streams, etc.), and streets for a distance of two
hundred (200) feet from all tract boundaries;
2. A plot/site plan certified by a qualified professional land surveyor, engineer or landscape architect
licensed and/or registered to practice in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the lot showing
the location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, driveways, parking lots, access
drives, driveways, circulation patterns, curb cuts, lot access, parking stalls, screening, fences and
walls, buffer yards, waste disposal or other methods of sewage disposal, other construction
features on the lot, and the location of all topographical features;
3. A description of the operations proposed in sufficient detail to indicate the effects of those
operations in producing traffic congestion, noise, glare, air pollution, water pollution, vibration,
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 3)
PART 3-7
Administration & Enforcement
fire hazards, safety hazards, or the emission of any potentially harmful or obnoxious matter or
radiation and other performance standards in accordance with Part 4 of this Chapter;
4. Evidence that the disposal of materials and wastes will be accomplished in a manner that complies
with Borough, State and Federal regulations. If not provided by the Borough’s contracted solid
waste disposal provider, such evidence shall, at a minimum, include copies of contracts with waste
haulers licensed to operate within Dauphin County which have been contracted to dispose of the
materials used and wastes generated on-site. The zoning permit shall remain valid only so long as
such contracts remain in effect and all materials and wastes are properly disposed of on a regular
basis. Should the nature of the use change in the future such that the materials used or wastes
generated change significantly, either in type or amount, the owner shall so inform the Zoning
Officer, and shall provide additional evidence demonstrating continued compliance with the
requirements of this section;
5. Engineering plans for the handling of traffic, noise, glare, air pollution, water pollution, vibration,
fire hazards, or safety hazards, smoke, or emission of any potentially harmful or obnoxious matter
or radiation;
6. Designation of the manner by which sanitary sewage and stormwater shall be disposed and water
supply, and other utilities obtained/provided;
7. The proposed number of shifts to be worked and the maximum number of employees on each
shift;
8. Where use by more than one firm is anticipated, a list of firms which are likely to be located in the
on the property, their floor area, and estimated number of employees; and
9. Submission, approval and recordation of a subdivision and/or land development plan in
accordance with Chapter 22 of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire, relating to
subdivision and land development, as required.
E. Areas Subject to Flooding. If the proposed development, excavation or construction is located within an
area subject to regulation by Part 15 Floodplain Overlay Regulations, the information set forth in Section
1508 shall accompany all applications.
F. Chapter 5 of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire Relating to Buildingss. Where the
proposed use is regulated under the Chapter 5 of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire
relating to buildings, the applicant shall submit an application of building permit concurrently with the
zoning permit. A zoning permit will not be issued until satisfactorily meeting the requirements of Chapter
5 of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire Relating to Buildings.
G. Submittals for Special Exception or Conditional Uses. In addition to the information listed above, an
application for a special exception or conditional use requiring a site/plot plan and action by the Zoning
Hearing Board or Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire shall also include the following
information, unless the Zoning Officer determines that such information is not necessary to determine
compliance with this Chapter:
1. Present zoning district and major applicable structure, building, and lot requirements.
2. For mixed use and non-residential uses:
a. Description of the proposed mixed use and non-residential operations and storage in sufficient
detail to indicate potential nuisances and hazards regarding noise, large truck traffic, glare,
odors, dust, fire or toxic or explosive hazards or other significant public health and safety
hazards.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 3)
PART 3-8
Administration & Enforcement
b. Hours of operation.
3. Existing directions of stormwater flow (and any proposed revisions) and any proposed methods of
stormwater management.
4. Listing of any sections of this Chapter from which a variance is being requested.
5. Approximate locations of principal buildings and locations of streets and alleys and zoning district
boundaries within one hundred (100) feet of the boundaries of the tract, and description of uses of
abutting properties (such as “tavern” or “single-family detached dwelling”).
6. Heights, locations, methods of illumination and intensity of exterior lighting and sign lighting.
7. Name and address of person who prepared the plot/site plan.
8. Signed acknowledgement of the site plan by the applicant.
9. Such additional information required under applicable sections of this Chapter.
Section 307. Issuance of Permits
A. At least one (1) copy of each zoning permit application and any other zoning approvals shall be retained in
the Borough of Highspire files.
B. PennDOT Permit. Where necessary for access onto a State-owned street or road, a Borough of Highspire
zoning or building permit shall be automatically conditioned upon issuance of a PennDOT Highway
Occupancy Permit.
Section 308. Revocation of Permits; Appeal of Permit orApproval
A. Revocation. The Zoning Officer shall revoke, withhold or suspend a permit or approval issued under the
provisions of this Chapter in the case of one or more of the following:
1. Any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in the application or on the plans on which the
permit or approval was based. (Note: The Pennsylvania Criminal Code provides for penalties for
providing false information to a municipal employee in the carrying out of his duties).
2. Upon violation of any condition lawfully imposed by the Zoning Hearing Board for a special
exception Use or a Variance.
3. Upon violation of any condition lawfully imposed by the Borough Council of the Borough of
Highspire for a conditional use.
4. Any work being accomplished or use of land or structures in such a way that does not complywith
this Chapter or an approved site plan or approved permit application.
5. Any other just cause set forth in this Chapter.
B. Appeals. A party with legitimate standing, or as otherwise provided by State law, may appeal decisions
made under this Chapter within the provisions of the MPC. Such appeal shall occur within the time period
established by the MPC.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 3)
PART 3-9
Administration & Enforcement
Section 309. Compliance with Chapter 22 of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire, Relating
to Subdivision and Land Development.
A. If an application under this Chapter would also be regulated by Chapter 22 of the Codified Ordinances of
the Borough of Highspire, relating to subdivision and land development, also known as the Borough of
Highspire Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (SALDO), then any permit or approval under this
Chapter (Zoning Ordinance) shall automatically be conditioned upon compliance with Chapter 22.
However, if the granting of a variance, special exception or conditional use is necessary, such approval
shall be obtained prior to submitting an application for subdivision and/or land development approval.
1. For example, if an applicant applies for a permit for a single-family detached dwelling on a
proposed new lot, the zoning and building permit for such dwelling shall not be valid until after
the lot is granted final subdivision and land development approval and the lot is officially recorded
by the Dauphin County Recorder of Deeds.
Section 310. General Procedure for Permits
A. After receiving a proper application, the Zoning Officer shall either:
1. issue the applicable permit(s); or
2. deny the application(s) as submitted, indicating one or more reasons in writing to the applicant.
B. After the permit under this Chapter has been issued, the applicant may undertake the action specified in the
permit, in compliance with other Borough of Highspire codes and ordinances. However, it is recommended
that applicants wait thirty (30) days to begin construction if there is a possibility of an appeal by another
party to have the permit revoked. Any commencement of construction or a use within this thirty (30) day
appeal period shall be at the risk of the applicant.
Section 311. Interpretation
A. Minimum Requirements. Where more than one provision of this Chapter controls a particular matter, the
provision that is more restrictive upon uses, structures, and buildings shall apply. The provisions of this
Chapter are in addition to any other applicable Borough of Highspire code or ordinance.
B. Interpretation of Chapter Text and Boundaries
1. The Zoning Officer shall literally apply the wording of this Chapter and the location of all Zoning
District boundaries to applications (see Part 6 of determining zoning district boundaries). In any
case, the Zoning Officer may also request an advisory opinion from the Borough of Highspire
Planning Commission, Borough of Highspire Solicitor, or the Zoning Hearing Board Solicitor to
aid in the Zoning Officer’s determination.
2. If an applicant disagrees with the Zoning Officer’s determination and believes that the Chapter
should be interpreted in the applicant’s favor, the applicant may appeal to the Zoning Hearing
Board.
Section 312. Enforcement, Violations and Penalties
All of the enforcement, violations and penalty provisions of the MPC, as amended, are hereby incorporated into this
Chapter by reference.
A. Violations. Any person who shall commit or who shall permit any of the following actions violates this
Chapter:
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 3)
PART 3-10
Administration & Enforcement
1. Failure to secure a Zoning Permit prior to pursuing any activity listed in Section 104 and 302 of
this Chapter.
2. Placement of false statements on or omitting relevant information from an application for a Zoning
Permit.
3. Undertaking any action in a manner which does not comply with an approved Zoning Permit.
4. Violation of any conditions imposed by a decision of the Zoning Hearing Board in granting a
variance, special exception or other approval.
5. Violation of any condition imposed by a decision of the Borough Council of the Borough of
Highspire in granting a conditional use.
B. Causes of Action; Enforcement; Remedies
1. Enforcement. If it appears to the Borough of Highspire that a violation of this Chapter has
occurred, the Borough of Highspire shall initiate enforcement proceedings by sending an
enforcement notice. Prior to sending an official enforcement notice, the Zoning Officer may at his
option informally request compliance.
2. Enforcement Notice. The enforcement notice shall be sent in writing to the owner of record of the
parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed a written request to receive
enforcement notices regarding that parcel, and to any other person requested in writing by the
owner of record. An enforcement notice shall state the following, at minimum:
a. The name of the owner of record and any other person against whom the Borough of
Highspire intends to take action.
b. The location and address of the property in violation.
c. The specific violation with a description of the requirements which have not been met,
citing in each instance, the applicable provisions of this Chapter.
d. The date (not to exceed a period of thirty (30) days) before which the steps for
compliance must be commenced and the date (not to exceed a period of thirty (30) days)
before which the steps must be completed.
e. An outline of remedial action which, if taken, will affect compliance with the provisions
of this Ordinance.
f. That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board within
a prescribed period of time in accordance with procedures set forth in this Chapter.
g. That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified, unless extended by
appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board, constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions
clearly described.
3. Evidence & Fees. In any appeal of an enforcement notice to the Zoning Hearing Board, the
Borough of Highspire shall have the responsibility of presenting its evidence first. Any filing fees
paid by a party to an appeal of an enforcement notice to the Zoning Hearing Board shall be
returned to the appealing party by the Borough of Highspire if the Zoning Hearing Board, or any
court in a subsequent appeal, rules in the appealing party’s favor.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 3)
PART 3-11
Administration & Enforcement
4. Cause of Action. If the enforcement notice is not complied with, within the specified time period,
the Zoning Officer shall notify the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire. With the
consent of the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire, the Borough of Highspire Solicitor
or other officer of the Borough of Highspire may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to
prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building, structure, landscaping or land, or to prevent in or
about such premises, any act, conduct, business or use constituting a violation.
5. Violations and Penalties.
a. Except as otherwise provided herein Subsection B, any person, partnership or corporation
who or which has violated or permitted the violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall,
upon being found liable therefore in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Borough of Highspire, pay a judgment of not more than five hundred dollars ($500) plus all
court costs, including the reasonable attorney’s fees incurred by the Borough of Highspire as a
result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or be payable until the date
of the determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor
timely appeals the judgment, the Borough of Highspire may enforce the judgment pursuant to
the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless a District Justice determining that there has been a violation, further
determines that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation
violating this Chapter to have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there
shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of
the determination by the District Justice, and thereafter each day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney’s fees
collected for the violation of this Chapter shall be paid over to the Borough of Highspire.
Imprisonment shall not be authorized by this Chapter.
b. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or provisions of Part 15
relating to Floodplain Regulations or who fails or refuses to comply with any notice, order of
direction of the Floodplain Administrator or any other authorized employee of the
municipality shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall pay a fine to
Highspire Borough of nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) plus costs of
prosecution. In addition to the above penalties all other actions are hereby reserved including
an action in equity for the proper enforcement of Part 15. The imposition of a fine or penalty
for any violation of, or noncompliance with, Part 15 of this Ordinance shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue and all such persons shall be required to
correct or remedy such violations and noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any
development initiated or any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged,
altered, or relocated, in noncompliance with Part of this Ordinance may be declared by the
Zoning Hearing Board, to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
Section 313. Fees
A. Determination. The Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire may, by ordinance or resolution,
establish fees for the administration of this Chapter. All fees shall be determined by a schedule that is
made available to the general public. The Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire may reevaluate
the fees schedule and make necessary alterations to it. Such alterations shall not be considered an
amendment to this Chapter and may be adopted at any public meeting of the Borough Council of the
Borough of Highspire.
Section 314. Amendments
A. Power of Amendment. The Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire may from time to time, amend,
supplement, change or repeal this Chapter including the Official Zoning Map. Any amendment,
supplement, change or repeal may be initiated by the Borough of Highspire Planning Commission, the
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 3)
PART 3-12
Administration & Enforcement
Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire or by a petition to the Borough Council of the Borough of
Highspire by an interested party;
B. Hearing and Enactment Procedures for Zoning Amendments:
1. Public Hearing. Before hearing and enacting this Chapter and/or Zoning Map amendments, the
Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire shall conduct a public hearing to inform the general
public of the nature of the amendment, and to obtain public comment. Such public hearing shall
be conducted after public notice (as defined herein and listed below) has been given.
2. Public Notice. Before conducting a public hearing, the Borough Council of the Borough of
Highspire shall provide public notice as defined in Part 2 and as follows:
a. The notice published once each week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Borough. Such notice shall state the time and place of the
hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first
publication shall not be more than thirty (30) days and the second publication shall not be
less than seven (7) days from the date of the hearing. Publication of the proposed
amendment shall include either the full text thereof or the title and brief summary,
prepared by the municipal solicitor and setting forth all the provisions in reasonable
detail.
b.1. For Official Zoning Map amendments, public notice shall also include the posting of a
sign at conspicuous locations along the perimeter of the subject property; these sign(s)
shall be posted at least one week prior to the hearing and will exhibit the nature, date,
time, municipality, location of the hearing;
b.2. In addition to the requirement, that notice be posted on the subject property, where the
proposed amendment involves a zoning map change, notice of the public hearing shall be
mailed by the Borough of Highspire at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the
hearing by first class mail to the addresses to which real estate tax bills are sent for all
real property located within the area being rezoned, as evidenced by tax records within
the possession of the Borough of Highspire. The notice shall include the location, date
and time of the public hearing. The provisions of this section shall not apply when the
rezoning constitutes a comprehensive rezoning.
c. For curative amendments, public notice shall also indicate that the validity of this Chapter
and/or map is in question, and shall give the place where and the times when a copy of
the request including any plans, explanatory material or proposed amendments may be
examined by the public; and,
d. If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed amendment is
changed substantially, or is revised, to include land previously not affected by it, the
Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire shall hold another public hearing, pursuant
to public notice, before proceeding to vote on the amendment;
3. Enactment Notice. In addition to the public notice requirements defined herein, the Borough
Council of the Borough of Highspire must publish a reference to the time and place of the meeting
at which passage of this Chapter or amendment will be considered, and a reference to a place
within the Borough of Highspire where copies of the proposed Chapter or amendment may be
examined without charge, or obtained for a charge not greater than the cost thereof. Enactment
notice shall be published at least once in one newspaper of general circulation in the Borough of
Highspire not more than sixty (60) days nor less than seven (7) days prior to passage. The
published content of the enactment notice shall be the same as that required for public notice
described in the preceding subsection;
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 3)
PART 3-13
Administration & Enforcement
4. Borough of Highspire Planning Commission Referrals. For amendments proposed by parties
other than the Borough of Highspire Planning Commission, the Borough Council of the Borough
of Highspire shall submit each amendment at least thirty (30) days prior to public hearing to the
Borough of Highspire Planning Commission for review and comment. The Borough of Highspire
Planning Commission shall submit a report of its review, together with any recommendations, to
the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire within forty-five (45) days from the date of said
referral. The recommendation of the Borough of Highspire Planning Commission may include a
specific statement as to whether or not the proposed amendment is in accordance with the intent of
this Chapter and the most recent version of any officially adopted Highspire Borough
Comprehensive Plan. The Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire cannot act upon the
amendment until it has received a recommendation from the Borough of Highspire Planning
Commission; however, should the Borough of Highspire Planning Commission fail to submit its
recommendation within forty-five (45) days, the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire
may proceed without its recommendation;
5. Dauphin County Planning Commission Referrals. All proposed amendments shall be submitted to
the Dauphin County Planning Commission at least thirty (30) days prior to public hearing on such
amendments. The Dauphin County Planning Commission may submit recommendations to the
Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire within thirty (30) days of such referral. The
Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire cannot act upon the amendment until it has received
a recommendation from the Dauphin County Planning Commission; however, should the Dauphin
County Planning Commission fail to submit its recommendation within f thirty (30) days, the
Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire may proceed without its recommendation;
6. Adjournment of Public Hearing. If during the public hearing process, the Borough Council of the
Borough of Highspire needs additional time to understand the proposal, inform the public, receive
public comment, and/or render a decision, it may adjourn the public hearing to a specific time and
place; and,
7. Within thirty (30) days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to this Chapter shall be
forwarded to the Dauphin County Planning Commission;
C. Amendment Initiated by the Borough of Highspire Planning Commission. When an amendment,
supplement, change or repeal is initiated by the Borough of Highspire Planning Commission, the proposal
shall be presented to the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire which shall then proceed in the
same manner as with a petition to the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire which has already
been reviewed by the Borough of Highspire Planning Commission;
D. Amendment Initiated by the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire. When an amendment,
supplement, change or repeal is initiated by the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire, such
amendment, supplement, change or repeal shall follow the procedure prescribed for a petition under
Section 314 above.
E. Amendment Initiated by a Petition from an Interested Party. A petition for amendment, supplement, change
or repeal for a portion of this Chapter shall include an accurate legal description and surveyed plan of any
land to be rezoned, and all of the reasons supporting the petition to be considered. The petition shall also
be signed by at least one (1) record owner of the property in question whose signature shall be notarized
attesting the truth and correctness of all the facts and information presented in the petition. A fee to be
established by Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire shall be paid upon the filing of such petition
for change and for the purpose of defraying the costs of the proceedings prescribed herein. The Borough
Council of the Borough of Highspire may require duplicate sets of petition materials.
F. Curative Amendment by a Landowner. A landowner, who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the
validity of this Chapter or the Official Zoning Map or any provision thereof which prohibits or restricts the
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 3)
PART 3-14
Administration & Enforcement
use or development of land in which he has an interest, may submit a curative amendment to the Borough
Council of the Borough of Highspire, including all of the reasons supporting the request to be considered,
with a written request that his challenge and proposed amendment be heard and decided as provided in the
MPC, as amended. The Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire shall commence a hearing thereon
within sixty (60) days of the request. The curative amendment shall be referred to the Dauphin County
Planning Commission as provided for in Section 314 and public notice of the hearing shall be provided as
defined herein.
1. In reviewing the curative amendment, the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire may deny
the request, accept the request as submitted, or may adopt an alternative amendment which will
cure the challenged defects. The Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire shall consider the
curative amendments, plans and explanatory material submitted by the landowner and shall also
consider;
a. The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water supplies, schools and other
public service facilities;
b. If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the proposal upon regional housing
needs and the effectiveness of the proposal in providing housing units of a type actually
available to and affordable by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully excluded by the
challenged provisions of the Chapter or Official ZoningMap;
c. The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by the site’s soils, slopes,
woodland, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers, natural resources and other natural features;
d. The impact of the proposed use on the site’s soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands,
floodplains, natural resources and natural features, the degree to which these are
protected or destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to development and any adverse
environmental impacts; and,
e. The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture and other land uses which
are essential to public health and welfare;
2. The Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire shall render its decision within forty-five (45)
days after the conclusion of the last hearing;
3. If the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire fails to act on the landowner’s request within
the time limits referred to above, a denial of the request is deemed to have occurred on the forty
sixth (46th )day after the close of the last hearing;
4. Public notice of the hearing shall include notice that the validity of this Chapter or Zoning Map is
in question and shall give the place where and the times when a copy of the request including any
plans, explanatorymaterial or proposed amendments may be examined by the public;
5. The challenge shall be deemed denied when:
a. The Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire fails to commence the hearing within
sixty (60) days;
b. The Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire notified the landowner that it will not
adopt the curative amendment;
c. The Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire adopts another curative amendment
which is unacceptable to the landowner; or
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 3)
PART 3-15
Administration & Enforcement
d. The Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire fails to act on the request forty-five
(45) days after the close of the last hearing on the request, unless the time is extended by
mutual consent by the landowner and municipality;
6. Where, curative amendment proposal is approved by the grant of a curative amendment
application by the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire pursuant to this section or a
validity challenge is sustained by the Zoning Hearing Board or the court acts finally on appeal
from denial of a curative amendment proposal or a validity challenge, and the proposal or
challenge so approved requires a further application for subdivision or land development, the
developer shall have two years from the date of such approval for a subdivision, land development
or planned residential development. Within the two-year period, no subsequent change or
amendment in the zoning, subdivision or other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied in any
manner which adversely affects the rights of the applicant as granted in the curative amendment or
the sustained validity challenge. Upon the filing of the preliminary or tentative plan, the
provisions of the MPC, as amended shall apply; and,
7. Where the proposal appended to the curative amendment application or the validity challenge is
approved but does not require further application under any subdivision or land development
Chapter, the developer shall have one year within which to file for a zoning permit. Within the
one-year period, no subsequent change or amendment in the zoning, subdivision or other
governing ordinance or plan shall be applied in any manner which adversely affects the rights of
applicant as granted in the curative amendment or the sustained validity challenge. During these
protected periods, the court shall retain or assume jurisdiction for the purposes of awarding such
supplemental relief as may be necessary;
G. Curative Amendment by the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire
1. The Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire, by formal action, may declare this Chapter or
portions thereof substantively invalid and propose to prepare a curative amendment to overcome
such invalidity. Within thirty (30) days following such declaration proposal, the Borough Council
of the Borough of Highspire shall:
a. By resolution, make specific findings setting forth the declared invalidity of this Chapter
or portions thereof which may include:
(1) references to specific uses which are either not permitted or not permitted in
sufficient quantity;
(2) references to a class of use or uses which require revision; or
(3) references to the entire Chapter which requires revisions.
b. Begin to prepare and consider a curative amendment to this Chapter to correct the
declared invalidity.
2. Within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the declaration and proposal, the Borough
Council of the Borough of Highspire shall enact a curative amendment to validate or reaffirm the
validity of this Chapter pursuant to the provisions required by the MPC, as amended in order to
cure the declared invalidity of the Chapter;
3. Upon the date of the declaration and proposal, the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire
shall not be required to entertain or consider any curative amendment filed by a landowner. Nor
shall the Zoning Hearing Board be required to give a report, upon request, for a challenge to the
validity of this Chapter subsequent to the declaration and proposal, based upon the grounds
identical to or substantially similar to those specified in the resolution required by this Section.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 3)
PART 3-16
Administration & Enforcement
Upon the enactment of a curative amendment to, or the reaffirmation of the validity of this
Chapter, no rights to a cure by amendment or challenge shall, from the date of the declaration and
proposal, accrue to any landowner on the basis of the substantive invalidity of the unamended
Chapter for which the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire propose to prepare a curative
amendment; and,
4. The Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire, having utilized the procedures as set forth in
this Section, may not again utilize said procedures for a thirty-six (36) month period following the
date of the enactment of a curative amendment, or reaffirmation of the validity of this Chapter;
provided however, that if after the date of declaration and proposal there is a substantially new
duty or obligation imposed upon the Borough of Highspire by virtue of a decision by any Court of
competent jurisdiction, the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire may utilize the
provisions of this Section to prepare a curative amendment to this Chapter to fulfill this duty or
obligation.
H. Authentication of Official Zoning Map. Whenever there has been a change in the boundary of a zoning
district or a reclassification of the zoning distirct adopted in accordance with the above, the change on the
Official Zoning Map shall be made, and shall be duly certified by the Borough of Highspire
Manager/Secretary and shall thereafter be refilled as part of the permanent records of the Borough of
Highspire.
Section 315. Zoning Hearing Board
A. Establishment and Membership
1. There shall be a Zoning Hearing Board which shall consist of three (3) members who shall be
appointed by resolution by the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire. The membership of
the Zoning Hearing Board shall consist of residents of Highspire Borough. Their terms of office
shall be three (3) years and shall be so fixed that the term of office of one member shall expire
each year. The Zoning Hearing Board shall promptly notify the Borough of Highspire of any
vacancies which occur. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of
the term. Members of the Zoning Hearing Board shall hold no other elected or appointed office in
the Borough nor shall any member be an employee of the Borough.
2. The Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire may appoint by resolution at least one (1) but
no more than three (3) residents of the municipality to serve as alternate members of the Zoning
Hearing Board. The term of office of an alternate member shall be three (3) years. When seated
pursuant to the provisions of this Section, an alternate shall be entitled to participate in all
proceedings and discussions of the Zoning Hearing Board to the same and full extent as provided
by law for Zoning Hearing Board members, including specifically the right to cast a vote as a
voting member during the proceedings, and shall have all the powers and duties set forth in this
Chapter and as otherwise provided by law. Alternates shall hold no other office in the Borough of
Highspire, including membership on the Planning Commission and Zoning Officer. Any alternate
may participate in any proceeding or discussion of the Zoning Hearing Board but shall not be
entitled to vote as a member of the Zoning Hearing Board nor be compensated, unless designated
as a voting alternate member pursuant to this Part.
3. Any member of the Zoning Hearing Board may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance, or
nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of the Borough Council of the
Borough of Highspire taken after the member has received fifteen (15) days advance notice of the
intent to take such a vote. A hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the member shall
request it in writing.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 3)
PART 3-17
Administration & Enforcement
B. Organization of Zoning Hearing Board
The Zoning Hearing Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall serve annual terms
as such and may succeed themselves. For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a
quorum shall be not less than a majority of all members of the Zoning Hearing Board, but the Zoning
Hearing Board may appoint a hearing officer from its own membership to conduct any hearing on its behalf
and the parties may waive further action by the Zoning Hearing Board as provided in Section 315.D.2. If,
by reason of absence or disqualification of a member, a quorum is not reached, the Chairman of the Zoning
Hearing Board shall designate as many alternate members of the Zoning Hearing Board to sit on the Zoning
Hearing Board as may be needed to provide a quorum. Any alternate member of the Zoning Hearing Board
shall continue to serve on the Zoning Hearing Board in all proceedings involving the matter or case for
which the alternate was initially appointed until the Zoning Hearing Board has made a final determination
of the matter or case. Designation of an alternate pursuant to this section shall be made on a case-by-case
basis in rotation according to declining seniority among all alternates. The Zoning Hearing Board may
make, alter, and rescind rules and forms for its procedure, consistent with codes or ordinances of the
Borough of Highspire and laws of the Commonwealth. The Zoning Hearing Board shall keep full public
records of its business, which records shall be the property of the Borough of Highspire, and shall submit a
report of its activities to the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire upon request.
C. Expenditures for Services
Within the limits of funds appropriated by the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire, the Zoning
Hearing Board may employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel, consultants and other technical
and clerical services. Members of the Zoning Hearing Board may receive compensation for the
performance of their duties, as may be fixed by the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire.
Alternate members of the Zoning Hearing Board may receive compensation, as may be fixed by the
Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire, for the performance of their duties when designated as
alternate members pursuant to Section 315.A, but in no case shall such compensation exceed the rate of
compensation authorized to be paid to the members by the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire.
D. Hearings
1. The Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with the
following requirements:
a. Public notice (as defined herein) shall be provided. In addition, the Zoning Hearing
Board shall notify in writing by mail the applicant, Zoning Officer, and other such
persons whether owners or tenants of property located within two hundred (200) feet of
the subject property for which the application was submitted, and every other person or
organization who shall have registered with the Zoning Hearing Board for the purposes
of receiving such notices. Such mailed notices shall state the location of the site and the
nature of the request. It shall also state the time, date, and location of the proposed
hearing. In addition to the written notice provided herein, written notice of said hearing
shall be conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land at least one (1) week prior to
the hearing;
b. The Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire may prescribe reasonable fees with
respect to hearing before the Zoning Hearing Board. Fees for said hearings may include
compensation for the secretary and members of the Zoning Hearing Board, notice and
advertising costs and necessary administrative overhead connected with the hearing. The
costs, however, shall not include legal expenses of the Zoning Hearing Board, expenses
for engineering, architectural or other technical consultants or expert witness costs;
c. The first hearing before the Zoning Hearing Board or hearing officer shall be commenced
within sixty (60) days from the date of receipt of the applicant’s application, unless the
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 3)
PART 3-18
Administration & Enforcement
applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time. Each subsequent hearing before
the Zoning Hearing Board or hearing officer shall be held within forty-five (45) days of
the prior hearing, unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant in writing or on the record.
An applicant shall complete the presentation of its case-in-chief within one hundred (100)
days of the first hearing. Upon the request of the applicant, the Zoning Hearing Board or
hearing officer shall assure that the applicant receives at least seven (7) hours of hearing
within the one hundred (100) days, including the first hearing. Persons opposed to the
application shall complete the presentation of their opposition to the application within
one hundred (100) days of the first hearing held after the completion of the applicant’s
case-in-chief. An applicant may, upon request, be granted additional hearings to
complete its case-in-chief provided the persons opposed to the application are granted an
equal number of additional hearings to complete their opposition to the application
provided the applicant is granted an equal number of additional hearings for rebuttal.
2. The hearings shall be conducted by the Zoning Hearing Board or the Zoning Hearing Board may
appoint any member or an independent attorney as a hearing officer. The decision, or, where no
decision is called for, the findings shall be made by the Zoning Hearing Board; however, the
appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the Borough of Highspire, may, prior
to the decision of the hearing, waive decisions or findings by the Zoning Hearing Board and
accept the decision or findings of the hearing officer as final;
3. The parties to the hearing shall be the Borough of Highspire, any person affected by the
application who has made timely appearance of record before the Zoning Hearing Board, and any
other person including civic or community organizations permitted to appear by the Zoning
Hearing Board. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have power to require that all persons who wish
to be considered parties enter appearances in writing on forms provided by the Zoning Hearing
Board for that purpose;
4. The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer presiding
shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses
and the production of relevant documents and papers, including witnesses and documents
requested by the parties;
5. The parties shall have the right to be represented by council and shall be afforded the opportunity
to respond and present evidence and argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all
relevant issues;
6. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial, and unduly repetitious
evidence may be excluded;
7. The Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a stenographic
record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for a stenographer shall be shared equally by the
applicant and the Zoning Hearing Board. The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the
Zoning Hearing Board if the transcript is ordered by the Zoning Hearing Board or hearing officer;
or shall be paid by the person appealing the decision of the Zoning Hearing Board if such appeal is
made, and in either event the cost of additional copies shall be paid by the person requesting such
copy or copies. In other cases the party requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost
thereof;
8. The Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or indirectly,
with any party or his representatives in connection with any issue involved except upon notice and
opportunity for all parties to participate, shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff
memoranda, or other materials, except advice from their solicitor, unless the parties are afforded
an opportunity to contest the materials so noticed and shall not inspect the site or its surroundings
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 3)
PART 3-19
Administration & Enforcement
after the commencement of hearings with any party or his representative unless all parties are
given an opportunity to be present;
9. The Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a written
decision or, when no decision is called for, make written findings on the application within fortyfive
(45) days after the last hearing before the Zoning Hearing Board or hearing officer. Where
the application is contested or denied, each decision shall be accompanied by the findings of fact
and conclusions based thereon together with the reasons therefore. Conclusions based on any
provisions of this or of any ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the provision
relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in light of the facts found. If
the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer, and there has been no stipulation that his decision or
findings are final the Zoning Hearing Board shall make his report and recommendations available
to the parties within forty-five (45) days and the parties shall be entitled to make written
representations thereon to the Zoning Hearing Board prior to final decision or entry of findings,
and the Zoning Hearing Board’s decision shall be entered no later than thirty (30) days after the
report of the hearing officer. Except for challenges filed under Article IX of the PA MPC, where
the Zoning Hearing Board fails to render the decision within the period required by this subsection
or fails to commence, conduct or complete the required hearing as provided in Section 315.D of
this Chapter, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless
the applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time. When a decision has
been rendered in favor of the applicant because of the failure of the Zoning Hearing Board to meet
or render a decision as hereinabove provided, the Zoning Hearing Board shall give public notice of
said decision with ten (10) days from the last day it could have met to render a decision in the
same manner as provided in Section 315.D of this Chapter. If the Zoning Hearing Board shall fail
to provide such notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the
right of any party opposing the application to appeal.
10. A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the findings shall be delivered
to the applicant personally or mailed to him not later than the next business day following its date.
To all other persons who have filed their name and address with the Zoning Hearing Board not
later than the last day of the hearing, the Zoning Hearing Board shall provide by mail or otherwise,
brief notice of the decision or findings and a statement of the place at which the full decision or
findings may be examined; and,
11. Effect of Zoning Hearing Board’s Decision
a. If the variance or special exception is granted or the issuance of a permit is approved, or
other action by the appellant is authorized, the necessary permit shall be secured and the
authorized action begun within two (2) years after the date when the variance or special
exception is finally granted, or the issuance of a permit is finally approved, or the other
action by the appellant is authorized, and the building or alteration, as the case may be,
shall be completed within three (3) years of said date. For good cause, the Zoning
Hearing Board may at any time, upon application in writing extend either of these
deadlines;
b. Should the appellant or applicant fail to obtain the necessary permits within said two (2)
year period, or having obtained the permit, should he fail to commence work thereunder
within such two (2) year period, it shall be conclusively presumed that the appellant or
applicant has waived, withdrawn, or abandoned his appeal or his application, and all
provisions, variances and permits granted to him shall be deemed automatically rescinded
by the Zoning Hearing Board;
c. Should the appellant or applicant commence construction or alteration within said two (2)
year period, but should he fail to complete such construction or alteration within said
three (3) year period, the Zoning Hearing Board may, upon ten (10) days’ notice in
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 3)
PART 3-20
Administration & Enforcement
writing, rescind or revoke the granted variance or special exception, or the issuance of the
permit, or permits, or the other action authorized to the appellant or applicant, if the
Zoning Hearing Board finds that no good cause appears for the failure to complete within
such three (3) year period, and if the Zoning Hearing Board further finds that conditions
have so altered or changed in the interval since the granting of the variance, permit or
action, that revocation or rescission of the action is justified; and,
d. As an alternative to the preceding, an applicant can request, as part of the original
application before the Zoning Hearing Board, the granting of a timetable associated with
the request which would supersede the deadlines imposed. In so doing, the applicant
must demonstrate that the times requested are logically related to normal and expected
progress of the project. In approving a timetable under this section, the Zoning Hearing
Board must establish and bind a definite time frame for (1) issuance of a zoning permit,
and (2) completion of construction of the project.
E. Zoning Hearing Board’s Functions
The Zoning Hearing Board shall have the exclusive jurisdiction to hear and render decisions in the
following matters:
1. Substantive Challenges to the Validity of this Chapter, except those brought before the Borough
Council of the Borough of Highspire pursuant to Section 916.1(a)(2) of the PAMPC.
a. If a challenge heard by a Zoning Hearing Board is found to have merit, the decision of
the Zoning Hearing Board shall include recommended amendments to the challenged
Chapter which will cure the defects found. In reaching its decision, the Zoning Hearing
Board shall consider the amendments, plans and explanatory material submitted by the
landowner and shall also consider:
(1) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water supplies, schools
and other public service facilities;
(2) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the proposal upon regional
housing needs and the effectiveness of the proposal in providing housing units
of a type actually available to and affordable by classes of persons otherwise
unlawfully excluded by the challenged provisions of this Chapter or Official
Zoning Map;
(3) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by the site’s soils,
slopes, woodland, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers, natural resources and other
natural features;
(4) The impact of the proposed use on the site’s soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands,
floodplains, natural resources and nature features, the degree to which these are
protected or destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to development and any
adverse environmental impacts; and,
(5) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture and other land uses
which are essential to public health and welfare;
b. Public notice of the hearing shall be provided as specified in Section 315.D of this
Chapter.
c. The Zoning Hearing Board shall commence its hearings within sixty (60) days after the
request is filed unless the landowner requests or consents to an extension of time; and,
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 3)
PART 3-21
Administration & Enforcement
d. The Zoning Hearing Board, shall render its decision with forty-five (45) days after the
conclusion of the last hearing. If the Board fails to act on the landowner’s request within
this time limit a denial of the request is deemed to have occurred on the forty sixth (46th)
day after the close of the last hearing;
2. Challenges to the Validity of this Chapter, raising procedural questions or alleged defects in the
process of enactment or adoption which challenges shall be raised by an appeal taken within thirty
(30) days after the effective date of this Chapter;
3. Special Exceptions as provided for in this Chapter and subject to all applicable requirements,
including, but not limited to:
a. Filing Requirements. In addition to the required zoning permit information, each special
exception application shall include the following:
(1) Ground floor plans and elevations or proposed structures;
(2) Names and address of abutting property owners including properties directly
across a public right-of-way;
(3) A scaled drawing (site/plot plan) of the site with sufficient detail and accuracy to
demonstrate compliance with all applicable provisions of this Chapter; and,
(4) A written description of the proposed use in sufficient detail to demonstrate
compliance with all applicable provisions of this Chapter;
b. General Criteria. Each applicant must demonstrate compliance with the following:
(1) The proposed use shall be consistent with the purpose and intent of this Chapter;
(2) The proposed use shall not detract from the use and enjoyment of adjacent or
nearby properties;
(3) The proposed use will not substantially change the character of the
subject property’s neighborhood;
(4) Adequate public facilities are available to serve the proposed use (e.g., schools,
fire, police and ambulance protection, sewer, water and other utilities, vehicular
access, etc.);
(5) The proposed use complies with Part 15 of this Chapter, Floodplain Overlay
Regulations;
(6) The proposed use shall comply with those criteria specifically listed in Part 14
of this Chapter. In addition, the proposed use must comply with all other
applicable regulations contained in this Chapter; and,
(7) The proposed use will not substantially impair the integrity of the the most
recent version of any officially adopted Highspire Borough Comprehensive
Plan.
c. Conditions. The Zoning Hearing Board in approving special exception applications, may
attach conditions considered necessary to protect the public welfare and the purposes
listed above, including conditions which are more restrictive than those established for
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 3)
PART 3-22
Administration & Enforcement
other uses in the same zoning district. The conditions shall be enforceable by the Zoning
Officer and failure to comply with such conditions shall constitute a violation of this
Chapter and,
d. Plot/Site Plan Approval. Any site/plot plan presented in support of the special exception
pursuant to Section 315.E.1.a(3) shall become an official part of the record for said
special exception. Approval of any special exception will also bind the use in accordance
with the submitted site/plot plan; therefore, should a change in the site/plot plan be
required as part of the approval of the use, the applicant shall revise the site plan prior to
the issuance of a zoning permit. Any subsequent change to the use on the subject
property not reflected on the originally approved site/plot plan, shall require the
obtainment of another special exception approval;
4. Variances. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear requests for Variances where it is alleged that the
provisions of this Chapter inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. The Zoning Hearing
Board may, by rule, prescribe the form of application to the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Hearing
Board may grant a Variance, provided that all of the following findings are made where relevant
in a given case:
a. That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including irregularity,
narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other
physical conditions peculiar to the particular property and the unnecessary hardship is
due to such conditions, and not the circumstances or conditions generally created by the
provisions of this Chapter in the neighborhood or zoning district in which the property is
located;
b. That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is not a possibility that
the property can be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of this Chapter and
that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable reasonable use of the
property;
c. That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant;
d. That the Variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the zoning district
or neighborhood in which the property is located, nor substantially or permanently impair
the appropriate use or development of adjacent property, not be detrimental to the public
welfare;
e. That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance that will afford
relief and will represent the least modification possible of the regulations in issue;
f. The proposed use complies with Part 15 of this Chapter, Floodplain Overlay Regulations;
g. Filing Requirements. In addition to the required zoning permit each variance application
shall include the following:
(1) Ground floor plans and elevations of existing and/or proposed structures;
(2) Names and addresses of adjoining property owners, including properties directly
across a public right-of-way;
(3) A scaled drawing (site plan) of the site with sufficient detail and accuracy to
demonstrate compliance with all applicable provisions of this Chapter; and,
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 3)
PART 3-23
Administration & Enforcement
(4) A written description of the proposed use in sufficient detail to demonstrate
compliance with all applicable provisions of this Chapter;
h Conditions. The Zoning Hearing Board in approving Variance applications, may attach
conditions considered necessary to protect the public welfare and the purposes listed
above, including conditions which are more restrictive than those established for other
uses in the same zoning district. These conditions shall be enforceable by the Zoning
Officer and failure to comply with such conditions will constitute a violation of this
Chapter; and,
i. Plot/Site Plan Approval. Any site/plot plan presented in support of a Variance shall
become an official part of the record for said Variance. Approval of any Variance will
also bind the use in accordance with the submitted site plan;
5. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including, but not limited to, the granting
or denial of any permit, or failure to act on the application therefore, the issuance of any cease and
desist order or the registration or refusal to register any nonconforming use, structure or lot;
6. Appeals from the determination of any officer or agency charged with the administration of any
transfers of development rights or performance density provisions of this Chapter;
7. Appeals from the Zoning Officer’s determination under Section 916.2 (and any subsequent
amendments) of the MPC; and,
8. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or municipal engineer in the administration
of any land use ordinance with reference to sedimentation and erosion control, and/or storm water
management for applications not involving a subdivision/land development.
F. Parties Appellant before the Zoning Hearing Board
Appeals under Sections 315.E.5; 315.E.6; 315.E.7; and 315.E.8and proceedings to challenge this Chapter
under Section 315.E may be filed with the Zoning Hearing Board in writing by the landowner affected, any
officer or agency of the Borough of Highspire, or any person aggrieved. Requests for a variance or a
special exception may be filed with the Zoning Hearing Board by any landowner or any tenant with the
permission of such landowner. Any appeal shall state:
1. The name and address of the appellant and applicant;
2. The name and address of the landowner of the real estate to be affected;
3. A brief description and location of the real estate to be affected by such proposed change together
with a plot/site plan drawn to scale with sufficient clarity to show the nature and character of the
request;
4. A statement of the present zoning classification of the real estate in question, the improvements
thereon, and the present use thereof; and,
5. A statement of the Section of this Chapter under which the request may be allowed, and reasons
why it should, or should not be granted.
G. Time Limitations
1. No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the Zoning Hearing Board later than thirty
(30) days after an application for development, preliminary or final, has been approved by the
Zoning Officer or the agency responsible for granting such approval if such proceeding is
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 3)
PART 3-24
Administration & Enforcement
designed to secure reversal or to limit the approval in any manner unless such person alleges and
proves that he had no notice or knowledge, or reason to believe that such approval had been given.
If such person has succeeded to his interest after such approval, he shall be bound by the
knowledge of his predecessor in interest.
2. The failure of anyone other than the landowner to appeal from an adverse decision by the Zoning
Officer a challenge to the validity of this Chapter or the Official Zoning Map pursuant to Section
916.2 of the MPC, as amended, shall preclude an appeal from a final approval except in the case
where the final submission substantially deviates from the approved tentative preliminary
approval.
H. Stay of Proceeding
1. Upon filing of any proceeding referred to in Section 315.F above and during its pendency before
the Zoning Hearing Board, all land development pursuant to any challenged ordinance, order or
approval of the Zoning Officer or of any agency or body, and all official action thereunder, shall
be stayed unless the Zoning Officer or any other appropriate agency or body certifies to the
Zoning Hearing Board facts indicating that such stay would cause imminent peril to life or
property, in which case, the development or official action shall not be stayed otherwise than by a
restraining order, which may be granted by the Zoning Hearing Board or by the court having
jurisdiction of zoning appeals on petition after notice to the Zoning Officer or other appropriate
agency or body. When an application for development, preliminary or final, has been duly
approved and proceedings designed to reverse or limit the approval are filed with the Zoning
Hearing Board by person other than the applicant, the applicant may petition the court having
jurisdiction of zoning appeals to order such person to post bond as a condition to continuing the
proceedings before the Zoning Hearing Board. After the petition is presented, the court shall hold
a hearing to determine if the filing of the appeal is frivolous. At the hearing, evidence may be
presented on the merits of the case. It shall be the burden of the applicant for a bond to prove the
appeal is frivolous. After consideration of all evidence presented, if the court determines that the
appeal is frivolous it shall grant the petition for a bond. The right to petition the court to order the
appellants to post bond may be waived by the appellee but such waiver may be revoked by him if
an appeal is taken from a final decision of the court. The question whether or not such petition
should be granted and the amount of the bond shall be within the sound discretion of the court.
An order denying a petition for bond shall be interlocutory. An order directing the responding
party to post a bond shall be interlocutory.
2. If an appeal is taken by a respondent to the petition for a bond from an order of the court
dismissing a zoning appeal for refusal to post a bond and the appellant court sustains the order of
the court below to post a bond, the respondent to the petition for a bond, upon motion of the
petitioner and after hearing in the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals, shall be liable for all
reasonable costs, expenses, and attorney fees incurred by the petitioner.
I. Appeal
Any person, taxpayer, or the Borough of Highspire aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board
may within thirty (30) days after such decision of the Zoning Hearing Board seek review by the Court of
Common Pleas of such decision in the manner provided by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and the MPC as amended.
Section 316. Conditional Uses
A. Filing of Conditional Use. For any use permitted by conditional use, a conditional use must be
obtained from the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire. In addition to the information
required on the zoning permit application, the conditional use application must show:1. Ground
floor plans and elevations or proposed structures;
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 3)
PART 3-25
Administration & Enforcement
2. Names and address of abutting property owners including properties directly across a public rightof-
way;
3. A scaled drawing (site/plot plan) of the site with sufficient detail and accuracy to demonstrate
compliance with all applicable provisions of this Chapter; and,
4. A written description of the proposed use in sufficient detail to demonstrate compliance with all
applicable provisions of this Chapter;
5. General Criteria. Each applicant must demonstrate compliance with the following:
a The proposed use shall be consistent with the purpose and intent of this Chapter;
b The proposed use shall not detract from the use and enjoyment of adjacent or nearby
properties;
c The proposed use will not substantially change the character of the
subject property’s neighborhood;
d Adequate public facilities are available to serve the proposed use (e.g., schools, fire,
police and ambulance protection, sewer, water and other utilities, vehicular access, etc.);
e The proposed use complies with Part 15 of this Chapter, Floodplain Overlay Regulations;
f. The proposed use shall comply with those criteria specifically listed in Part 14 of this
Chapter. In addition, the proposed use must comply with all other applicable regulations
contained in this Chapter; and,
g. The proposed use will not substantially impair the integrity of the most recent version of
any officially adopted Highspire Borough Comprehensive Plan ;
C. Conditions. The Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire in approving conditional use applications,
may attach conditions considered necessary to protect the public welfare and the purposes listed above,
including conditions which are more restrictive than those established for other uses in the same zone.
These conditions shall be enforceable by the Zoning Officer and failure to comply with such conditions
shall constitute a violation of this Chapter;
D. Plot/Site Plan Approval. Any plot/site plan presented in support of the conditional use shall become an
official part of the record for said conditional use. Approval of any conditional use will also bind the use in
accordance with the submitted site/plot plan; therefore, should a change in the plot/site plan be required as
part of the approval of the use, the applicant shall revise the site/plot plan prior to the issuance of a zoning
permit. Any subsequent change to the use on the subject property not reflected on the originally approved
plot/site plan shall require the obtainment of another conditional use approval;
E. Hearing Procedures:
1. Before voting on the approval of a conditional use, the Borough Council of the Borough of
Highspire shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public notice. The Borough Council of
the Borough of Highspire shall submit each such application to the Borough of Highspire Planning
Commission at least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing held upon an application to provide the
Borough of Highspire Planning Commission an opportunity to submit recommendations. If, after
any public hearing held upon an application, the proposed application is revised, the Borough
Council shall hold another public hearing, pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to vote on
the application;
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 3)
PART 3-26
Administration & Enforcement
2. Public notice as defined herein, shall be provided. In addition, the Borough Council shall notify in
writing by mail the applicant, Zoning Officer, and other such persons whether owners or tennants
of property located within two hundred (200) feet of the subject property for which the application
was submitted, and every other person or organization who shall have registered with the Borough
for the purposes of receiving such notices, and other persons as the Borough Council shall
designate by ordinance, and to any person who has made timely request for the same. Written
notices shall be given at such time and in such manner as shall be prescribed by ordinance or, in
the absence of ordinance provisions, by rules of the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire.
In addition to the written notice provided herein, written notice of said hearing shall be
conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land at least one week prior to the hearing;
3. The Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire may prescribe reasonable fees with respect to
hearings. Fees for said hearings may include compensation for the secretary, notice and
advertising costs, and necessary administrative overhead connected with the hearing. The costs,
however, shall not include legal expenses, expenses for engineering, architectural, or other
technical consultants, or expert witness costs;
4. The parties to the hearing shall be the Borough of Highsprie, any person affected by the
application who has made timely appearance of record before the Borough Council of the Borough
of Highspire, and any other person, including civic or community organizations permitted to
appear by the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire. The Borough Council of the
Borough of Highspire shall have power to require that all persons who wish to be considered
parties enter appearance in writing on forms provided by the Borough Council of the Borough of
Highspire for that purpose;
5. The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire shall have
power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant documents and paper, including witnesses and documents requested by the
parties;
6. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall be afforded the opportunity
to respond and present evidence and argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all
relevant issues;
7. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence
may be excluded;
8. The Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire may keep a stenographic record of the
proceedings. The appearance fee for a stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and
the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire. The cost of the original transcript shall be paid
by the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire if the transcript is ordered by the Borough
Council of the Borough of Highspire; or shall be paid by the person appealing the decision of the
Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire if such appeal is made, and in either event, the cost
of additional copies shall be paid by the person requesting such copy or copies. In other cases the
party requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof; and,
9. The Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire shall not communicate, directly or indirectly,
with any party or his representatives in connection with any issue involved except upon notice and
opportunity for all parties to participate, shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff
memoranda, or other materials, except advice from their solicitor, unless parties are afforded an
opportunity to contest the material so noticed and shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after
the commencement of hearings with any party or his representative unless all parties are given an
opportunity to be present,
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 3)
PART 3-27
Administration & Enforcement
10. The hearing shall be conducted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire or the
Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire may appoint any member or an independent
attorney as a hearing officer. The decision, or, where there is no decision, the findings shall be
made by the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire. However, the appellant or the
applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the Borough of Highspire, may, prior to the decision
of the hearing, waive decision or findings by the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire
and accept the decision or findings of the hearing officer as final.
11. The Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire shall render a written decision or, when no
decision is called for, make written finds on the conditional use application within forty-five (45)
days after the last hearing before the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire. Where the
application is contested or denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact or
conclusions based thereon, together with any reasons therefore. Conclusions based on any
provisions of this Chapter or of any ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the
provision relied on and the reasons way the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the
facts found.
12. Where the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire fails to render the decision within the
period required by this Part or fails to commence, conduct or complete the required hearing as
provided in Section 317.E.2, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the
applicant unless the applicant has agreed in writing or on the record of an extension of time.
When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of the failure of the Borough
Council of the Borough of Highspire to meet or render a decision as hereinabove provided, the
Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire shall give public notice of the decision within ten
(10) days from the last day it could have met to render a decision in the same manner as required
by the public notice requirements of this Part. If the Borough Council of the Borough of
Highspire shall fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do so.
F. Time Limitation
1. If a conditional use is granted, the necessary permit shall be secured and the authorized action
begun within two (2) years after the date when the conditional use is finally granted, and the
building or alteration, as the case may be, shall be completed within three (3) years of said date.
For good cause, the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire may at any time, upon
application in writing, extend either of these deadlines;
2. Should the appellant or applicant fail to obtain the necessary permits within said two (2) year
period, or having obtained the permit should he fail to commence work thereunder within such
two (2) year period, it shall be conclusively presumed that the appellant or applicant has waived,
withdrawn, or abandoned his application, and all approvals and permits granted to him shall be
deemed automatically rescinded by the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire;
3. Should the appellant commence construction or alternation within said two (2) year period, but
should he fail to complete such construction or alteration within said three (3) year period, the
Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire may, upon ten (10) days notice in writing, rescind
or revoke the granted conditional use, if the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire finds
that no good cause appears for the failure to complete within such three (3) year period, and if the
Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire further finds that conditions have altered or
changed in the interval since the granting of the conditional use that revocation or rescission of the
action is justified; and,
4. As an alternative to the preceding, an applicant can request, as part of the original application
before the Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire the granting of a timetable associated
with the request which would supersede the deadlines imposed in this Part. In so doing, the
applicant must demonstrate that the times requested are logically related to normal and expected
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 3)
PART 3-28
Administration & Enforcement
progress of the project. In approving a timetable under this section, the Borough Council of the
Borough of Highspire must establish and bind a definite time frame for (1) issuance of a zoning
permit, and (2) completion of construction of the project.
RETTEW
Draft Date: March 21, 2012
Enacted Date: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 4)
PART 4-1
General Regulations
PART 4
GENERAL REGULATIONS
Section 400. Application. The regulations contained in this Part shall apply to all uses within the Borough of
Highspire.
Section 401. Accessory Buildings and Similar Structures
A. No accessory building or similar structure shall be constructed upon a lot until the construction of the
principal building has been actually begun and except as provided elsewhere in this Chapter. Unless
otherwise specified elsewhere in this Chapter, accessory buildings and similar structures, including but not
limited to detached garages, barns, storage buildings, garden structures and greenhouses (not used for
commercial purposes), may be erected in accordance with the following requirements:
1. Accessory buildings and similar structures shall not be erected, set, placed or otherwise permitted
to be located between the principal building and the public street (excluding alleys) or within any
required front setback area within any zoning district, unless otherwise provided herein this
Chapter.
2. Accessory buildings and similar structures may be erected, set, or placed inside rear or side yards
provided that:
a. Accessory buildings and similar structures shall be no more than two hundred (200)
square feet in ground floor area and no more than fifteen (15) feet in height shall be
exempted from building permit requirements; provided, however, that the structure:
(1). does not involve any electrical, plumbing or mechanical installation;
(2). shall not be required to have a permanent foundation or be set on piers, provided
the structure is sited on a level and stabilized area and anchored down by an
approved method for wind load requirements.
Otherwise, all accessory buildings and similar structures shall comply with all applicable
standards herein this Chapter and Chapter 5 of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of
Highspire relating to buildings.
b. Accessory buildings and similar structures shall be located no closer than five (5) feet to
the nearest wall of the principal building on the same lot. For accessory buildings and
similar structures erected, set or placed less than five (5) feet from the principal, they
shall be attached to the principal building and shall be considered as part of that principal
building.
c. Except as otherwise provided herein the subsection, accessory buildings and similar
structures shall comply with the dimensional requirements of the underlying zoning
district relating to accessory buildings and similar structures, except that detached
garages adjacent to and having access to an alley, shall be setback at least five (5) feet
from the right-of-way or fifteen (15) feet from the centerline of the alley, whichever is
greater.
(1). Accessory buildings and similar structures involving “children’s swing sets” and
related accessory child related “play equipment”, “tree houses” and “play
houses”, shall be setback at least three (3) feet from any abutting lot line and
shall not be located between the principal building and the public street
RETTEW
Draft Date: March 21, 2012
Enacted Date: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 4)
PART 4-2
General Regulations
(excluding alleys), nor within any required front setback area of within any
zoning district.
d Accessory buildings and similar structures in the R-L, R-M, MN/C zoning districts and/or
upon a lot with a residential use upon it shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of gross floor
area of the principal building. But in all zoning districts, in no case shall the footprint of
an accessory building or similar structure exceed the footprint of the principal building.
e. Accessory buildings and similar structures with a permanent foundation shall be
calculated as part of any impervious lot coverage standards or requirements.
Section 402. Bus Shelters
A. A bus or public transit shelter shall be allowed in all zoning districts to provide refuge for mass transit
riders from adverse weather conditions.
B. Only the following signs shall be permitted:
1. One two-sided sign with a maximum sign area of eight (8) square feet, which shall only be
internally illuminated in the C-G and I zoning districts.
2. Non-illuminated signs identifying the name of the transit provider, route schedules and maps.
C. The location of a bus shelter shall not interfere with pedestrian traffic along a sidewalk and shall be not
located within a clear-sight triangle.
D. There shall be a legally binding commitment provided by a responsible entity to properly maintain the bus
shelter and to remove the shelter if it is not needed in the future or if it falls into disrepair.
E. Shelters shall be durably constructed and be covered by a roof. For security and safety purposes, the
majority of the side and rear walls of the shelter shall be conducted of a clear, shatter resistant material.
F. Any light bulbs or lighting elements shall not be directly visible from outside the shelter. Glare shall not be
created.
Section 403. Buffer and Screening Regulations
A. Where permitted non-residential and mixed uses in the CBD, C-G and I zoning districts abut the R-L and
R-M zoning districts; and where permitted non-residential, multi-family dwellings/apartment, and single
family attached uses in the R-L and R-M zoning districts abut a lot with an existing single family detached,
single family semi-detached, or two family detached dwelling in the R-L and R-M zoning districts, the
aforementioned non-residential, multi-family dwelling/apartment, and single family attached use shall
provide a ten (10) foot wide buffer yard and screening, unless otherwise stipulated in this Chapter. The
buffer yard and screening shall be provided on the lot proposed for development and extend the entire
length or width of the lot line abutting either the R-L and R-M zoning districts or the single family
detached, single family semi-detached, or two family detached dwelling lots in the R-L and R-M zoning
districts as required herein above.
1. Otherwise, in the MN/C zoning district where permitted non-residential, multi-family
dwellings/apartments, single family attached, or mixed uses abut a lot with an existing single
family detached, single family semi-detached, or two family detached dwelling in the MN/C
zoning district, the aforementioned non-residential, multi-family dwellings/apartments, single
family attached, or mixed uses shall provide a five (5) foot wide buffer yard and screening with no
less than ninety (90) percent opacity.
RETTEW
Draft Date: March 21, 2012
Enacted Date: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 4)
PART 4-3
General Regulations
B. No buffer yard shall be required for any non-residential, multi-family dwellings/apartments, single family
attached, or mixed use separated from the applicable R-L and R-M zoning districts or single or two family
residential dwelling lots in the R-L and R-M zoning district by a public street right-of-way including alleys.
C. All buffer yard areas shall be planted and maintained with vegetative cover and material, and where
required, screen plantings no less than eighty (80) percent opacity shall be planted and maintained to the
full length or width of the required buffer yard.
D. Buffer yards may coincide within any required building setback and yard requirements.
E. The buffer yard shall be a landscaped, and where required, screen planted area free of buildings; structures;
dumpsters and refuse containers; commercial or industrial sales, storage and display; manufacturing or
processing activity; materials; loading and unloading areas; and vehicle parking, sales, and display. Signs
shall be permitted in a buffer yard abutting a street right-of-way (excluding alleys).
F. Buffer yards may be crossed by access drives, driveways, sidewalks, or easements with a maximum width
of thirty-five (35) feet, provided that the centerline of access drive, driveway or easement crosses the lot
line and buffer yard at not less than seventy-five (75) degrees; however, no turning or maneuvering of
vehicles shall be permitted in the buffer yard area.
G. Screen Planting
1. Each buffer yard shall include screen plantings located in the exterior portion of the required
buffer yards, extending the length or width of the lot line in accordance with the following
requirements:
a. Plant materials used in screen planting shall be at least four (4) feet in height (measured
from the finished grade) when planted, shall be planted no more than three (3) feet apart,
and be of such species as will produce, within three (3) years, a complete year-round
visual screen of at least six (6) feet in height.
b. The screen planting shall be maintained permanently in a healthy condition. Any
landscaping that dies or is severely damaged shall be replaced by the current property
owner as soon as is practical considering growing seasons, within a maximum of one
hundred fifty (150) days.
c. The screen planting shall be so placed that at maturity it will be not closer than two (2)
feet from any street right-of-way or property line.
d. In order to aid surveillance and minimize the potential for crime, planting shall also be
sited, massed, and scaled to maintain visibility of doors and first (1st) or ground floor
windows from the street and from within the development to the greatest extent possible.
Planting patterns shall not obstruct sight lines or create isolated areas, especially near
pedestrian walking paths. A clear sight triangle shall be maintained at all street
intersections and at all points where access drives and driveways intersect public streets.
e. The screen plant screen shall be interrupted only at:
(1). approved points of approximately perpendicular [not less than seventy-five (75)
degrees] vehicle or pedestrian ingress and egress to the lot;
(2). locations necessary to complywith safe sight distance requirements; and
(3). locations needed to meet other specific State, Highspire Borough and utility
requirements.
RETTEW
Draft Date: March 21, 2012
Enacted Date: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 4)
PART 4-4
General Regulations
f. Trees that are used in the planting of a buffer yard and elsewhere on the lot shall be in
accordance with those identified within Chapter 22, relating to subdivision and land
development or Chapter 25 relating to trees, of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough
of Highspire.
(1). American Arborvitae and similar weak-stem plants shall not be used to meet the
buffer yard requirements. If more than twenty (20) evergreen plants are
proposed, no more than fifty (50) percent shall be of one species.
g. Screen plantings shall be provided between the lot line and any off-street parking area
and any outdoor solid waste storage and refuse area for any non-residential, multi-family
dwelling/apartment, single family attached, and/or mixed use where the parking or solid
waste storage and refuse area abuts the R-L and R-Mzoning districts or a lot occupied by
a single family detached, single family semi-detached, or two family detached use.
h. Fencing shall be permitted to comprise no more than sixty (60) percent of any screen
planting, and shall be shall be placed in the buffer yard on the inside (towards the
proposed principal use) of any required plant screening.
Section 404. Fences andWalls
A. Fences and walls shall be permitted by right in all zoning districts, but it shall be unlawful to construct or
alter any fence or wall without first having secured a permit as provided in Part 3 of this Chapter.
B. Fences and walls are permitted without complying with any setback requirements except they shall not be
installed directly on any lot line; however a small setback is recommended to provide future maintenance.
C. Fences and walls shall be durably constructed and well-maintained. Fences and walls that have deteriorated
parts and materials shall be replaced or removed.
D. No fence or wall shall obstruct the clear-sight triangle requirements of this Chapter.
E. No fence or wall shall be erected in a street right-of-way or other rights-of-way or easements including
public or private drainage, utility or access easements, unless otherwise required by this Chapter or any
other Chapters of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire. .
F. Fences, in addition to the applicable standards provided herein Section 404, shall also comply with the
following:
1. Any fence located between the principal building and the street (excluding alley) in the R-L, R-M,
MN/C and CBD district shall:
a. be an open-type of fence (such as picket, metal post, wrought iron or split rail) with a
minimum ratio of 1:1 of open structural areas;
b. not exceed forty eight-(48) inches in height;
c. not be constructed of “chain link” material or pattern. Fences shall not be constructed of
corrugated metal, corrugated fiberglass or sheet metal. Fences are encouraged to be
constructed using weather resistant wood, vinyl materials that resemble wood, or vinyl
materials that resemble historic style metal post fences.
RETTEW
Draft Date: March 21, 2012
Enacted Date: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 4)
PART 4-5
General Regulations
2. Fences within the R-L, R-M, MN/C, and CBD zoning districts or upon a lot with a residential use
upon it shall not exceed eight (8) feet six (6) inches in height. Fences within the other zoning
districts shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height.
a. Any fence or wall exceeding six (6) feet in height shall contain openings therein equal to
fifty (50) percent of the area of that portion of the wall or fence exceeding six (6) feet.
3. Structural posts of a fence may extend above the height of the fence.
4. All fence heights shall be measured from the average surrounding ground level.
5. Unless required for security purposes, no fence shall be constructed of barbed wire, razor, or other
sharp components capable of causing injury, and only then if the barbed wire, razor, or other sharp
components capable of causing injury portion is not lower than six (6) feet above the average
surrounding ground level.
6. No fence shall be constructed out of fabric, junk, abandoned vehicles, appliances, tanks or barrels.
7. If one side of a fence includes posts and supports creating a framework, the framework shall be
placed on the inside of the fence (the side facing toward the interior of the lot upon which is
located), as opposed to facing onto a street or abutting lots, unless the fence is so designed as to
provide equal frame and cover area toward the street or abutting lots.
8. If a fence is “finished” only on one side, the “finished” side shall be placed and face outward away
from or to toward the exterior of the lot or parcel upon which it is located, as opposed toward the
interior of the lot.
9. Brick may be used for posts or as a base for a fence, provided the maximum fence height for the
fence portion is not exceeded.
G. Walls, in addition to the applicable standards provided herein subection F above, shall also complywith the
following standards:
1. Engineered retaining walls necessary to hold back slopes are exempted from the regulations of this
Section and are permitted by right as needed in all zoning districts.
2. Walls that are structurally part of a building shall be regulated as part of that building.
Section 405. Frontage onto Improved Streets
A. Frontage required on improved streets shall comply with the following:
1. Each proposed new lot and principal building shall directly abut one of the following:
a. a public street right-of-way (excluding alleys):
b. a street proposed to be dedicated to the Borough of Highspire by the subdivision plan
which created such lot; or
c. an existing (at date of adoption of this Chapter) private street which meets all of the
requirements of a public street.
2. The erection of a principal building on any lot which existed at the time of the enactment of this
Chapter and does not have frontage on a public street right-of-way (excluding alleys) shall be
permitted if the applicant provides proof of access to the property in the form of a legal document
RETTEW
Draft Date: March 21, 2012
Enacted Date: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 4)
PART 4-6
General Regulations
recorded at the Dauphin County courthouse. If the existing document does not address access
rights and maintenance responsibilities between the landowner and effected parties, or if no such
document exists, a new document shall be recorded that does address these issues. In addition, the
landowner shall enter into a binding legal agreement with the Borough of Highspire prepared by
the Borough of Highspire Solicitor outlining the responsibility of each party as it pertains to the
private right-of-way.
3. Access to lots and principal buildings shall comply with Part 19 of this Chapter and Chapter 22
Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire relating to subdivision and land development.
Section 406. Garage and Yard Sales
A. In any zoning district, a landowner and/or occupant, may conduct a maximum of two (2) garage or yard
sales per year. The total number of garage or yard sales permitted per calendar year shall not exceed two
(2) per unit of occupancy.
B. No garage or yard sale shall be conducted for a period longer than two (2) consecutive days.
C. Sales shall be limited to personal items.
D. Only two (2), six (6) square foot signs shall be permitted advertising the garage or yard sale located upon
the premises where the sale occurs, and shall be removed promptly upon the completion of the sale. No
signs shall be permitted within any public right-of-way.
E. In no case shall any aspect or the garage or yard sale interfere with or otherwise obstruct pedestrian and
vehicular traffic, and shall not be conducted in a public right-of-way including sidewalks and streets, except
that parking may occur where permitted.
F. The conduct of a garage or yard sale beyond the extent herein represents a commercial business and
requires appropriate zoning authorization.
Section 407. Habitable FloorArea
Unless otherwise provided herein this Chapter, the minimum residential dwelling and room sizes shall be in
accordance with the Chapter 5 relating to buildings and/or Chapter 10 relating to health and sanitation (property
maintenance) of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire.
Section 408. Height Regulations
A. In all zoning districts, height regulations shall not apply to the following structures, provided they do not
exceed the height limitations of the zoning district for which they are located by more than fifteen (15) feet:
1. penthouses including those not intended for human occupancy; nor
2. skylights, steeples of places of worship, antennas, flagpoles, spires, belfries, windmills, cupolas,
domes, chimneys, ventilators, water tanks, bulkheads, utility poles or towers, silos, clock or bell
towers, elevator shafts, mechanical equipment or other appurtenances usually required to be and
customarily placed above roof level and not intended for human occupancy.
B. Otherwise, the height of any building may exceed the maximum permitted height requirements by one (1)
additional foot for each one (1) additional foot by which the width of each yard exceeds the required
setback regulations for the zoning district in which the building or structure is located.
C. Unless otherwise provided herein this Chapter, the minimum principal building height shall not be less than
one (1) story in height
RETTEW
Draft Date: March 21, 2012
Enacted Date: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 4)
PART 4-7
General Regulations
Section 409. Landscaping & Vegetation Preservation
A. Any part of a non-residential, multi-family dwelling/apartment, single family attached, or mixed use lot
which is not used for structures, access drives, driveways, loading areas, parking spaces and aisles,
sidewalks and designated storage areas shall be provided with an all-season, well-maintained vegetative
groundcover, and shall be landscaped with trees and shrubs. Landscaped areas shall be kept free of debris,
rubbish and noxious weeds.
B. In order to aid surveillance and minimize the potential for crime, planting shall also be sited, massed, and
scaled to maintain visibility of doors and first (1st) or ground floor windows from the street and from
within the development to the greatest extent possible. Planting patterns shall not obstruct sight lines or
create isolated areas, especially near pedestrian walking paths. A clear sight triangle shall be maintained at
all street intersections and at all points where access drives and driveways intersect public streets.
C. Vegetation preservation
1. Vegetation preservation is governed by the standards in this Section and the provisions of the PA
MPC. The removal of trees, shrubbery, foliage, grass or other natural growth shall be permitted
when in conformance with the provisions of this Chapter or any other Chapters of the Codified
Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire regulating land use and subdivision/development. The
grubbing activity shall be permissible, upon zoning officer review and approval of the application
as required by the Borough. A permit shall be prepared and issued for an approved application.
Violations and penalties associated with cutting and clearing of vegetation include:
a. Forestry activities of timber harvesting and/or logging shall comply with Part 14 of this
Chapter.
b. The cutting of trees and/or clearing of vegetation within a buffer yard applicable to the lot
as required by this Chapter, or within the minimum building setback as required by this
Chapter, whichever is greater, is prohibited. Only the removal and replacement of
damaged/deceased trees and/or vegetation is permitted. Grubbing activity is permitted
where the purpose is to improve the appearance of the lot.
D. Shade Trees
1. As part of the construction of any new street or any new principal non-residential, multi-family
dwelling/apartment, single family attached, or mixed use building, shade trees shall be required to
be planted in accordance with Chapter 22 relating to subdivision and land development and 25
relating to trees of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire..
Section 410. Non-ResidentialWaste Handling Requirements
A. All non-residential uses shall be required to provide detailed information regarding materials and waste
handling, including:
1. Listing of all materials to be both used or produced on the site;
2. Listing of all wastes generated on the site; and
3. Evidence shall be provided indicating that the disposal of all materials and wastes shall be
accomplished in a manner that complies with state and Federal regulations. Such evidence shall, at
a minimum, include copies of contracts with waste haulers licensed to operate within the Borough
and/or County which have been contracted to dispose of the materials and wastes used or
generated on-site or some other legal means of disposal. The zoning permit for this use shall
RETTEW
Draft Date: March 21, 2012
Enacted Date: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 4)
PART 4-8
General Regulations
remain valid only so long as such contracts remain in effect and all materials and wastes are
properly disposed of on a regular basis. Should the nature of the use change in the future, such that
the materials used or wastes generated changes significantly either by type or amount, the owner
shall so inform the Zoning Officer, and shall provide additional evidence demonstrating continued
compliance with the requirements of this section.
Section 411. Number of Principal Uses and Principal Buildings Per Lot
A. A lot in the MN/C, CBD, C-G and I zoning may include more than one permitted principal use and/or
building provided all other requirements of this Chapter are met. If differing dimensional requirements
apply for different uses on the lot, then the most restrictive requirement shall apply.
1. For example, if “use A” requires twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of lot area and “use B” on
the same lot requires ten thousand (10,000) square foot lot area, then the lot shall have a minimum
lot area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
2. The lot may include a condominium form of ownership of individual buildings, with a legally
binding property owner or other similar type association, if the applicant proves to the satisfaction
of the Zoning Officer, based upon review by the Borough Solicitor, that there will be appropriate
legal mechanisms in place and compliance with applicable State law.
B. A lot within the R-L and R-M zoning districts shall not include more than one principal use and shall not
include more than one principal building unless specifically permitted by this Chapter.
1. A mobile home park, condominium residential development, single family attached, or multifamily
dwelling/apartment development may include more than one principal building per lot,
provided all other requirements of this Chapter are met.
2. A condominium form of ownership of individual dwelling units, with a legally binding
homeowners or other association, may be established if the applicant proves to the satisfaction of
the Zoning Officer, based upon review by the Borough Solicitor, that there will be appropriate
legal mechanisms in place and compliance with applicable State law.
Section 412. Ornamental Ponds
A. Ornamental ponds and wading pools shall comply with all accessory use and structure setbacks for the
zoning district which they are located.
B. All such ponds or pools shall be maintained so as not to pose a nuisance by reason of odor, or the harboring
of insect, vermin, or both.
C. Water may not be discharged from an ornamental pond or wading pool directly onto any public right-ofway
or within ten (10) feet of any adjacent propertywithout the applicable owner’s consent.
D. No such pond shall be used for the commercial hatching of fish or other species.
Section 413. Outdoor Storage and Outdoor Stockpiling
A. Unless otherwise permitted elsewhere in herein this Section and/or Part 14 of this Chapter, the outdoor
storage and outdoor stockpiling (including personal material, but excluding firewood) shall not be located
between the principal building and the public street (excluding alleys) nor within any required front, side,
or rear setback area.
B. Outdoor storage and outdoor stockpiling shall not include the sale of any bulk materials such as goods,
material, and merchandise offered for sale to customers as a principal use or as accessory use to a permitted
RETTEW
Draft Date: March 21, 2012
Enacted Date: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 4)
PART 4-9
General Regulations
principal use. Otherwise, it shall be considered outside sales and display and must comply with provisions
set forth elsewhere herein Part 4 and Part 14 of this Chapter
C. In the R-L, R-M, and MN/C zoning districts, on lots used for single and two-family residential purposes:
1. The outdoor stockpiling of personal material, except firewood, for more than one (1) year is
prohibited. In all instances, outdoor stockpiling of personal material shall not be located between
the principal building and the public street (excluding alleys) or within any required front setback
area. All such stockpiling shall comply with accessory use and structure setback requirements for
the underlying zoning district.
2. The outdoor stockpiling of non-personal including goods, junk, material, or merchandise
associated with and generated by an off-site business or non-residential establishment shall be
considered outdoor storage and shall not be permitted.
D. In the R-L, R-M, MN/C, and CBD zoning districts, the outdoor storage of bulk materials for nonresidential,
multi-family dwelling/apartment, single family attached, and mixed uses, including but not
limited to goods, material, and merchandise; but also including junk, waste, discarded or salvaged material,
machinery, or equipment, including automobile, truck, or other vehicle parts shall not be permitted. All
related storage must be within a completely enclosed building.
E. Unless otherwise specified Part 14 of this Chapter, in the C-G zoning district, permitted outdoor storage of
bulk materials whether or not intended for sale to customers including but not limited to goods, material, or
merchandise shall not be located between the principal building and the public street (excluding alleys) nor
within any required front setback area. The related storage of junk, waste, discarded or salvaged material,
machinery, or equipment, including automobile, truck, or other vehicle parts must be within a completely
enclosed building.
F. In the I zoning district:
1. The outdoor storage and outdoor stockpiling in may be located between the principal building and
the public street (excluding alleys), but shall not be within any required setback area.
2. All materials and activities not within completely enclosed buildings shall be surrounded by a
fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height. Such fence shall be completely sight obscuring and
maintained in good condition. Any gate in a fence shall be similarly constructed and maintained
and shall be kept securely locked at all times when the establishment is not in operation.
G. Compost
1. The placement of compost as an accessory use to a residential use of a lot is permitted, subject to
all accessory use, building, and structure setback setbacks of the underlying zoning district. Only
waste materials from the residential use of the lot shall be deposited within the compost, and in no
case shall meat, or meat by-products, dairy products or bones be composted. All compost shall be
properlymaintained so as not to become a nuisance to nearby properties.
Section 414. Outside Sales and Display
A. Outside sale and display of goods, material, and merchandise offered for sale shall be permitted in the
CBD, C-G, and I zoning districts.
B. To be considered outside sales and display, the goods, material, and merchandise which are being
displayed, must be offered for sale to customers. Otherwise, it shall be considered Outdoor Storage or
stockpiling must comply with Outdoor Storage and Outdoor Stockpile provisions set forth elsewhere herein
Part 4 of this Chapter.
RETTEW
Draft Date: March 21, 2012
Enacted Date: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 4)
PART 4-10
General Regulations
C. Except that within the CBD zoning district, outside sales and display may encroach upon the required front
setback, all outside sales and display of goods, material, and merchandise offered for sale shall not occupy
any public right-of-way (including public sidewalk areas), required set back areas, buffer yards, or required
parking and loading areas. In no case shall the location of such outside sales and display areas occur within
any area used for pedestrian or vehicular circulation, parking or loading, or emergency vehicle access (e.g.,
fire lanes).
1. Additionally, the location of the outside sales and displays shall not interfere with or otherwise
obstruct pedestrian and vehicular traffic:
a. traveling within a public right-of-way including sidewalks and streets (including alleys);
b. entering or leaving the lot or adjacent lots (including access drives and driveways); and
c. shall be not located within a clear-sight triangle.
D. No outside sales and display shall occur on areas with a slope in excess of twenty five (25) percent or
within any area designated as the floodway as provided for in Part 15 “FP” Floodplain Overlay District.
E. Outside sales and display areas shall be graded for proper drainage and shall be surfaced so as to provide a
durable and dustless surface, such as brick, concrete or bituminous concrete surface.
F. Outside sales and display areas shall be aligned and displayed in an orderly fashion so that circulation for
fire safety can be maintained at all times.
G. No signage, except as authorized by this Chapter, shall be permitted;
H. Intended outside sale and display areas shall be graphically depicted and other indicated upon any permits
and/or plans required by the Borough.
Section 415. Parking and Storage of Unlicensed orUninspectedMotorVehicles
A. Unless provided in elsewhere in another Chapter of the Codified Ordinances of Highspire Borough, motor
vehicles without current, valid license plates or inspection stickers which are more than sixty (60) days
beyond their expiration dates, shall not be parked or stored in any zoning district, unless stored within a
completely enclosed building or completely covered.
B. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to prevent the unenclosed storage of motor vehicles without
current, valid license plates and current valid inspection stickers if such storage is performed in conjunction
with the legal operation of a permitted motor vehicle sales establishment, a motor vehicle service or repair
establishment, or automobile wrecking, junk and scrap storage and sales.
Section 416. Performance Standards for all Uses
A. Compliance Required.
1. All uses shall comply with the requirements of this section. In order to determine whether a
proposed use will conform to the requirements of this Chapter, Highspire Borough may obtain a
qualified consultant's report, whose cost for services shall be borne by the applicant.
2. All projects that require the additional use of new facilities or essential services, such as sewers,
storm drains, fire hydrants, potable water, public streets, street lighting and similar services, shall
obtain such approval as required by the agency providing such service prior to project approval.
No availability of essential services shall be permitted to be grounds for denying permits for
RETTEW
Draft Date: March 21, 2012
Enacted Date: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 4)
PART 4-11
General Regulations
additional development until such services are available. The jurisdiction is not obligated to
extend or supply essential services if capacity is not available. If capacity is available, the
extension of services shall be by and at the cost of the developer, unless the jurisdiction agrees
otherwise. All service extensions shall be designed and installed in full conformance with the
jurisdiction’s standards for such service, and shall be subject to review, permit and inspection as
required by other policies or ordinances of the jurisdiction.
B. All uses shall be subject to and complywith the following regulations, or as amended, where applicable.
1. Vibration: Ground vibration inherently and recurrently generated on the lot and detectable
without instruments on any adjacent lot in any zoning district shall be prohibited, except that
temporary vibration as a result of construction or vehicles which leave the lot (such as trucks,
trains, airplanes and helicopters) shall be permitted. Otherwise all of the applicable “Rules and
Regulations” of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection shall be complied with.
2. Noise: Noise which is determined to be objectionable because of volume, frequency or beat shall
be muffled or otherwise controlled in accordance with Chapter 10 of the Codified Ordinances of
the Borough of Highspire relating to health and sanitation (noise control). For purposes of this
standard, the zoning districts listed in this Chapter shall correspond with the following districts in
Chapter 10:
Zoning Districts This Chapter Chapter 10
R-L, R-M, and PR/OS = Residential
MN/C, CBD, and C-G = Commercial
I = Manufacturing
3. Air Pollution. Airborne Emissions and Odor: No pollution of air by fly ash, dust, vapors or other
substance shall be permitted which is harmful to health, animals, vegetation or other property or
which can cause soiling of property. Otherwise all of the applicable “Rules and Regulations” of
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection shall be complied with.
4. Odors. A. No malodorous gas or matter shall be permitted which is discernible on any adjacent lot
or property.
5. Water Pollution: Water pollution shall be subject to the standards established by the Pennsylvania
Fish and Boat Commission, Department of Environmental Protection, and The Clean Streams
Law, June 22, 1937 P.L. 1987, 35 P.S. 691, or as amended.
6. Mine Reclamation and Open Pit Setback: Pennsylvania Act 147, the “Surface Mining
Conservation and Reclamation Act” of 1971, or as amended.
7. Glare and Heat: Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be conducted within an
enclosed building or with other effective screening in such a manner as to make such glare or heat
completely imperceptible from any point along the property line. No heat from any use shall be
sensed at any property line to the extent of raising the ambient temperature of air or materials
more than five (5) degrees Fahrenheit. Any operation or activity that produces glare shall be
conducted so that direct or indirect light from the source shall not cause illumination in excess of
five-tenths (0.5) footcandles measured at the property line. Otherwise all of the applicable “Rules
and Regulations” of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection shall be complied
with.
8. No use or operations shall be permitted which creates a public nuisance or hazard to adjoining
property by reason of fire, explosion, radiation or other similar cause. Additionally, all uses and
operations shall complywith the following:
RETTEW
Draft Date: March 21, 2012
Enacted Date: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 4)
PART 4-12
General Regulations
a. Electromagnetic interference
(1). In all zoning districts, no use, activity or process shall be conducted which
produces electric and/or magnetic fields which adversely affect public health,
safety and welfare, including but not limited to interference with normal radio,
telephone or television reception and/or transmission off the premises where the
activity is conducted.
b. Fire and explosive hazards
(1). Chapter 9 of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire shall regulate
hazards of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling or use of
substances, materials or devices and from conditions hazardous to life, property
or public welfare in the occupancy of a structure or premises.
c. Toxic and hazardous substance storage
(1). Storage of toxic and hazardous substance shall meet the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, Pennsylvania Labor and
Industry, and/or the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
9. Outdoor Lighting: Where on-site outdoor light fixtures are installed to provide exterior
illumination of buildings, parking areas, and other on-site facilities for non-residential, multifamily
dwelling/apartment, single family attached, and mixed uses, at a minimum all on-site,
outdoor lighting shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by employing hooded,
shielded, or screened fixtures that confine glare to the site, and security lighting should be directed
toward the building, rather than the area around it. Otherwise, the standards of Chapter 22 of the
Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire, relating to subdivision and land development,
restrictions shall apply. Outdoor lighting provisions herein do not include overhead street lighting
and warning, emergency, or traffic signals.
Section 417. Pets, Keeping Of
A. Keeping of pets is permitted by right accessory use in all zoning districts.
B. No use shall involve the keeping of animals or fowl in such a manner or of such types of animals that it
creates a serious nuisance (including noise or order), a health hazard or a public safety hazard. The owner
of the animals shall be responsible for collecting and properly disposing of all fecal matter from pets.
C. Keeping pets outdoors shall not permitted in the front of the principal building or front yard area, and shall
complywith the Chapter 2 of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire relating to animals, and
other applicable health and safety codes, as well as any applicable State regulations.
D. It shall be unlawful on a residential lot to maintain any “exotic wildlife” as defined by the Pennsylvania
Game & Wildlife Code, whether or not an exotic wildlife possession permit has been issued.
Section 418. Public Water and Sewage Required
A. Every principal building shall be served by public water and sewage services. However, if the Borough
would allow a dwelling unit without both public water and sewage services, then a minimum lot area of one
acre shall apply.
RETTEW
Draft Date: March 21, 2012
Enacted Date: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 4)
PART 4-13
General Regulations
Section 419. Projections into Required Setbacks
A. Patios, terraces, and decks and other similar uncovered structures without enclosed habitable foundations,
may extend into required setback areas not more than five (5) feet so long there is a minimum of five (5)
feet remaining between the structure and the lot line.
B. Cornices, eaves, sills or other similar architectural features, gutters, bay windows, chimneys, or similar
structures, may project into the front, side, or rear setback of a lot, not more than three (3) feet.
C. Exterior stairways, fire escapes or other required means of egress, ground-mounted doors for basement
access, window awnings, chase for heating pipes or other similar structures that do not include space usable
by persons may extend or project into a required setback area, except as may be required within a drainage
or utility easement.
D. Covered porches and those porches with enclosed habitable spaces, shall be considered as part of the
principal building and shall not project into any required setback area.
E. Walks, and window wells, and such other structures customarily incidental to the principal or accessory
building may project into the front, side or rear setback area of a lot providing the structure elevation shall
be not more than twelve (12) inches above the yard grade.
F. Handicapped ramps, and landings necessary to provide entrance to building may be located within a
required setback area. Handicapped ramps serving an existing building may extend into a right-of-way
where necessary, if granted written approval by the Zoning Officer, as long as a minimum of thirty six (36)
inch clear width of walkway is maintained when such ramp would encroach on an existing walkway. But in
no case shall ramps or landings extend into the cartway or any area of the street serving as a vehicle travel
or parking lane.
Section 420. Repair of Personal, Passenger, or RecreationalMotorVehicles
The routine maintenance, repair and servicing of personal, passenger, or recreational motor vehicles including gocarts
and racing vehicles, owned or leased by the person performing such services when performed outside of a
building, shall be permitted as an accessory use to residential use or building by the owner or occupant of the
residential use or building, subject to the following:
A. All vehicles shall be maintained with proper licensure.
B. All work shall be performed on the vehicle owner’s or lessee’s property of residence.
C. Work shall be limited to the following:
1. Servicing and replacement of spark plugs, batteries, distributors and distributor parts;
2. Repair and replacement of tires and wheels, excluding recapping or regrooving;
3. Replacement of water hoses, fan belts, brake fluids, transmission fluid, oil filters, air filters, oil,
grease, light bulbs, floor mats and carpeting, seat covers, seat belts, windshield wipers, mirrors
and engine coolants;
4. Repair and replacement of car radios, CD players, amplifiers, speakers, and similar electronic
devices;
5. Cleaning and flushing of radiators onlywhen flushed into water-tight container’
6. Repair and replacement of fuel pump and line repairs;
RETTEW
Draft Date: March 21, 2012
Enacted Date: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 4)
PART 4-14
General Regulations
7. Minor servicing and adjustments;
8. Minor motor adjustments, not involving the removal of the motor head or crankcase, nor the
prolonged revving of the motor;
9. Minor body repairs, excluding the replacement of body parts, the complete repainting of the body
and the application of undercoating;
10. Cleaning of all exterior and interior surfaces, including washing, shampooing, vacuuming, ribbing,
polishing, waxing, and the application of paint sealants.
D. All by-products or waste fuels, lubricants, chemicals, and other products shall be properly disposed of.
E. No vehicle shall be stored in a “jacked-up” position or on blocks for more than seventy two (72)
consecutive hours, unless completely covered.
F. All exterior work or that being completed outside of a completely enclosed building shall be performed
during daylight hours. Otherwise, all maintenance, repair and servicing operations occurring during times
other than daylight hours shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building and completely
undetectable from adjacent properties through soundproofing the building.
G. Neither of the following shall be maintained or repaired upon residential lots in the R-L, R-M, and/orMN/C
zoning districts:
1. Trucks with an aggregate gross weight of over 14,000 pounds;
2. Vehicles not owned or leased by a resident of the lot.
Section 421 Reverse Frontage Lots, or Through or Double Frontage Lots
A. Reverse frontage or through or double frontage lots shall follow the frontage, front and rear setback,
building and development orientation, and access patterns surrounding development of the majority of the
existing adjacent through or double frontage lots on the same shared block face (between two [2]
intersecting streets) along the same side of the street. Therefore, the building and development orientation,
frontage, location of front and rear setbacks, and access to the lot shall follow the majority of the existing
adjacent through or double frontage lots on the same shared block face (between two [2] intersecting
streets) along the same side of the street.
B. Where no other reverse frontage or through or double frontage lots exist nearby, such reverse frontage or
through or double frontage lots shall comply with Chapter 22 of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough
of Highspire relating to subdivision and land development and have two (2) required front yard and set
backs, one front yard on each street. Building and development orientation shall face the street conveying
the higher amount of daily traffic, while access to the lot shall be from the street conveying the lesser
amount of daily traffic.
Section 422. Sale of Personal, Passenger, orRecreational MotorVehicles
A. In any zoning district, a landowner or occupant may display a maximum of two (2) personal, passenger, or
recreational motor vehicles titled to the land owner or occupant of the building or lot, for sale at any time.
Such displays shall be for a maximum of sixty (60) days not more than twice a calendar year. Two (2) signs
a maximum of six (6) square feet each may be displayed per vehicle. All such vehicle sale activities shall
be in accordance with applicable state regulations.
B. Neither of the following shall be sold on residential lots in the R-L, R-M or MN/C zoning districts:
RETTEW
Draft Date: March 21, 2012
Enacted Date: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 4)
PART 4-15
General Regulations
1. Trucks with an aggregate gross weight of over 14,000 pounds;
2. Vehicles not owned or leased by a resident of the lot.
C. Otherwise, it shall be considered motor or automobile vehicle sales and must comply with all applicable
provisions set forth elsewhere of this Chapter.
Section 423. Satellite Dish Antennas
A. Satellite dish antennas are subject to all accessory use and structure standards except as provided herein this
section.
B. Satellite dish antennas shall comply with the following:
1. Consideration shall be given to the physical characteristics of the surrounding neighborhood, the
property, the location of existing structures, and the feasibility of obtaining reception in the siting
of satellite dish antennas.
2. Satellite dish antennas may be located on accessory structures, such as garages or sheds.
3. Satellite dish antennas attached to a structure shall be at least eight (8) feet above adjoining ground
level.
4. All freestanding, detached, ground mounted and freestanding satellite dish antennas shall comply
with the yard and setback requirements for accessory structures in the applicable zoning district.
5. In no case shall satellite dish antennas project into any public right-of-way (including streets,
alleys, sidewalks, etc).
6. The location of the satellite dish antennas shall not interfere with or otherwise obstruct pedestrian
and vehicular traffic:
a. Traveling within a public right-of-way including sidewalks and streets;
b. Entering or leaving the lot or adjacent lots (including access drives and driveways); and
c. Shall be not located within a clear-sight triangle as set forth in Chapter 22 of the Codified
Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire relating to subdivision and land development.
7. Notwithstanding the standards in this Section, these standards shall not conflict with or supersede
any rule or regulation relating satellite dishes as governed by the Federal Communications
Commission under the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996.
.
Section 424. Service Structures Screening and Location
A. Service structures and areas such as solid waste dumpsters, refuse and recycling containers, propone tanks,
air conditioning units (except window units) and condensers, electrical transformers and other equipment or
elements providing essential services to a building or lot shall not be located:
1. between the principal building and the public street (excluding alleys) or within any required front
setback area in the R-L, R-M, MN/C, or CBD zoning districts;
2. in any required setback (excluding those lot lines abutting any alley) or a required buffer yard;
RETTEW
Draft Date: March 21, 2012
Enacted Date: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 4)
PART 4-16
General Regulations
3. in any area of a parking lot that causes obstructed access to designated parking spaces; or
4. within fifteen (15) feet of the R-L and R-M zoning districts or an existing single or two family
dwelling on an abutting lot.
B. All service structures and areas shall be fully screened on all sides with a minimum of eighty (80) percent
opacity.
1. A continuous planting, hedge, fence, wall or earthen mounding shall enclose any service structure
on all sides unless such structure must be frequentlymoved, in which case screening on all but one
(1) side is required.
2. Fencing, if erected, shall be constructed of the same color and material as the principal building of
a lot, but may be a decorative masonry wall (excluding exposed “cinder block”). If solid weatherresistant
wood or material of similar appearance (such as white vinyl vertical planks) is used,
vegetative screen planting shall also be provided. The fence or wall shall include a self-latching
door or gate. In no case shall be “chain link” material or pattern fencing be used for screening.
3. The average height of the screening material shall be one (1) foot more than the height of the
enclosed structure, but shall not be required to exceed eight (8) feet in height unless specified
otherwise by this Chapter.
4. When a service structure is located adjacent to a building wall, perimeter landscaping material
may fulfill the screening requirements for that side of the service structure if that wall or screening
material is of an average height sufficient to meet the height requirement set out in this section.
5. Although service structures are screened by plant material, such material may not count towards
the fulfillment of any required landscaping.
6. Whenever screening material is placed around any solid waste or trash disposal unit that is
emptied or removed mechanically on a regular basis, a fixed barrier (e.g. mounted metal brackets)
to contain the placement of the container shall be provided within the screening material on those
sides where there is such material. The barrier shall be at least eighteen (18) inches from the
screening material and shall be of sufficient strength to prevent possible damage to the screening
when the container is moved. The minimum front opening of the screening material shall be
twelve (12) feet to allow service vehicles access to the container.
C. The locations of all service structures and screening shall be shown on all site plans and land development
plans submitted to Highspire.
D. This section shall not apply to dumpsters temporarily placed during actual construction or demolition on
the premises, or for recycling containers that do not involve garbage.
Section 425. Shopping Cart Storage
A. In the zoning districts where grocery stores, department store, variety stores, or home improvement and
building supply stores are permitted, the outdoor collection of shopping carts shall be permitted under the
following conditions:
1. Shopping carts may be collected and stored immediately in front of the store front (upon private
sidewalks, or under a canopy) and/or within a parking lot;
2. In no case shall such designed shopping cart storage and collection areas be located upon any
facilities used for vehicle circulation, parking, loading, nor emergency vehicle access (e.g., fire
lanes) or public rights-of-way;
RETTEW
Draft Date: March 21, 2012
Enacted Date: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 4)
PART 4-17
General Regulations
3. Such shopping cart storage and collection areas shall be situated so as to provide clear pedestrian
access (sidewalk or other area) at least eight (8) feet wide adjoining the store front;
4. Signage for such shopping cart storage and collection areas shall be governed by those regulations
pertaining to on-site directional and informational signs as regulated by this Chapter.
5. Intended shopping cart storage and collection areas shall be graphically depicted and other
indicated upon any permits and/or plans required by the Borough.
Section 426. Solar Energy Systems, Accessory.
A. Accessory solar energy systems shall be permitted in all zoning districts subject to the following
conditions:
1. A solar energy system is considered a accessory solar energy system only if it supplies electrical
or thermal power primarily for on-site use, except that when a property upon which the facility is
installed also receives electrical power supplied by a utility company, excess electrical power
generated and not presently needed for on-site use may be used by the utility company. The owner
of the accessory solar energy system shall provide written confirmation that the public utility
company has been informed of the customer’s intent to install an interconnected customer-owned
generator and also approves of such connection. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this
requirement.
2. The design and installation of accessory solar energy systems shall conform to applicable industry
standards, including those of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), Underwriters
Laboratories, the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), or other similar certifying
organizations, and shall comply with Chapter 133 relating to buildings, and with all other
applicable fire and life safety requirements. The manufacturer specifications shall be submitted as
part of the application.
3. All accessory solar energy systems shall be designed and located in order to prevent reflective
glare toward any inhabited structure on adjacent properties as well as adjacent street rights-of-way.
4. All on-site utility and transmission lines shall, to the extent feasible, be placed underground.
5. All accessory solar energy systems shall be sited as inconspicuously as practicable.
6. Roof and wall mounted accessory solar energy systems shall be sited in accordance with the
following:
a. Accessory solar energy systems located on a pitched roof of any structure shall not
extend above the highest point of the existing pitched roof.
b. Accessory solar energy systems located on a roof of any structure should be the same
slope as, or parallel to, the pitched roof.
c. Accessory solar energy systems located on a flat roof shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in
height above the height of the roof, and withn the R-L, R-M, MN/B and CBD zoning
districts, shall be screened from view at ground level of nearby streets by parapets, walls,
fences, landscaping, or other approved means.
d. All accessory solar energy systems mounted on roofs and walls of any structure shall be
subject to the maximum height regulations specified within each zoning district.
RETTEW
Draft Date: March 21, 2012
Enacted Date: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 4)
PART 4-18
General Regulations
e. No accessory solar energy system shall be attached to, nor otherwise sited along the front
facade (wall) or front building line of any principal building.
f. Accessory solar energy systems located on a wall of any structure shall not extend more
than two (2) feet into any required side or rear setback.
7. If the accessory solar energy system is unable to be located on a roof or a wall of a structure as is
preferred, then placement of detached, ground mounted, freestanding accessory solar energy
systems shall be provided in accordance with the following:
a. No part of any accessory solar energy system shall be erected, nor located between the
principal building and the public street (excluding alleys).
(1). Detached, ground mounted, freestanding accessory solar energy systems shall be
set back a distance equal to the total height of the solar energy system from all
property lines and street rights-of-way.
b. Accessory solar energy systems detached, ground mounted, freestanding from the
principal structure shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.
c. The total surface area of all detached, ground mounted, freestanding accessory solar
energy systems on the lot shall not exceed more than fifteen (15) percent of the total lot
area.
8. Prior to the issuance of a permit for the installation of an accessory solar energy system, the
applicant shall provide the Zoning Officer with:
a. evidence that the roof, wall, or otherwise the structure in which the accessory solar
energy system is proposed to be attached, is capable of holding the load, in the form of
stamped plans certified by a licensed professional engineer registered by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
b. confirmation that the public utility company has been informed of the customer’s intent
to install an interconnected customer-owned generator and also approves of such
connection. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
9. The applicant shall maintain the accessory solar energy system in good and safe condition.
Whenever an accessory solar energy system becomes structurally unsafe or endangers the safety
of the structure or premise, or endangers the public safety, the Zoning Officer shall give written
notice to the owner of the premises on which the accessory solar energy system is located that
such accessory solar energy system shall be made safe or removed.
Section 427. Swimming Pools
A. Outdoor swimming pools, shall be permitted in all zoning districts, subject to the following conditions,
must conform to all applicable Borough and state codes and shall be subject to the following regulations.
1. No swimming pool shall be permitted to be located between the principal building and the public
street (excluding alleys) or within any required front setback area.
2. Swimming pools shall comply with all accessory use and structure setbacks for the zoning district
which they are located.
RETTEW
Draft Date: March 21, 2012
Enacted Date: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 4)
PART 4-19
General Regulations
3. Water may not be discharged from a swimming pool directly onto any public right-of-way or
within ten (10) feet of any adjacent property without the applicable owner’s consent.
4. Pools shall not be located over a drainage, utility, or access easement.
5. All on-site, outdoor lighting shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties by
employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine glare to the site.
6. All swimming pools shall comply with the requirements of the Chapter 5 of the Codified
Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire relating to buildings.
7. These standards shall not apply to “kiddie” or “wading” pools, or pools designed with pools walls
not capable of holding water at a depth of more than twenty-four (24) inches of water.
Section 428. Temporary Construction Trailers or Sheds
A. Temporary construction trailers or sheds shall be permitted in all zoning districts subject to the following
conditions:
1. Temporary construction trailers or sheds shall be permitted only during the period that the
construction work is in progress. A permit for the temporary structure shall be obtained from the
Zoning Officer prior to the commencement of construction and shall be renewed every six (6)
months.
2. Temporary construction trailers or sheds shall be located on the lot on which the construction is
progressing and shall not be located within ten (10) feet of any lot line abutting an existing
residential use.
3. Temporary construction trailers or sheds shall be used only as temporary field offices and for
storage of incidental equipment and supplies and shall not be used for any dwelling use.
4. A temporary construction trailer may be permitted for use as a sales center for residential lots. The
maximum gross floor area of such a temporary sales center shall be five hundred (500) square feet.
5. No combustible materials shall be stored in temporary construction trailers or sheds.
Section 429. Temporary Storage
A. The use of temporary, non-traditional storage units, including those commercially known as “pods” or
enclosed “container” of a box trailer with or without wheels, shall be permitted on a temporary basis
subject to the following:
1. Units shall be permitted for a maximum period of sixty (60) consecutive days in any one calendar
year. This period may be extended upon written request to the Zoning Officer for a period not
exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days.
2. The enclosed “container” of a box trailer with wheels may be used for temporary construction
storage for the period for which a valid building permit has been issued. Such units shall be
licensed and located in accordance with the required accessory use setback of the zoning district in
which the property is located.
3. The “container” of a box trailer, with or without wheels, shall not be used for permanent storage in
any zoning district.
RETTEW
Draft Date: March 21, 2012
Enacted Date: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 4)
PART 4-20
General Regulations
B. The temporary storage of portable dumpsters and bulk materials, including, but not limited to stone, mulch,
firewood, and building materials within public right-of-way of a street under the jurisdiction of the
Borough of Highspire shall be permitted in all zoning districts, subject to the following conditions:
1. The temporary storage shall not exceed forty eight (48) hours, unless otherwise approved by the
Highspire Borough Police Department:
2. The location of the storage shall not interfere with or otherwise obstruct pedestrian and vehicular
traffic:
a. traveling within a public right-of-way including sidewalks and streets (including alleys);
b. entering or leaving the lot or adjacent lots (including access drives and driveways); and
c. shall be not located within a clear-sight triangle.
3. The location of the storage shall be directly in front of the lot, and shall not extend in front of
adjacent lots without the applicable owner’s consent.
Section 430. Unenclosed Vehicle Storage
A. Within the R-L, R-M, MN/C, and CBD zoning districts, the unenclosed storage of recreation vehicles,
campers, travel trailers, boats and trailers shall be permitted only according to the following requirements:
1. For purposes of this section, recreational vehicles, campers, travel trailers, boats and trailers are
divided into two separate categories, as follows:
a. Class I Vehicles
(1). Recreational vehicles, campers, travel trailers, boats and trailers used solely for
the transport of residents’ recreational vehicle(s) that possess no more than two
hundred (200) square feet, as measured to the vehicle’s outermost edges, nor
exceeding a height of ten (10) feet, as measured from the ground to the highest
point of the main body of the vehicle. Vehicle height shall no be measured on
vehicle accessories (e.g., air conditioners, vents, hatches, masts, antennas,
outrigging fishing poles, etc.), but will be measured to the highest point of any
flybridge or other boat console
b. Class II Vehicles
(1). Those recreational vehicles, campers, travel trailers, boats and trailers used
solely for the transport of residents’ recreational vehicle(s) that possess more
than two hundred (200) square feet, as measured to the vehicle’s outermost
edges, nor exceeding a height of ten (10) feet, as measured from the ground to
the highest point of the main body of the vehicle. Vehicle height shall no be
measured on vehicle accessories (e.g., air conditioners, vents, hatches, masts,
antennas, outrigging fishing poles, etc.), but will be measured to the highest
point of any flybridge or other boat console
2. The temporary parking of one (1) Class I or Class II vehicle for a period not to exceed forty eight
(48) hours shall be permitted on a paved or gravel surface in any yard, so long as the vehicle is set
back no less than ten (10) feet from any street right-of-way (excluding alleys), and five (5) feet
from abutting lot lines or alley right-of-way.
RETTEW
Draft Date: March 21, 2012
Enacted Date: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 4)
PART 4-21
General Regulations
3. The storage of Class I vehicles registered to the land owner or tenant of a property shall be
permitted on the basis of one (1) vehicle per one half (1/2) acre of lot area up to a maximum of
five (5) vehicles, so long as the unit is set back no less than ten (10) feet from any street right-ofway
(excluding alleys) and five (5) feet from abutting lot lines or alley right-of-way
4. The storage of one (1) Class II vehicle is permitted, subject to the following requirements:
a. All vehicles shall be set back a horizontal distance equal to the underlying zoning
district’s principal use setbacks.
b. No vehicle shall be stored between the principal building and the public street (excluding
alleys) or within any required front setback area. On vacant lots, the vehicle must be
stored behind the required front setback line, as specified for principal uses.
c. Screening shall be provided along any side or rear lot lines in accordance Part 4 of this
Chapter. Such screening shall not be required along a common side lot line when the
owner resides on one lot, and stores a vehicle on an abutting vacant lot that he/she owns.
One ten (10) foot wide break in required screening may be provided along one (1) rear or
side lot line for vehicle access onto an adjoining alley.
d. All areas used for storage of Class II vehicles shall be maintained so as to keep vegetation
properly trimmed and debris or litter disposed of regularly. All vehicles shall maintain
required licensure and shall prevent the leakage of fuels, lubricant, or both, onto the
ground.
5. The storage or parking of one (1) commercial truck upon any residential lot is permitted. For the
purpose of this section, commercial trucks shall include those that do not exceed a gross vehicle
weight (truck plus rated payload) of ten thousand (10,000) pounds.
6. The parking or storage of any trailer other than those accessory to a principal residential use is
prohibited.
Section 431. Wind Energy Systems, Accessory.
A. Accessorywind energy systems are permitted in all zoning districts subject to the following criteria:
1. A wind energy system is considered an accessory wind energy system only if it supplies electrical
power primarily for on-site use, except that when a parcel on which the system is installed also
receives electrical power supplied by a utility company, excess electrical power generated and not
presently needed for on-site use may be used by the utility company. The owner of the accessory
wind energy system shall provide written confirmation that the public utility company has been
informed of the customer’s intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator, and also
approves of such connection. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
2. The design and installation of all accessory wind energy systems shall conform to applicable
industry standards, including those of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI),
Underwriters Laboratories, Det Norske Veritas, Germanischer Lloyd Wind Energies, the
American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), or other similar certifying organizations, or
as approved under an emerging technology program such as the California Energy Commission,
International Electrotechnical Commission, or any other accessory wind certification program
recognized by the American Wind Energy Association (AWEA) or the U.S. Department of
Energy. All accessory wind energy systems and shall comply with standards set forth in Chapter 5
of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire relating to buildings, and with all other
applicable fire and life safety requirements. The manufacturer specifications shall be submitted as
part of the application.
RETTEW
Draft Date: March 21, 2012
Enacted Date: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 4)
PART 4-22
General Regulations
3. Within the R-L, R-M, MN/B, and CBD zoning districts and/or upon a lot with a residential use
upon it, no more than one (1) wind turbine shall be permitted per property.
4. All on-site utility and transmission lines shall be placed underground.
5. All wind turbines and towers shall have a flat finish as applied by the manufacturer. The objective
is to have the equipment as inconspicuous as practicable.
6. All accessory wind energy systems shall be equipped with manual—electronic or mechanical—
and automatic over-speed controls to limit the blade rotation speed to within the design limits of
the accessorywind energy system.
7. Accessory wind energy systems shall not be installed in any location where their proximity would
interfere with existing fixed broadcast, retransmission, or reception antenna. This includes
interference with residential radio, television, or wireless phone, or other personal communication
system reception. No accessory wind energy system shall be installed in any location along the
major axis of an existing microwave communication link where its operation is likely to produce
electromagnetic interference in the link’s operation.
8. As in Section 416 herein above, noise from accessory wind turbines shall comply with Chapter 10
of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire relating to health and sanitation (noise
control).
a. The permitted maximum decibel level may be exceeded during short-term events such as
utility outages and severe wind storms.
9. No part of any accessory wind energy system shall be erected, nor located between the principal
building and the public street (excluding alleys), nor within any required accessory use or structure
setback, nor otherwise attached to or along the front façade (wall) or front building line of any
principal building.
10. Wind turbines shall be set back a distance equal to the total height of the wind turbine from all
property lines, and streets and rights-of-way, and overhead utility lines.
11. The maximum height of accessorywind energy systems shall comply with the following:
a. Part 17 APZ Airport Zoning Overlay District Regulations within applicable; otherwise;
b. For lots less than one-half (1/2) acre in area, accessory wind turbines shall be roof
mounted and shall not be higher than forty-five (45) feet above the ground to the highest
point of the rotor or blade. The maximum rotor diameter for accessory wind turbines
shall be six (6) feet.
c. For lots between one-half (1/2) acre but less than one (1) acre, the tower height shall be
limited to seventy-five (75) feet, or twenty (20) feet above the tree line, whichever is
lower.
d. For lots greater than or equal to one (1) acre, the tower height shall be limited to one
hundred twenty (120) feet or forty (40) feet above tree line, whichever is lower.
e. For all accessory wind energy systems not otherwise mounted on a roof, unauthorized
access to the turbine and tower shall be prevented by design, with a minimum of twelve
(12) feet from the ground to the bottom of the ladder. All doors to turbine and tower shall
be locked.
RETTEW
Draft Date: March 21, 2012
Enacted Date: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 4)
PART 4-23
General Regulations
12. The minimum height of the lowest position of the wind turbine shall be fifteen (15) feet above the
ground. If the wind turbine proposed is a Vertical Axis Wind Turbine (also referred to as a “helix
type” turbine or VAT), the height between the lowest point of the turbine and the ground may be
reduced to eight (8) feet.
13. Accessory wind energy systems shall not be lighted, except to comply with applicable Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations.
14. No portion of any accessory wind energy system shall extend over parking areas, access drives,
driveways or sidewalks.
15. Accessory wind energy systems shall not display advertising, except for reasonable identification
of the accessory wind energy system’s manufacturer. Such sign shall have an area of less than four
(4) square feet.
16. When an accessory building is necessary for storage cells or related mechanical equipment, the
accessory building shall comply with the accessory building requirements specified within each
zoning district.
17. All applications for accessory wind energy systems shall include the information required for a
site plan approval pursuant to Section 306 of this Chapter. In addition, the applicant shall submit:
a. A site plan showing:
(1.) Property lines and physical dimensions of the subject property within two (2)
times the total height from the tower location.
(2.) Location, dimensions, and types of existing principal and accessory structures
on the property.
(3.) Location of the proposed accessory wind energy system tower, foundations, guy
anchors, and associated equipment.
(4.) The right-of-way of any public street abutting the property.
(5.) Any overhead utility lines.
b. Accessory wind energy systems system specifications, including manufacturer and
model, rotor diameter, tower height, and tower type—freestanding or guyed.
c. Tower and tower foundation blueprints or drawings signed by a qualified professional
engineer licensed and/or registered to practice in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
18. Prior to the issuance of a permit for the installation of an accessory wind energy system, the
applicant shall provide the Zoning Officer with confirmation that the public utility company has
been informed of the customer’s intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator and
also approval of such connection. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
19. The owner of the accessory wind energy system shall, at the owner’s expense, complete
decommissioning within six (6) months after the end of the useful life of the accessory wind
energy system. It shall be presumed that the accessory wind energy system is at the end of its
useful life if no electricity is generated for a continuous period of six (6) months.
RETTEW
Draft Date: March 21, 2012
Enacted Date: June 19, 2012 (27, PART 4)
PART 4-24
General Regulations
20. The applicant shall maintain the accessory wind energy system in good and safe condition.
Whenever an accessory wind energy system becomes structurally unsafe or endangers the safety
of the structure or premise, or endangers the public safety, the Zoning Officer shall give written
notice to the owner of the premises on which the accessory wind energy system is located that
such accessory wind energy system shall be made safe or removed.
Section 432. Yard and Setback Exception.
A. Front Yard and Setback Exception
1. Except as otherwise provided herein this Chapter, in any zoning district within a block containing
a lot proposed for development, where the required front setback regulations for the zoning district
are greater than the actual distances of the existing buildings on abutting lots are setback from the
street right-of-way, the required front setback may be altered to be similar to those distances
between existing principal buildings on the abutting lots and the abutting street right-of-way, in
accordance with the following standard:
a. Identify the existing principal buildings on the lots abutting the lot proposed for
development.
b. Using these results, calculate the average setback distance between the existing principal
buildings on the abutting lots and the street rights-of-way line.
(1). If an abutting lot is vacant, the required setback of the abutting vacant lot shall
be assumed to be the minimum front setback standard defined in the underlying
zoning district in which it is situated.
(2). For corner lots, the standards set forth in this section above shall be calculated
using each abutting lot, which includes those abutting lots having frontage on
and the existing principal buildings oriented toward the intersecting street.
c. The required front building setback for the building on the lot proposed for development
shall be the average setback distance calculated in subsections a. and b. above, which
may be adjusted by not more fifteen percent (15%), unless all buildings on the abutting
lots have the same set back distance.
(1). Front building façades and/or covered front porches shall be permitted to fulfill
this requirement.
d. However, no building shall extend into any street right-of-way.
e. Otherwise the building on the lot proposed for development shall comply with all front
setback standards defined in the underlying zoning district in which it is situated.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 5)
Non-Conforming Lots, Uses & Buildings PART 5-1
PART 5
NONCONFORMITIES
Section 500. Continuation of Nonconformities
A. All lawful uses of land, buildings, signs, or other structures existing on the effective date of this Chapter
may be continued, altered, restored, reconstructed, sold, or maintained in accordance with the provisions of
this Chapter.
Section 501. Registration of Nonconformities
A. Nonconformities may be reported to the Zoning Officer by the owner, user, lessor, or lessee, and be
registered by the Zoning Officer within one (1) year of the effective date of this Chapter. The Zoning
Officer, upon proof of a legal nonconformity, may certify the existence of the nonconformities .
B. Should a nonconformity not be reported or identified within one (1) year, the owner of the nonconformity
shall have the right to show by a preponderance of the evidence to the Zoning Officer that the
nonconformity existed upon the effective date of this Chapter.
Section 502. Existing Nonconforming Lots of Record
A. Any nonconforming lot, due to its lot area or dimensions, existing as of the effective date of this Chapter or
created by an amendment to this Chapter may be continued although such lot does not conform to the lot
requirements for the district in which it is located.
B. The following requirements apply to the development and use of a nonconforming lot.
1. All the requirements of this Chapter shall be met with the exception of minimum lot area and
minimum lot width.
2. The following requirements shall apply to the development and use of the nonconforming lot:
a. All the requirements of this Part shall be met with the exception of minimum lot area and
minimum lot width. No lot shall be developed unless the following requirements are met:
(i) In residential districts, only one single-family dwelling may be erected, and the
following minimum side building setback shall be provided:
(aa) On lots less than forty (40) feet in width, but not less than twenty-six
(26) feet in width, two (2) minimum side building setbacks shall be
provided, each equaling twenty (20) percent of the existing lot width.
However, no building shall be closer than ten (10) feet to an existing
principal building.
3. Where possible, contiguous nonconforming parcels under common ownership should be combined
to create conforming lots.
Section 503. Existing Nonconforming Uses and Structures
A. Alterations and Reconstruction.
1. Repairs and structural alterations not constituting extensions, expansions or enlargements may be
made to a nonconforming use or structure.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 5)
Non-Conforming Lots, Uses & Buildings PART 5-2
2. Restoration of Nonconforming Uses and Structures
a. A nonconforming use or structure which has been damaged or destroyed to the extent of
fifty (50%) percent or more of its market value at the time of the damage shall not be
restored except in conformity with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is
located and all other applicable standards of this Chapter.
b. When damage is less than fifty (50%) percent or more of its market value at the time of
the damage, a nonconforming use or structure may be repaired or reconstructed and used
as before the time of the damage, provided that:
(1). such repairs or reconstruction are commenced within eighteen (18)
months of the date of such damage and is carried to completion without undue
delay; and
(2). the reconstructed use or structure does not exceed in height, area, and
volume, the use or structure destroyed.
B. Extensions, Expansions, and Enlargements.
1. Nonconforming uses or structures, and structures and land occupied or used for purposes which
are nonconforming and otherwise not permitted in the zoning district in which they are located
shall be allowed to expand, extend or enlarge. All extensions, expansions and enlargements of
lawful nonconforming uses and structures shall be reviewed by the Zoning Officer to determine
compliance with the following standards:
a. Any extension, expansion or enlargement of a nonconforming structure or use shall be
permitted as long as the maximum impervious coverage is not exceeded.
b. Any expansion or enlargement of a nonconforming structure or use shall not exceed
thirty three and one third (33 1/3) percent of the total gross area of the nonconforming
structure or use from the time it became nonconforming.
c. Any extension, expansion or enlargement shall conform to the height, area/ footprint,
setback, and impervious lot coverage regulations of the zoning district in which it is
located. If an existing structure or use has a lawfully nonconforming building setback,
additions may occur to increase the height above such setback or to extend other portions
of the structure or use out to the nonconforming side or rear setback line, provided that:
(aa) The use or structure shall not be extended beyond the existing
nonconforming building setback line
(bb) No additional nonconformity shall be created
(cc) The new nonconforming extension shall not be greater than twenty five
(25) percent of the existing floor area
(dd) All other requirements of this Part are met
(ee) Such addition shall not be permitted for a structure proposed for a use
by a non-residential use on a lot that abuts an existing residential use in
the R-L and R-M zoning districts.
d. All required loading and/or parking spaces for any expansion or enlargement shall
complywith the requirements of Part 19 of this Chapter.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 5)
Non-Conforming Lots, Uses & Buildings PART 5-3
e. Any extension, expansion or enlargement of a nonconforming structure or use shall not
be permitted to extend into vacant parcels of land adjacent to the parcel containing the
nonconforming structure or use, where such vacant parcels have been separately recorded
or acquired prior to the effective date of this Chapter.
f. Any expansions or extensions of a nonconforming sign shall comply with all provisions
of this Chapter.
g. The intensity of a nonconforming use (resulting nuisances such as air pollution, noise,
glare, vibrations, delivery traffic, hazards, etc) shall not be increased.
Section 504. Change of Use
A. Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be
changed to a nonconforming use.
B. Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a more restricted classification or to a conforming use,
such use shall not hereafter be changed to a use of less restricted classification unless in compliance with
the rules for such change as outlined by this Part.
C. A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use only by the granting of a Special
Exception by the Zoning Hearing Board in compliance with this Chapter. Where a Special Exception
approval is required, the Zoning Hearing Board shall determine whether the applicant has provided
sufficient proof to show the following:
1. The proposed use is in general conformity with the most recent version of the Highspire Borough
Comprehensive Plan and harmony with the area in which it is proposed.
2. The proposed use would be equal to or less intensive in external impacts than the existing nonconforming
use.
3. The proposed use would be closely similar in external impacts and character of the existing nonconforming
use.
4. The proposed use would not endanger the public health and safety if located where proposed and
that the use will not deteriorate the environment or generate nuisance conditions such as traffic
congestion, noise, dust, smoke, glare or vibration.
5. In addition, the applicant shall furnish evidence that the disposal of materials will be accomplished
in a manner that complies with State and Federal regulations.
6. All uses must comply with Borough building, health, housing, rental, safety, property and other
applicable local, county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such licensed,
certificates, and permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Borough, or shall be a
condition of approval.
7. The applicant shall provide a detailed description of the proposed use in each of the following
topics:
a. The nature of the on-site activities and operations, the type of products, materials,
equipment and/or processes involved in the proposed use.
b. The number of employees. The total number of employees on each shift.
c. The floor area of the building or gross area of the lot devoted to the proposed use.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 5)
Non-Conforming Lots, Uses & Buildings PART 5-4
d. The magnitude of walk-in trade.
e. The traffic and environmental impacts that are likely to be generated (e.g. odor, noise,
smoke, dust, litter, glare, vibration, electrical disturbance, wastewater, storm water, solid
waste, etc.) and specific measures employed to mitigate or eliminate any negative
impacts. The applicant shall further furnish evidence that the impacts generated by the
proposed use fall within acceptable levels, as regulated by applicable laws and ordinance,
including but not limited to those listed in Part 4 of this Chapter.
f. The hours of operation.
g. The extent of pervious and impervious surfaces in relationship to that currently present
on adjacent lots and the overall block in which development, infill, reuse and/or
redevelopment is proposed.
h. Architectural plans as submitted as part of approval. Architectural plans may be required
to be submitted as part of said application.
i. How the proposed use complies items 1-6 herein this subsection above.
Section 505. Abandonment and Discontinuance
A. A nonconforming use shall be presumed abandoned when operations associated with the nonconforming
use have ceased by an apparent act or failure to act on the part of the tenant or owner to reinstate such use
within one (1) year from the date the activity stopped and the use is not actively advertised for sale or lease.
Such nonconforming use shall not thereafter be reinstated except in conformance with this Chapter. A
nonconforming use, which is actively marketed, but has not been sold or leased, shall not be considered
abandoned. The applicant shall be responsible to provide evidence that the nonconformity was not
abandoned
B. Except for in a Mobile Home Park, the removal of a nonconforming mobile home from the site it occupied
[and if such site is not leased, actively marketed, or purchased within one (1) year or less] shall constitute
abandonment of the site, and any occupation or subsequent use of said site shall conform with the
provisions of this Chapter.
C. The removal of a mobile home from a residential lot already occupied by a residential building shall
constitute abandonment of the nonconforming use and such use shall not thereafter be permitted.
D. Mobile Home Parks which are nonconforming under the terms of this Chapter shall be operated in
accordance with Public Health Regulations, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, DEP, under the provisions of
Act 175 of April 9, 1929, P.L. 177, as amended, and all other applicable laws.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 6)
PART 6-1
Designation of Zoning Districts, Adoption of Zoning
Maps & Permitted Use Tables
PART 6
DESIGNATION OF ZONING DISTRICTS, ADOPTION OF ZONING MAPS, &
PERMITTED USE TABLES
Section: 600. Designation of Districts
For the purpose of this Chapter, the Borough of Highspire is hereby divided into zoning districts and overlay
districts which shall be designated as follows:
ZONING DISTRICT
ABBREVIATION ZONING DISTRICT TITLE
A. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
R-L Residential LowIntensity Zoning District
R-M Residential Moderate Intensity Zoning District
B.MIXED USE DISTRICTS
MN/C Mixed Neighborhood / Commercial Zoning District
CBD Central Business District Zoning District
C. COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
C-G Commercial General Zoning District
D. INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
I Industrial Zoning District
E. PARKS AND RECREATION DISTRICTS
PR/OS Parks and Recreation / Open Space Zoning District
F. OVERLAYDISTRICTS
FP Floodplain Overlay District Regulations
NCS Neighborhood Compatibility Standards Overlay District
APZ Airport Zoning Overlay District Regulations
Section 601. Zoning Map
The locations and boundaries of the above underlying base zoning and overlay districts and are shown upon the
map(s) attached to and made a part hereof this Chapter, which shall be designated:
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 6)
PART 6-2
Designation of Zoning Districts, Adoption of Zoning
Maps & Permitted Use Tables
A. “Borough of Highspire, Dauphin County, PA: Zoning Map” herein referred to as the ‘Zoning Map’;
B. “Borough of Highspire, Dauphin County, PA: Floodplain Overlay District Map”;
C. “Borough of Highspire, Dauphin County, PA: Neighborhood Compatibility Standards OverlayMap”; and
D. “Borough of Highspire, Dauphin County, PA: Airport Zoning OverlayDistrict Map”.
These maps and all notations, references and other data shown thereon are hereby incorporated by reference into this
Chapter as if all were fully described herein.
Section 602. Zoning District Boundaries
The boundaries between zoning districts are shown by zoning district boundary lines on the zoning map(s). Where
uncertainty exists as to boundaries of any zoning districts shown on the zoning map(s), the following rules shall
apply:
A. Where zoning district boundaries are so indicated as approximately coinciding with the centerlines of
streets, highways, railroad lines or streams, or ridge lines, such centerlines shall be construed to be the
zoning district boundaries.
B. Where zoning district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately coincide with lot lines, such lot
lines shall be construed to be the zoning district boundaries.
C. Where zoning district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to centerlines of
streets and highways, the zoning district boundaries shall be construed as parallel thereto and at such
distances from the centerline as indicated on the zoning map(s).
D. For unsubdivided land or where a zoning district boundary divides a lot, the location of the zoning district
boundary, unless dimensions are indicated, shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on the
zoning map(s).
E. Where a municipal boundary divides a lot, the minimum lot area shall be regulated by the municipality in
which the principal use(s) are located, unless otherwise provided by applicable case law. The land area
within each municipality shall be regulated by the use regulations and other applicable regulations of each
municipality.
Section 603. Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries
A. In the case of any uncertainty as to zoning district boundaries on the zoning map(s), the Zoning Officer
shall determine the Zoning District Boundaries, however, the Zoning Officer’s determination may be
appealed to the Zoning Hearing Board.
Section 604. Application of Regulations
Except as provided herein:
A. No building or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or part thereof shall be erected,
moved or altered unless in conformance with the regulations specified for the Zoning District in which it is
located; with the exception of existing nonconformities as of the effective date of this Chapter, which may
be altered in compliance with Part 5 of this Chapter.
Section 605. Use Tables
A. The following tables list the types of uses permitted by this Chapter. Uses are divided into those Permitted
by Right (zoning decision by Zoning Officer); Permitted by Special Exception (zoning decision by Zoning
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 6)
PART 6-3
Designation of Zoning Districts, Adoption of Zoning
Maps & Permitted Use Tables
Hearing Board,) and Permitted by Conditional Use (zoning decision by Borough Council). Many of the
uses permitted by the above three (3) categories must comply with certain criteria, which are found in Part
14 of this Chapter. The specific section numbers where the criteria are located are noted in the tables.
TABLE 6-1
“R-L” & “R-M” ZONING DISTRICTS
PERMITTED USES
TYPES OF USES
Part 14
Specific Criteria&
Supplemental
Regulations
ZONING DISTRICTS
R-L
Residential
Low-Intensity
R-M
Residential
Moderate Intensity
A. RESIDENTIAL USES
Apartment Conversion 1401 C SE
Bed and Breakfast 1401 SE SE
Continuing Care Retirement Facility 1401 - SE
Group Care 1401 P
Group Home 1401 P P
Long Term Care Nursing Home or Personal Care Facility 1401 - SE
Mobile Home Park 1401 SE -
Multi-Family Dwelling/Apartment 1401 - P
Single Family Attached Dwelling 1401 - P
Single Family DetachedDwelling 1401 P P
Single Family Semi-DetachedDwelling 1401 SE P
Two-Family Detached Dwelling 1401 SE P
B. NON-RESIDENTIAL USES
Agriculture Operation 1402 SE SE
Cemetery (Excluding crematorium) 1402 P P
Community Garden (not including Market Garden) 1402 P P
Forestry 1402 P P
Library 1402 - P
Municipal Owned Uses 1402 P P
Parks, Playgrounds and Other Non-Commercial Recreational Uses. 1402 P P
Place of Worship and RelatedUses 1402 SE SE
Public/Private Utility Buildings and Structures 1402 SE SE
School, Primary and Secondary 1402 SE SE
C. ACCESSORY USES
Accessory Apartment to Owner Occupied Single-Family Detached Dwelling 1403 C C
Community Garden (not including Market Garden) 1402 P P
Daycare, Accessory 1403 P P
Daycare, Commercial 1403 P P
Daycare, Family 1403 P P
Home Occupation 1403 P P
No Impact Home Based Business 1403 P P
P Permitted by Right (zoning decision by Zoning Officer)
SE Special ExceptionUse (zoning decision by Zoning Hearing Board)
C Conditional Use (zoning decision byBoroughCouncil)
- Not Permitted
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 6)
PART 6-4
Designation of Zoning Districts, Adoption of Zoning
Maps & Permitted Use Tables
TABLE 6-2
“MN/C” & “CBD” ZONING DISTRICTS
PERMITTED USES
TYPES OF USES
Part 14
Specific Criteria&
Supplemental
Regulations
ZONING DISTRICTS
MN/C
Mixed
Neighborhood /
Commercial
CBD
Central Business
District
A. RESIDENTIAL USES
Apartment Conversion 1401 SE -
Bed and Breakfast 1401 P P
Boarding House 1401 P P
Continuing Care Retirement Facility (upper floor in CBD) 1401 SE P
Group Care 1401 P -
Group Home 1401 P -
Long Term Care Nursing Home or Personal Care Facility 1401 P -
Multi-Family Dwelling/Apartments (Upper floor above ground floor non-residential
in CBD)
1401 P P
Single Family Attached Dwelling 1401 P -
Single Family DetachedDwelling 1401 P -
Single Family Semi-DetachedDwelling 1401 P -
Two-Family Detached Dwelling 1401 P -
B. NON-RESIDENTIAL USES
Agriculture Operation 1402 SE -
Animal Hospital, Veterinary Office 1402 SE -
Bank - P
Business Services P P
Clinic,Medical 1402 SE P
Club, Clubhouse or Lodge, Private 1402 SE P
Commercial Recreation, Indoor 1402 SE P
Communications Antenna and Equipment Building Transmitting &
Receiving Facilities (Excluding Towers)
1402 - P
Community Garden & Market Garden 1402 P P
Convenience Store, Neighborhood 1402 SE P
Craftsman/Artisan Studio P P
Daycare, Commercial 1402 C P
Farmer’sMarket and/or Flea Market 1402 - P
Financial Service, Other P P
Food Service 1402 P P
Forestry 1402 P P
Funeral Home 1402 P -
Home Improvement Center, Lumber, and Building Materials Sales (Retail and/or
Indoor)
1402 - P
Hotel, Including Conference Facilities 1402 SE P
Industrial Use, Light 1402 - P
Laundry & Dry Cleaning Establishment (Personal) 1402 P P
Library 1402 P P
Massage Therapy P P
Municipal Owned Uses 1402 P P
Museum P P
Nightclub 1402 - C
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 6)
PART 6-5
Designation of Zoning Districts, Adoption of Zoning
Maps & Permitted Use Tables
TYPES OF USES
Part 14
Specific Criteria&
Supplemental
Regulations
ZONING DISTRICTS
MN/C
Mixed
Neighborhood /
Commercial
CBD
Central Business
District
Offices, Business Professional P P
Office,Medical 1402 P P
Parking Lot (not fronting on 2nd Street) 1402 SE P
Parking Structure (with ground floor businesses in CBD) 1402 - P
Parks, Playgrounds and Other Non-Commercial Recreational Uses. 1402 P P
Personal Services P P
Place of Worship and RelatedUses 1402 SE SE
Post Office 1402 SE P
Public/Private Utility Building or Structure 1402 SE SE
Restaurant (no drive thru facilities) 1402 P P
Retail Business 1402 P P
Schools, Commercial 1402 SE P
School, Public or Private 1402 C C
Taverns/Bars 1402 SE SE
Theater, Indoor (excluding adult uses) - P
C. ACCESSORY USES
Accessory Apartment to Owner Occupied Single-Family Detached Dwelling 1403 SE SE
Automated Banking Facility (Walk Up Only) 1403 P P
Community Garden/Market Garden 1402 P P
Daycare, Accessory 1403 P P
Daycare, Commercial 1403 P P
Daycare, Family 1403 P P
Home Occupation 1403
No Impact Home Based Business 1403 P P
Outdoor Café/Dining 1403 P P
P Permitted by Right (zoning decision by Zoning Officer)
SE Special ExceptionUse (zoning decision by Zoning Hearing Board)
C Conditional Use (zoning decision byBoroughCouncil)
- Not Permitted
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 6)
PART 6-6
Designation of Zoning Districts, Adoption of Zoning
Maps & Permitted Use Tables
TABLE 6-3
“C-G”& “I” ZONING DISTRICTS
PERMITTED USES
TYPES OF USES
Part 14
Specific Criteria&
Supplemental
Regulations
ZONING DISTRICTS
C-G
Commercial
General
I
Industrial
A. NON-RESIDENTIAL USES
Adult Related Uses 1402 - C
Agricultural Operation 1402 SE SE
All Other Uses 1402 - C
Animal Hospital, Veterinary Office 1402 P -
Automobile, Boat, Heavy Equipment,Mobile Home, Recreational Vehicle and
Similar Motor Vehicle Rental/Sales, Repair/Service,Washing and/or Fuel/Gas Sales
1402 P P
Automobile Wrecking, Junk and Scrap Storage and Sales 1402 - P
Banks (including drive thrus) P -
Business Service P -
Clinic,Medical 1402 P -
Club, Clubhouse or Lodge, Private 1402 P P
Commercial Recreation, Indoor 1402 P P
Commercial Recreation, Outdoor 1402 - P
Communication Antenna, Tower, and Equipment Building Transmitting &
Receiving Facilities
1402 SE P
Community Garden & Market Garden 1402 P P
Contractors’ Office and Storage Yard 1402 P P
Convenience Store, General (including drive thrus) 1402 P -
Daycare, Commercial 1402 P -
Dog Day Care 1402 - P
Farmer’sMarket and/or Flea Market 1402 P P
Financial Services, Other (including drive thrus) P -
Food Service 1402 P -
Forestry 1402 P P
Funeral Home 1402 P -
Home Improvement Center, Lumber, and Building Materials Sales 1402 P P
Hospital 1402 P -
Industrial Use, Heavy 1402 - P
Industrial Use, Light 1402 P P
Kennel, Commercial 1402 - SE
Laundry & Dry Cleaning Establishment (Industrial) 1402 - P
Laundry & Dry Cleaning Establishment (Personal) 1402 P -
Library 1402 P -
Mini-Storage Warehouses 1402 - P
Motel, Including Conference Facilities 1402 P -
Municipal Owned Uses 1402 P P
Nightclubs 1402 P -
Offices, Business Professional P -
Offices,Medical 1402 P -
Parking Lot and Parking Structure 1402 P P
Personal Services P -
Place of Worship and RelatedUses 1402 P -
Plant Nursery 1402 P P
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 6)
PART 6-7
Designation of Zoning Districts, Adoption of Zoning
Maps & Permitted Use Tables
TYPES OF USES
Part 14
Specific Criteria&
Supplemental
Regulations
ZONING DISTRICTS
C-G
Commercial
General
I
Industrial
Post Office 1402 P -
Public/Private Utility Buildings or Structures 1402 P P
Restaurant (Fast Food & Sit Down) 1402 P -
Retail Business P -
Sawmill 1402 - P
School, Commercial 1402 P P
Schools, Public or Private 1402 P -
Schools, Vocational 1402 - P
Treatment Center 1402 SE
Warehousing, Distribution, andWholesaling 1402 - P
B. ACCESSORY USES
Automated Banking Facility 1403 P P
Community Garden/Market Garden 1402 P P
Daycare, Commercial 1403 P P
Outdoor Café/Dining 1403 P -
P Permitted by Right (zoning decision by Zoning Officer)
SE Special ExceptionUse (zoning decision by Zoning Hearing Board)
C Conditional Use (zoning decision byBoroughCouncil)
- Not Permitted
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 6)
PART 6-8
Designation of Zoning Districts, Adoption of Zoning
Maps & Permitted Use Tables
TABLE 6-4
“PR/OS” ZONING DISTRICT
PERMITTED USES
TYPES OF USES
Part 14
Specific Criteria&
Supplemental
Regulations
ZONING DISTRICTS
PR/OS
Park and Recreation /
Open Space
A. NON-RESIDENTIAL USES
Agricultural Operation 1402 P
Boat Launching Facility, Boat Storage, and Marina 1402 P
Campground or Camp 1402 SE
Cemetery 1402 P
Commercial Recreation, Outdoor 1402 SE
Communication Antennas, Towers and Equipment Transmitting
And Receiving Facilities
1402 SE
Community Garden & Market Garden 1402 P
Forestry 1402 P
Natural Areas or Wildlife Refuges P
Parks, Playgrounds and Other Non-Commercial Recreational Uses. 1402 P
Plant Nursery 1402 P
Public/Private Utility Buildings and Structures 1402 SE
P Permitted by Right (zoning decision by Zoning Officer)
SE Special ExceptionUse (zoning decision by Zoning Hearing Board)
C Conditional Use (zoning decision byBoroughCouncil)
- Not Permitted
RETTEW
Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 7)
PART 7-1
“R-L” Residential LowIntensity
PART 7
“R-L” RESIDENTIAL LOWINTENSITY ZONING DISTRICT
Section 700. Purpose
This zoning district is generally comprised of those areas where lower intensity residential dwellings are
predominant, includes certain undeveloped areas where similar development could be extended, and provides for
similar compatible reuse and infill development. The zoning district seeks to stabilize and protect certain areas of the
Borough where a pattern of low density residential dwellings have been established, and to promote suitable
environment for family life.
Section 701. Permitted Uses by Right
A. See Table 6.1 in Section 605.
Section 702. Uses Permitted by Conditional Use or Special Exception
A. See Table 6-1 in Section 605.
Section 703. Area and Design Requirements
Use
Minimum
Lot
Area Per
Unit
Minimum
Lot
Width at Lot
Frontage
Maximum
Permitted
Impervious
Lot
Coverage /
Minimum
Vegetative
Coverage
Building Setbacks
Maximum
Building
Height
Interior Corner
Minimum/
Maximum
Front
Minimum
Side
Minimum
Rear
Singlefamily
detached
dwelling
5,000 sq. ft. 50 ft. 65 ft.
40%
Impervious /
20%
Vegetative
20 ft.
/ 30 ft. 10 ft. 20 ft. 35 ft.
RETTEW
Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 7)
PART 7-2
“R-L” Residential LowIntensity
Use
Minimum
Lot
Area Per
Unit
Minimum
Lot
Width at Lot
Frontage
Maximum
Permitted
Impervious
Lot
Coverage /
Minimum
Vegetative
Coverage
Building Setbacks
Maximum
Building
Height
Interior Corner
Minimum/
Maximum
Front
Minimum
Side
Minimum
Rear
Single
family
semidetached
dwelling
3,500 sq. ft. 35 ft. 50 ft.
45%
Impervious /
20%
Vegetative
20 ft.
/ 30 ft.
10 ft.,
except 0 ft.
at the
shared lot
line of
lawfully
attached
dwellings
constructed
with a
shared
common
party wall
and the
written
consent of
the owner
of the
abutting lot
and
building.
20 ft. 35 ft.
Two-family
detached
dwelling
4,000 sq. ft. 80 ft. 95 ft.
45%
Impervious /
20%
Vegetative
20 ft.
/ 30 ft. 10 ft. 20 ft. 35 ft.
Other
permitted
use
6,000 sq. ft. 60 ft. 75 ft.
60%
Impervious /
20%
Vegetative 20 ft. /
35 ft. 15 ft. 25 ft. 40 ft.
RETTEW
Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 7)
PART 7-3
“R-L” Residential LowIntensity
Use
Minimum
Lot
Area Per
Unit
Minimum
Lot
Width at Lot
Frontage
Maximum
Permitted
Impervious
Lot
Coverage /
Minimum
Vegetative
Coverage
Building Setbacks
Maximum
Building
Height
Interior Corner
Minimum/
Maximum
Front
Minimum
Side
Minimum
Rear
Accessory
buildings
and
structures
N/A N/A N/A
Included in
above if on a
permanent
foundation
Not
permitted to
be located
between the
principal
building
and the
public street
3 ft.
3 ft.,
except
that
detached
garages
adjacent
to and
having
access to
an alley,
shall be
setback
five (5)
feet from
the rightof-
way or
fifteen
(15) feet
from the
centerline
of the
alley,
whichever
is greater
15 ft. or not
higher than
the principal
building,
whichever
is less
Section 704. Additional Design Guidelines and Standards
A. All new development should generally be compatible in character, design, height, scale, setback,
orientation, lot access and off-street parking with adjacent and nearby buildings/structures and development
on the same shared block face (between two [2] intersecting streets) along the same side of the street.
Except for the specific requirements listed herein this section below, although not required, applicants for
new development may, and are encouraged to utilize the neighborhood development compatibility design
guidelines and standards set forth in Part 16 Neighborhood Compatibility Standards Overlay District.
B. Oversized Residential Lot
1. If a residential lot has twice the minimum required area per unit and twice the minimum required
lot width, the side setbacks shall be determined in accordance with the following standard:
a. One side: Minimum required side setback for zoning district (i.e. 10 ft).
b. Other side: Equal to the minimum required lot width plus minimum required side setback
for zoning district (i.e. 50 ft. + 10 ft. = 60 ft.).
C. Building Orientation
RETTEW
Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 7)
PART 7-4
“R-L” Residential LowIntensity
1. The orientation or location of the main or everyday entrance for the principal building shall be
similar to those building orientations for existing principal buildings on adjunct lots in accordance
with the following standard:
a. Interior Lots
Principal buildings shall have their primary front facades, provided with a main or
everyday front entrance, oriented toward and facing the public street.
b. Corner Lots
Principal buildings on lots fronting on more than one (1) public street shall have their
primary front facades, provided with a main or everyday front entrance, oriented towards
and facing:
(1). the corner; or
(2). the street upon which the majority of the principal buildings on the adjacent lots
are oriented towards.
D. New buildings shall have a pitched roof with a slope of no less than 4:12, instead of a flat roof.
Section 705. Compliance with General Regulations
A. All uses shall comply with all applicable General Regulations contained within Part 4 of this Chapter, as
well as:
1. Part 18 Signs
2. Part 19 Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations.
Section 706. Overlay Districts
A. If located within or affected by the following overlay districts, development or uses shall meet the
requirements of the applicable overlay provisions in accordance with:
1. Part 15 FP Floodplain Overlay District Regulations
2. Part 17 APZ Airport Zoning OverlayDistrict Regulations.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 8)
PART 8-1
“R-M” Residential Moderate Intensity
PART 8
“R-M” RESIDENTIAL MODERATE INTENSITY ZONING DISTRICT
Section 800. Purpose
This zoning district is generally comprised of those areas where a variety of moderately intensive residential
dwelling types, including single and multi-unit housing, are predominant and well established. This zoning district
provides for similar compatible reuse and infill development. The zoning district seeks to promote and protect the
mixed residential areas of the Borough where an existing pattern of diverse, moderate intensity residential dwelling
types have been established.
Section 801. Permitted Uses by Right
A. See Table 6-1 in Section 605.
Section 802. Uses Permitted by Conditional Use or Special Exception
A. See Table 6-1 in Section 605.
Section 803. Area and Design Requirements
Use
Minimum
Lot
Area Per
Unit
Minimum
Lot
Width at Lot
Frontage
Maximum
Permitted
Impervious
Lot
Coverage /
Minimum
Vegetative
Coverage
Building Setbacks Maximum
Permitted
Building
Height
Interior Corner
Minimum/
Maximum
Front
Minimum
Side
Minimum
Rear
Single-family
detached dwelling 4,000 sq. ft. 40 ft. 55 ft.
50%
Impervious
/ 20%
Vegetative
15 ft.
/ 25 ft. 7.5 ft. 15 ft. 35 ft
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 8)
PART 8-2
“R-M” Residential Moderate Intensity
Use
Minimum
Lot
Area Per
Unit
Minimum
Lot
Width at Lot
Frontage
Maximum
Permitted
Impervious
Lot
Coverage /
Minimum
Vegetative
Coverage
Building Setbacks Maximum
Permitted
Building
Height
Interior Corner
Minimum/
Maximum
Front
Minimum
Side
Minimum
Rear
Single family
semi-detached
dwelling
3,000 sq. ft. 30 ft. 45 ft.
55%
Impervious
/ 20%
Vegetative
15 ft.
/ 25 ft.
7.5 ft.,
except 0 ft.
at the
shared lot
line of
lawfully
attached
dwellings
constructed
with a
shared
common
party wall
and the
written
consent of
the owner
of the
abutting lot
and
building.
15 ft. 35 ft.
Two-family
detached dwelling 3,500 sq. ft. 70 ft. 85 ft.
55%
Impervious
/ 20%
Vegetative
15 ft.
/ 25 ft. 7.5 ft. 15 ft. 35 ft.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 8)
PART 8-3
“R-M” Residential Moderate Intensity
Use
Minimum
Lot
Area Per
Unit
Minimum
Lot
Width at Lot
Frontage
Maximum
Permitted
Impervious
Lot
Coverage /
Minimum
Vegetative
Coverage
Building Setbacks Maximum
Permitted
Building
Height
Interior Corner
Minimum/
Maximum
Front
Minimum
Side
Minimum
Rear
Single-family
attached dwelling
& Multi-family
dwelling
/apartment
2,500 sq. ft. 25 ft.
40 ft.
(also
end
units
for
SFA)
60%
Impervious
/ 20%
Vegetative
15 ft.
/ 25 ft.
7.5 ft.
except 0 ft.
at the
shared lot
line of
lawfully
attached
dwellings
constructed
with a
shared
common
party wall
and the
written
consent of
the owner
of the
abutting lot
and
building.
15 ft. 35 ft
Other permitted
use 6,000 sq. ft. 60 ft. 75 ft.
60%
Impervious
/ 20%
Vegetative
15 ft.
/ 25 ft. 15 ft. 25 ft. 35 ft
Accessory use or
structure
N/A N/A N/A
Included in
above if on
a
permanent
foundation
Not
permitted
to be
located
between
the
principal
building
and the
public
street
3 ft. 3 ft.
20 ft. or
not higher
than the
principal
building,
whichever
is less
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 8)
PART 8-4
“R-M” Residential Moderate Intensity
Section 804. Additional Design Guidelines and Standards
A. All new development should generally be compatible in character, design, height, scale, setback,
orientation, lot access and off-street parking with adjacent and nearby buildings/structures and development
on the same shared block face (between two [2] intersecting streets) along the same side of the street.
Except for the specific requirements listed herein this section below, although not required, applicants for
new development may, and are encouraged to utilize the neighborhood development compatibility design
guidelines and standards set forth in Part 16 Neighborhood Compatibility Standards Overlay District.
B. Oversized Residential Lot
1. If a residential lot has twice the minimum required area per unit and twice the minimum required
lot width at the frontage, the side yard setbacks shall be determined in accordance with the
following standard:
a. One side: Minimum required side setback for zoning district (i.e. 7.5 ft).
b. Other side: Equal to the minimum required lot width plus minimum required side setback
for zoning district (i.e. 40 ft. + 7.5 ft. = 47.5 ft.).
C. Building Orientation
1. The orientation or location of the main or everyday entrance for the principal building shall be
similar to those building orientations for existing principal buildings on adjunct lots in accordance
with the following standard:
a. Interior Lots
Principal buildings shall have their primary front facades, provided with a main or
everyday front entrance, oriented toward and facing the public street.
b. Corner Lots
Principal buildings on lots fronting on more than one (1) public street shall have their
primary front facades, provided with a main or everyday front entrance, oriented towards
and facing:
(1). the corner; or
(2). the street upon which the majority of the principal buildings on the adjacent lots
are oriented towards.
D. New buildings shall have a pitched roof with a slope of no less than 4:12, instead of a flat roof.
Section 805. Compliance with General Regulations
A. All uses shall complywith all applicable General Regulations contained within Part 4 of this Chapter, as
well as:
1. Part 18 Signs
2. Part 19 Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 8)
PART 8-5
“R-M” Residential Moderate Intensity
Section 806. Overlay Districts
A. If located within or affected by the following overlay districts, development or uses shall meet the
requirements of the applicable overlay provisions in accordance with:
1. Part 15 FP Floodplain Overlay District Regulations
2. Part 16 NCS Neighborhood Compatibility Standards OverlayDistrict
3. Part 17 APZ Airport Zoning OverlayDistrict Regulations.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 9)
PART 9-1
“MN/C” Mixed Neighborhood / Commercial
PART 9
“MN/C” MIXED NEIGHBORHOOD / COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICT
Section 900. Purpose
This zoning district is comprised of those areas where a combination of the wide variety of moderately intensive
residential dwelling types permitted in the Residential Moderate Density Zoning District (R-M), including single
and multi-unit housing, are predominant, well established and able to support compatible neighborhood, pedestrian
oriented public and commercial services. This zoning district includes certain areas along 2nd Street, adjacent to the
Central Business District Zoning District (CBD) where compatible reuse, replacement, and infill development may
occur in a manner that protects and enhances the existing pattern of mixed residential areas and promotes
complimentary and supporting commercial and public uses to serve those and surrounding neighborhoods.
Section 901. Permitted Uses by Right
A. See Table 6-2 in Section 605.
Section 902. Uses Permitted by Conditional Use or Special Exception
A. See Table 6-2 in Section 605.
Section 903. Area and Design Requirements
Use
Minimum
Lot
Area Per
Unit
Minimum
Lot
Width at Lot
Frontage
Maximum
Permitted
Impervious
Lot
Coverage /
Minimum
Vegetative
Coverage
Building Setbacks Minimum/
Maximum
Permitted
Building
Height
Interior Corner
Minimum/
Maximum
Front
Minimum
Side
Minimum
Rear
Single-family
detached dwelling 4,000 sq. ft. 40 ft. 55 ft.
50%
Impervious
/ 20%
Vegetative
5 ft./15 ft. 5 ft. 25 ft. 2 stories or
24 ft/40ft
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 9)
PART 9-2
“MN/C” Mixed Neighborhood / Commercial
Use
Minimum
Lot
Area Per
Unit
Minimum
Lot
Width at Lot
Frontage
Maximum
Permitted
Impervious
Lot
Coverage /
Minimum
Vegetative
Coverage
Building Setbacks Minimum/
Maximum
Permitted
Building
Height
Interior Corner
Minimum/
Maximum
Front
Minimum
Side
Minimum
Rear
Single family
semi-detached
dwelling
3,000 sq. ft. 30 ft. 45 ft.
55%
Impervious
/ 20%
Vegetative
5 ft. / 15 ft.
5 ft.,
except 0 ft.
at the
shared lot
line of
lawfully
attached
dwellings
constructed
with a
shared
common
party wall
and the
written
consent of
the owner
of the
abutting lot
and
building.
25 ft. 2 stories or
24 ft/40ft
Two-family
detached dwelling 3,500 sq. ft. 70 ft. 85 ft. 55%
Impervious
/ 20%
Vegetative
5 ft./15 ft. 5 ft. 25 ft. 2 stories or
24 ft/40ft
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 9)
PART 9-3
“MN/C” Mixed Neighborhood / Commercial
Use
Minimum
Lot
Area Per
Unit
Minimum
Lot
Width at Lot
Frontage
Maximum
Permitted
Impervious
Lot
Coverage /
Minimum
Vegetative
Coverage
Building Setbacks Minimum/
Maximum
Permitted
Building
Height
Interior Corner
Minimum/
Maximum
Front
Minimum
Side
Minimum
Rear
Single-family
attached dwelling
& Multi-family
dwelling/
apartment
2,500 sq. ft. 25 ft.
40 ft.
(also
end
units
for
SFA)
60%
Impervious
/ 20%
Vegetative
5 ft./15 ft.
5 ft. except
0 ft. at the
shared lot
line of
lawfully
attached
dwellings
constructed
with a
shared
common
party wall
and the
written
consent of
the owner
of the
abutting lot
and
building.
25 ft. 2 stories or
24 ft/40ft
Other permitted
use 2,500 sq. ft. 25 ft. 40 ft.
65%
Impervious
/ 20%
Vegetative
5 ft./15 ft.
5 ft. except
0 ft. at the
shared lot
line of
lawfully
attached
dwellings
constructed
with a
shared
common
party wall
and the
written
consent of
the owner
of the
abutting lot
and
building.
25 ft.
2 stories or
24 ft/40ft
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 9)
PART 9-4
“MN/C” Mixed Neighborhood / Commercial
Use
Minimum
Lot
Area Per
Unit
Minimum
Lot
Width at Lot
Frontage
Maximum
Permitted
Impervious
Lot
Coverage /
Minimum
Vegetative
Coverage
Building Setbacks Minimum/
Maximum
Permitted
Building
Height
Interior Corner
Minimum/
Maximum
Front
Minimum
Side
Minimum
Rear
Accessory use or
structure
N/A N/A N/A
Included in
above if on
a
permanent
foundation
Not
permitted
to be
located
between
the
principal
building
and the
public
street
3 ft.
3 ft.,
except that
detached
garages
adjacent to
and
having
access to
an alley,
shall be
setback
five (5)
feet from
the rightof-
way or
fifteen
(15) feet
from the
centerline
of the
alley,
whichever
is greater
20 ft. or
not higher
than the
principal
building,
whichever
is less
Section 904. Additional Standards and Guidelines
A. All new development should generally be compatible in character, design, height, scale, setback,
orientation, lot access and off-street parking with adjacent and nearby buildings/structures and development
on the same shared block face (between two [2] intersecting streets) along the same side of the street. At a
minimum, modifications to existing buildings and development of new buildings shall maintain an exterior
appearance that resembles and is compatible with any existing residential dwellings and buildings in the
neighborhood.
B. Reuse of Existing or Former Residential Buildings
1. In order to ensure modifications to existing or former residential buildings for permitted uses
maintain an exterior appearance that resembles and is compatible with the existing residential
dwelling and residential buildings in the neighborhood, new development that incorporates one or
both of the provisions herein subsections 904.B.2.a and .b below, shall qualify for the same
number of incentives as provided below:
a. Fifteen (15) foot reduction in minimum rear building setback; and/or
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 9)
PART 9-5
“MN/C” Mixed Neighborhood / Commercial
b. Fifteen (15) percent increase in impervious lot coverage, and five (5) percent reduction in
minimum vegetative cover.
2. Modification of Existing or Former Residential Buildings
a. In addition to other standards of this Chapter, the reuse of existing or former residential
buildings for all permitted non-residential and mixed use establishments, the existing
building shall maintain an exterior appearance that resembles and is compatible with any
existing residential dwellings and residential buildings in the neighborhood. No
modifications or alternations to the external appearance of the front and street side
facades of the building (except for permitted signs, fire escapes, and front porch
enclosures provided for herein this subsection below) which would alter its existing or
former residential character, shall be permitted.
(1). Building modifications shall occur to the rear and/or non-public street
(excluding alleys) side of the existing principal building.
b. Covered Front Porch Enclosures
(1). Front porch enclosures shall be provided in accordance with the following
standard:
(a). The applicant shall demonstrate that expansion to the rear and/or side
of the existing principal building, including enclosing any side and rear
porches, is not feasible.
(b). Front porch enclosures shall be limited to the existing front porch
footprint.
(c). Front porch enclosures shall include the use of glass or screens that
leave intact the original elements of the porch including the open space
(percentage of window/door openings to solid wall space); the railings,
transoms, columns, and roof.
(2). Front porch enclosures shall include the use of materials and colors consistent
and compatible with the principal building.
(3). Multiple-story front porch enclosures shall not be permitted.
3. Building Footprint of Existing or Former Residential Buildings
a. There shall be no limit to the total floor area, but the existing building may be expanded
only to the extent that the total building footprint of the existing building plus any
expansion combined shall not exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet.
C. New Buildings
1. In addition to the standards and provisions set forth herein Section 903 and 904.A above and
elsewhere in the Chapter, new buildings shall complywith the following provisions:
a. Blank walls on building facades facing public streets shall not be permitted.
b. Where a new principal building with public street-side façades greater than forty-five
(45) feet in width is proposed, such facades shall incorporate recesses, projections,
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 9)
PART 9-6
“MN/C” Mixed Neighborhood / Commercial
different façade materials, colors and/or designs, and/or different rooflines and roof
pitches, as to reduce the effect of a monotonous, blank wall look that would deteriorate
the appearance of the Borough.
c. Where a new principal building is proposed, at least seventy-five (75) percent of the
building’s front facade shall be located on the required front setback. Covered front
porches shall be permitted to fulfill this requirement.
d. The maximum footprint of any new building shall not exceed two thousand five hundred
(2,500) square feet.
e. New buildings shall have a pitched roof with a slope of no less than 6:12, instead of a flat
roof.
D. Non-Residential Uses within an Enclosed Building
1. Unless otherwise permitted elsewhere in this Chapter, all permitted principal non-residential uses
shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building, except for permitted outdoor
cafes/dining.
E. Residential Dwelling Unit Size
1. The minimum dwelling unit size shall be eight hundred (800) square feet.
F. Refuse Areas
1. The storage of refuse, including dumpsters, trash bins, and recycling receptacles, for nonresidential,
multi-family dwelling/apartment, and mixed uses shall be provided within the
principal or accessory building(s) or within an outdoor area enclosed by walls or opaque fencing.
Any refuse areas outside of a principal or accessory building shall be:
a. designed to be architecturally compatible with the principal or accessory building
(including design, materials, and colors); and
b. located behind the rear wall of the principal building; and
c. entirely screened by a six (6) foot high wall/fence or other enclosure, and plantings.
G. Screening
1. In addition to the standards set forth in Part 4, screening shall be provided in accordance with the
following:
a. All wall-mounted mechanical, electrical, communication, and service equipment,
including satellite dishes (not including residential uses) and vent pipes shall be screened
from public view by parapets, walls, fences, landscaping, or other approved means.
b. All rooftop mounted equipment and other appurtenances shall be concealed by or
integrated within the roof form or screened from view at ground level of nearby streets.
The following when above the roofline requires screening: stair wells, air conditioning
units, large vents, heat pumps, and mechanical equipment. In no case shall fencing be
used as a rooftop equipment screen.
c. Service and loading areas must be visually screened from the public street, sidewalks,
and abutting property in the R-L and R-M zoning districts or existing residential use in
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 9)
PART 9-7
“MN/C” Mixed Neighborhood / Commercial
the MN/C zoning district. For new construction, service and loading areas must be behind
the principal building. Loading docks shall not be located along 2nd Street.
H. Hours of Operation
For proposed non-residential and mixed use developments, the hours of operation and activities must be
appropriately scheduled to protect the existing neighborhood from detrimental noise, disturbance or
interruption. An hours of operations plan shall be submitted as part of any application for such use.
Section 905. Compliance with General Regulations
All uses shall complywith all applicable General Regulations contained within Part 4 of this Chapter, as well as:
1. Part 18 Signs
2. Part 19 Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations.
Section 906. Overlay Districts
If located within or affected by the following overlay districts, development or uses shall meet the requirements of
the applicable overlay provisions in accordance with:
1. Part 15 FP Floodplain Overlay District Regulations
2. Part 16 NCS Neighborhood Compatibility Standards OverlayDistrict
3. Part 17 APZ Airport Zoning OverlayDistrict Regulations.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 10)
PART 10-1
“CBD” Central Business District
PART 10
“CBD” CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT ZONING DISTRICT
Section 1000. Purpose
This zoning district includes the traditional mixed use (residential and non-residential development) business area of
the Borough, comprising the heart of and the prominent focal point of Highspire. The area includes a high degree of
pedestrian scaled and pedestrian oriented mixed use buildings and development designed in a compatible and
complementary manner which seeks to encourage retention and enhancement of existing businesses and residential
opportunities, attraction of new businesses and residents, and creation of a pleasing and safe environment for
residents, business owners, customers and visitors alike. This zoning district seeks to maintain and enhance the
traditional business area of the Borough through compatible reuse, replacement, and infill development.
Section 1001. Permitted Uses by Right
A. See Table 6-2 in Section 605.
Section 1002. Uses Permitted by Conditional Use or Special Exception
A. See Table 6-2 in Section 605.
Section 1003. Area and Design Requirements
Use
Minimum
Lot
Area
Minimum
Lot
Width at
Lot
Frontage
Maximum
Permitted
Impervious
Lot
Coverage /
Minimum
Vegetative
Coverage
Building Setbacks
Minimum
/Maximum
Permitted
Building
Height
Minimum/
Maximum
Front
Minimum
Side
Minimum
Rear
Permitted
uses
Shall based on size of the buildings,
required setbacks, coverage,
parking, loading/unloading, and
other applicable standards
including stormwater management
requirements of Chapter 22 the
Highspire SALDO
85%
Impervious /
10%
Vegetative
0 ft./10 ft.
5 ft., except
0 ft. at the
shared lot
line of
lawfully
attached
buildings
or uses
constructed
with a
shared
common
party wall
and the
written
consent of
the owner
of the
abutting lot
and
building.
15 ft. 2 stories or
24 ft / 65 ft.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 10)
PART 10-2
“CBD” Central Business District
Use
Minimum
Lot
Area
Minimum
Lot
Width at
Lot
Frontage
Maximum
Permitted
Impervious
Lot
Coverage /
Minimum
Vegetative
Coverage
Building Setbacks
Minimum
/Maximum
Permitted
Building
Height
Minimum/
Maximum
Front
Minimum
Side
Minimum
Rear
Accessory
use or
structure
N/A N/A N/A
Not
permitted to
be located
between the
principal
building and
the public
street
3 ft.
3 ft., except
that
detached
garages
adjacent to
and having
access to
an alley,
shall be
setback
five (5) feet
from the
right-ofway
or
fifteen (15)
feet from
the
centerline
of the alley,
whichever
is greater
Not higher
than the
principal
building
Section 1004. Additional Standards and Guidelines
A. Reuse of Existing or Former Residential Buildings
1. The reuse of existing or former residential buildings for all permitted non-residential and mixed
use establishments, the existing building shall maintain an exterior appearance that resembles and
is compatible with any existing residential dwellings and residential buildings in the
neighborhood. No modifications or alternations to the external appearance of the front and street
side facades of the building (except for permitted signs, fire escapes, and front porch enclosures
provided for herein this subsection below) which would alter its existing or former residential
character, shall be permitted.
a. Building modifications shall occur to the rear and/or non-public street (excluding alleys)
side of the existing principal building.
b. Covered Front Porch Enclosures
(1). Front porch enclosures shall be provided in accordance with the following
standard:
(a). The applicant shall demonstrate that expansion to the rear and/or side
of the existing principal building, including enclosing any side and rear
porches, is not feasible.
(b). Front porch enclosures shall be limited to the existing front porch
footprint.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 10)
PART 10-3
“CBD” Central Business District
(c). Front porch enclosures shall include the use of glass or screens that
leave intact the original elements of the porch including the open space
(percentage of window/door openings to solid wall space); the railings,
transoms, columns, and roof.
(2). Front porch enclosures shall include the use of materials and colors consistent
and compatible with the principal building.
(3). Multiple-story front porch enclosures shall not be permitted.
2. Building Footprint of Existing or Former Residential Buildings
a. There shall be no limit to the total floor area, but the existing building may be expanded
only to the extent that the total building footprint of the existing building plus any
expansion combined shall not exceed two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.
B. New Buildings
1. In addition to the standards and provisions set forth herein Section 1003 above and elsewhere in
the Chapter, new buildings shall comply with the following provisions:
a. New Building Dimensions
(1.) Where a new principal building is proposed, the maximum building footprint of
any new building shall not exceed fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.
(2.) Where a new principal building is proposed, at least eight-five (85) percent of
the building’s front facade shall be located on the required front setback.
b. New Building Orientation, Entrances and Walls/Windows
(1). Building Orientation
(a). New buildings on lots abutting 2nd Street shall have at their primary
front facades, provided with a main or everyday front entrance and
windows, oriented toward and facing 2nd Street.
(b). Otherwise, the orientation or location of a new building’s main or
everyday entrance and windows shall be provided in accordance with
the following standard:
(i). Interior Lots
1. Principal buildings shall have their primary front
facades, provided with a main or everyday front
entrance and windows, oriented toward and facing
the public street (excluding alleys).
(ii). Corner Lots
1. Principal buildings on lots fronting on more than one
(1) public street shall have their primary front
facades, provided with a main or everyday front
entrance and windows, oriented towards and facing
(in order of preference):
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 10)
PART 10-4
“CBD” Central Business District
a. both the intersecting street (excluding
alleys); or
b. the corner, with one entrance located at and
oriented toward the corner with an
appropriate building articulation such as a
chamfered corner, turret, canopy, or other
similar building feature.
(2). Building Entrances
(a). All new buildings’ primary front facades shall have their main or
everyday front entrance accentuated and provided with some weather
protection. Permitted entrances types include: recessed, protruding,
canopy, awning, portico, or overhang.
(3). Building Walls and Windows
(a). Blank walls on building facades facing public streets shall not be
permitted.
(b). A minimum of fifty (50) percent of a new building’s primary front
facades’ first floor facing a public street shall either include windows,
doors, or combination of both.
(c). Additionally, where a new building with public street-side façades
greater than forty-five (45) feet in width is proposed, such facades shall
incorporate recesses, projections, different façade materials, colors
and/or designs, and/or different rooflines and roof pitches, as to reduce
the effect of a monotonous, blank wall look that would deteriorate the
appearance of the Borough.
(d). Smoked, reflective, or black glass is prohibited.
C. Non-Residential Uses within an Enclosed Building
1. Unless otherwise permitted elsewhere in this Chapter, all permitted principal non-residential uses
shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building, except for permitted outdoor cafes and
outside sales and display.
D. Residential Dwelling Unit Size
1. The minimum dwelling unit size shall be eight hundred (800) square feet.
E. Prohibited Uses
1. The following uses are prohibited in this zoning district:
a. Drive-in/drive-through facilities.
b. Ground floor residential uses.
F. Refuse Areas
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 10)
PART 10-5
“CBD” Central Business District
1. The storage of refuse, including dumpsters, trash bins, and recycling receptacles, for nonresidential
and multi-family residential uses shall be provided within the principal or accessory
building(s) or within an outdoor area enclosed by walls or opaque fencing. Any refuse areas
outside of a principal or accessory building shall be:
a. designed to be architecturally compatible with the principal or accessory building
(including design, materials, and colors); and
b. located behind the rear wall of the principal building; and
c. entirely screened by a six (6) foot high wall/fence or other enclosure, and plantings.
G. Screening
1. In addition to the standards set forth in Part 4, screening shall be provided in accordance with the
following:
a. All wall-mounted mechanical, electrical, communication, and service equipment,
including satellite dishes (not including residential uses) and vent pipes shall be screened
from public view by parapets, walls, fences, landscaping, or other approved means.
b. All rooftop mounted equipment and other appurtenances shall be concealed by or
integrated within the roof form or screened from view at ground level of nearby streets.
The following when above the roofline requires screening: stair wells, air conditioning
units, large vents, heat pumps, and mechanical equipment. In no case shall fencing be
used as a rooftop equipment screen.
c. Service and loading areas must be visually screened from the public street, sidewalks,
and abutting property in the R-L and R-M zoning districts or existing residential use in
the MN/C zoning district. For new construction, service and loading areas must be behind
the principal building. Loading docks shall not be located along 2nd Street.
H. Hours of Operation
For proposed non-residential and mixed use developments, the hours of operation and activities must be
appropriately scheduled to protect the existing neighborhood from detrimental noise, disturbance or
interruption. An hours of operations plan shall be submitted as part of any application for such use.
Section 1005. Compliance with General Regulations
A. All uses shall comply with all applicable General Regulations contained within Part 4 of this Chapter, as
well as:
1. Part 18 Signs
2. Part 19 Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations.
Section 1006. Overlay Districts
A. If located within or affected by the following overlay districts, development or uses shall meet the
requirements of the applicable overlay provisions in accordance with:
1. Part 15 FP Floodplain Overlay District Regulations
2. Part 17 APZ Airport Zoning Overlay District Regulations.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 11)
PART 11-1
“C-G” Commercial General
PART 11
“C-G” COMMERCIAL GENERAL ZONING DISTRICT
Section 1100. Purpose
This zoning district is generally comprised of an area in the Borough providing for a wider range of automobileoriented
and automobile-dominated commercial activity and related uses than permitted in the Central Business
District (CBD). The purpose of this zoning district is to augment the CBD by providing for more intense
establishments generally requiring additional street frontage while also protecting the safe usage of streets.
Section 1101. Permitted Uses By Right
A. See Table 6-3 in Section 605.
Section 1102. Uses Permitted by Conditional Use or Special Exception
A. See Table 6-3 in Section 605.
Section 1103. Area and Design Requirements
Use
Minimum
Lot
Area
Minimum
Lot
Width at
Lot
Frontage
Maximum
Permitted
Impervious
Lot
Coverage /
Minimum
Vegetative
Coverage
Building Setbacks
Maximum
Permitted
Building
Minimum Height
Front
Minimum
Side
Minimum
Rear
Permitted
uses
Shall based on size of the buildings,
required setbacks, coverage,
parking, loading/unloading, and
other applicable standards including
stormwater management
requirements of Chapter 22 the
Highspire SALDO
85%
Impervious /
10%
Vegetative
25 ft.
5 ft.*,
except 0 ft.
at the
shared lot
line of
lawfully
attached
buildings
or uses
constructed
with a
shared
common
party wall
and the
written
consent of
the owner
of the
abutting lot
and
building.
25 ft. 65 ft. **
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 11)
PART 11-2
“C-G” Commercial General
Use
Minimum
Lot
Area
Minimum
Lot
Width at
Lot
Frontage
Maximum
Permitted
Impervious
Lot
Coverage /
Minimum
Vegetative
Coverage
Building Setbacks
Maximum
Permitted
Building
Minimum Height
Front
Minimum
Side
Minimum
Rear
Accessory
use or
structure
N/A N/A N/A
Not
permitted to
be located
between the
principal
building and
the public
street
10 ft. 10 ft.
Not higher
than the
principal
building
* Twenty-five (25) feet when abutting property in the R-L and R-M zoning districts or existing residential use in the
MN/C zoning district.
** Except that for uses and structures abutting a residential use/district, for every one (1) foot higher than thirty-five
(35) feet, the use or structure must be setback an additional one (1) foot beyond the required minimum
setback.
Section 1104. Compliance with General Regulations
All uses shall comply with all applicable General Regulations contained within Part 4 of this Chapter, as well as:
1. Part 18 Signs
2. Part 19 Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations.
Section 1105. Overlay Districts
If located within or affected by the following overlay districts, development or uses shall meet the requirements of
the applicable overlay provisions in accordance with:
1. Part 15 FP Floodplain Overlay District Regulations
2. Part 17 APZ Airport Zoning Overlay District Regulations.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 12)
PART 12-1
“I” Industrial
PART 12
“I” INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICT
Section 1200. Purpose
This zoning district is generally comprised of those areas where industrial and commercial uses are predominant,
and includes certain undeveloped or underdeveloped areas of the Borough where similar development could be
extended and provided with similar type, compatible development subject to design and performance standards. The
zoning district includes compatibility and performance standards to help minimize detrimental impacts on
surrounding, lower density and/or intensity uses and districts.
Section 1201. Permitted Uses by Right
A. See Table 6-3 in Section 605.
Section 1202. Uses Permitted by Conditional Use or Special Exception
A. See Table 6-3 in Section 605.
Section 1203. Area and Design Requirements
Use
Minimum
Lot
Area
Minimum
Lot
Width at
Lot
Frontage
Maximum
Permitted
Impervious
Lot
Coverage /
Minimum
Vegetative
Coverage
Building Setbacks
Maximum
Permitted
Building
Minimum Height
Front
Minimum
Side
Minimum
Rear
Other
permitted
use
Shall based on size of the
buildings, required
setbacks, coverage, parking,
loading/unloading, and
other applicable standards
including stormwater
management requirements
of Chapter 22 the
Highspire SALDO
90%
Impervious
/ 10%
Vegetative
30 ft.
20 ft.*,
except 0 ft.
at the
shared lot
line of
lawfully
attached
buildings or
uses
constructed
with a
shared
common
party wall
and the
written
consent of
the owner
of the
abutting lot
and
building.
30 ft.* 65 ft.**
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 12)
PART 12-2
“I” Industrial
Use
Minimum
Lot
Area
Minimum
Lot
Width at
Lot
Frontage
Maximum
Permitted
Impervious
Lot
Coverage /
Minimum
Vegetative
Coverage
Building Setbacks
Maximum
Permitted
Building
Minimum Height
Front
Minimum
Side
Minimum
Rear
Accessory
use or
structure
N/A N/A N/A
Not
permitted
to be
located
between the
principal
building
and the
public
street
10 ft. 10 ft.
Not higher
than the
principal
building
* Thirty (30) feet when abutting property in the R-L and R-M zoning districts or existing residential use in the
MN/C zoning district
** Except that for uses and structures abutting a residential use/district, for every one (1) foot higher than thirty-five
(35) feet, the use or structure must be setback an additional one (1) foot beyond the required minimum
setback.
Section 1204. Compliance with General Regulations
A. All uses shall comply with all applicable General Regulations contained within Part 4 of this Chapter, as
well as:
1. Part 18 Signs
2. Part 19 Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations.
Section 1205. Overlay Districts
A. If located within or affected by the following overlay districts, development or uses shall meet the
requirements of the applicable overlay provisions in accordance with:
1. Part 15 FP Floodplain Overlay District Regulations
2. Part 17 APZ Airport Zoning Overlay District Regulations.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 13)
PART 13-1
“PR/OS” Parks and Recreation / Open Space
PART 13
“PR/OS” PARKS AND RECREATION / OPEN SPACE ZONING DISTRICT
Section 1300. Purpose
This zoning district is generally comprised of important natural and manmade features and land areas within the
Borough essential for providing for a wide range of open space, park, and other leisure time recreational activities
and related uses. The purpose of this zoning district is to protect important natural and manmade areas, grounds,
buildings, and uses within the Borough that support, enhance and provide for a variety of lower intensity outdoor
recreation, open space, and other leisure time activities.
Section 1301. Permitted Uses by Right
A. See Table 6-4 in Section 605.
Section 1302. Uses Permitted by Conditional Use or Special Exception
A. See Table 6-4 in Section 605.
Section 1303. Area and Design Requirements
Use
Minimum
Lot
Area
Minimum
Lot
Width at
Lot
Frontage
Maximum
Permitted
Impervious
Lot
Coverage /
Minimum
Vegetative
Coverage
Building Setbacks
Maximum
Permitted
Building
Minimum Height
Front
Minimum
Side
Minimum
Rear
Permitted
use
Shall based on size of the
buildings, required
setbacks, coverage, parking,
loading/unloading, and
other applicable standards
including stormwater
management requirements
of Chapter 22 the
Highspire SALDO
20%
Impervious
/ 60%
Vegetative
25 ft. 25 ft 25 ft. 35 ft.
Accessory
use or
structure
N/A N/A N/A
Not
permitted
to be
located
between the
principal
building
and the
public
street
10 ft. 10 ft. 20 ft.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 13)
PART 13-2
“PR/OS” Parks and Recreation / Open Space
Section 1304. Compliance with General Regulations
A. All uses shall comply with all applicable General Regulations contained within Part 4 of this Chapter, as
well as:
1. Part 18 Signs
2. Part 19 Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations.
Section 1305. Overlay Districts
A. If located within or affected by the following overlay districts, development or uses shall meet the
requirements of the applicable overlay provisions in accordance with:
1. Part 15 FP Floodplain Overlay District Regulations
2. Part 17 APZ Airport Zoning Overlay District Regulations.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-1
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
PART 14
SPECIFIC CRITERIA AND SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC USES
Section 1400. Applicability.
A. In addition to the general provisions for principal, accessory and/or temporary uses, buildings, and
structures within a particular zoning district established in Parts 7 through 13 of this Chapter, and the
additional general provisions for uses, buildings, and structures established in the Part 4 and elsewhere in
the Chapter, this Part sets forth the specific standards and supplemental regulations that shall be applied to
each principal, accessory and/or temporary use identified herein. These specific use standards and
supplemental regulations must be satisfied prior to approval of any application for a zoning permit,
building permit, occupancy permit, temporary permit, special exception and/or conditional use. The
applicant shall be required to demonstrate compliance with these standards and regulations and must
furnish whatever evidence is necessary to demonstrate such compliance.
B. All principal, accessory and/or temporary uses identified subsequently herein this Part, must comply with
the general provisions for uses within a particular zoning district in which the use is to be located, unless
different standards are established herein the subsequent sections of Parts 7 through 13 of this Chapter; in
any case, the more restrictive of the general and specific provisions shall apply.
C. For the purposes of this Part, any required setbacks shall be measured from the boundary line of the site for
which the zoning permit, building permit, occupancy permit, temporary permit, special exception and/or
conditional use is requested, regardless of whether or not this line corresponds to a property line or a lease
line.
D. For uses allowed within a specific zoning districts as “Conditional Uses” and/or “Special Exceptions”, see
also the procedures and standards in Part 3 as applicable of this Chapter.
Section 1401. Additional Supplemental Standards and Requirements for Specific Principal Residential Uses.
A. Apartment Conversions: Apartment conversions are permitted subject to the following criteria:
1. The building must be a single-family detached dwelling that existed on the effective date of this
Chapter, and contained (at that time) at least three thousand two hundred (3,200) square feet of
habitable floor area.
2. All principal buildings permitted as part of a residential conversion to dwelling unit/apartment
uses shall maintain an exterior appearance that resembles and is compatible with any existing
dwellings in the neighborhood. No modifications to the external appearance of the building
(except fire escapes) which would alter its residential character shall be permitted.
3. Fire escapes, where required, shall be located in the rear of the building and shall not be located on
anywall facing a street right-of-way, excluding alleys.
4. All apartment conversions shall comply with the minimum lot area per unit requirements for the
underlying zoning district.
5. In the R-L zoning district, no more than two (2) total dwelling units shall be permitted per lot in
the applicable underlying zoning district. In all other zoning districts where apartment conversions
are permitted, the total number of dwelling units permitted per lot shall be three (3).
6. No dwelling unit shall be less than eight hundred (800) square feet.
7. All dwelling units shall be located within the principal building.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-2
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
8. All dwelling units must have separate kitchen and bathroom facilities as well as living/sleeping
spaces.
9. All uses must comply with Borough building, health, housing, rental, safety, property and other
applicable local, county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such licenses,
certificates, and permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Borough, or shall be a
condition of approval.
10. The applicant shall obtain any required land development approvals.
B. Bed and Breakfasts: Bed and Breakfasts are permitted subject to the following criteria:
1. The building must be a single-family detached dwelling.
2. All principal buildings permitted to be bed and breakfast uses shall maintain an exterior
appearance that resembles and is compatible with any existing dwellings in the neighborhood. No
modification to the external appearances of the building (except fire and safety requirements)
which would alter its residential character shall be permitted.
3. Fire escapes, where required, shall be located in the rear of the building and shall not be located on
anywall facing a street right-of-way, excluding alleys.
4. Accommodations shall be limited to no more than three (3) guest bedrooms for rent in the R-L and
R-M zoning districts; and six (6) guest bedrooms for rent in other zoning districts.
5. In no case shall more than five (5) guest bedrooms be available or used in any one structure, and
no more than ten (10) total guest bedrooms shall be permitted per lot.
6. The owner of the facility or resident manager must reside therein, and must be on the premises
when guests are present.
7. Overnight guests shall not occupy the facility for more than fourteen (14) consecutive nights in a
thirty (30) day period.
8. No cooking facilities shall be provided or permitted in individual guest bedrooms.
9. Accessory uses, customarily incidental to the use of a bed and breakfast, shall be permitted so long
as they complement the bed and breakfast use and do not encumber activities of surrounding lots.
10. All uses must comply with Borough building, health, housing, rental, safety, property and other
applicable local, county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such licenses,
certificates, and permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Borough, or shall be a
condition of approval.
11. The applicant shall obtain any required land development approvals.
C. Boarding Houses: Boarding houses are permitted subject to the following criteria:
1. All principal buildings permitted to be boarding house facilities shall maintain an exterior
appearance that resembles and is compatible with any existing dwellings in the neighborhood. No
modification to the external appearances of the building (except fire and safety requirements)
which would alter its residential character shall be permitted.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-3
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
2. Fire escapes, where required, shall be located in the rear of the building and shall not be located on
anywall facing a street right-of-way, excluding alleys.
3. Accommodations shall be limited to no more than six (6) tenant/guest rooms for rent,
accommodating not more than twelve (12) tenants/guests. All tenant/guest rooms shall be limited
to two (2) persons each.
4. All tenant/guest rooms available for boarding shall be located within the principal building.
5. All tenant/guest rooms shall contain a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet of habitable
floor area per person, exclusive of common areas.
6. Meals for compensation shall be provided only to registered tenants of the boarding house. No
cooking facilities shall be provided or permitted in the individual guest rooms.
7. All uses must comply with Borough building, health, housing, rental, safety, property and other
applicable local, county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such licenses,
certificates, and permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Borough, or shall be a
condition of approval.
8. The applicant shall obtain any required land development approvals.
D. Continuing Care Retirement Community Facility
1. Whenever a party or parties seeks to establish a continuing care retirement facility, the party or
parties shall file a detailed statement of intent with the Borough describing the proposed use and
development of the lot. Such statement shall detail the proposed number and nature of the
anticipated occupants and uses. The statement shall identify how said use satisfies a demonstrative
need and shall be conducted in a responsible manner without detriment to surrounding properties
and neighborhood.
2. The continuing care retirement community is designed primarily for persons aged fifty five (55)
and over.
3. The subject property shall front on or have direct access via a public street (excluding alleys) to an
arterial or collector road as provided in the most recent version of the Highspire Borough
Comprehensive Plan.
4. The following uses shall be permitted as principal uses within a continuing care retirement
community.
a. Residential uses.
(1). Long-term care nursing centers
(2). Personal care centers
(3). Single-family attached dwellings
(4). Single-family detached dwellings
(5). Single family semi-detached dwellings
(6). Two family detached dwellings
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-4
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
(7). Multi-family dwellings/apartments
b. Public-Semi-Public uses.
(1). Parks, Other Outdoor Recreational Uses
(2). Libraries and community activity buildings
(3). Indoor recreation uses and structures operated for the benefit or use of the
community
(4). Post office
c. Institutional uses.
(1). Places of worship
5. The following uses shall be permitted as accessory uses in the continuing care retirement
community for the use of residents and guests:
a. Accessory service uses:
(1). Daycare facilities
(2). Medical offices and clinics
(3). Common dining facilities
(4). Indoor recreation facilities
b. Accessory commercial uses.
(1). Banks.
(2). Food services.
(3). Retail businesses.
(4). Personal services
(5). Restaurants (no drive in or drive thru)
c. Each accessory use shall be located in a building occupied by residential uses or in a
community activities building.
d. Each accessory commercial use shall not exceed two thousand five hundred (2,500)
square feet of net floor area.
e. The total area reserved of commercial accessory uses shall not exceed four (4) percent of
the total gross land area of the original tract/lot, and no more than twenty five thousand
(25,000) square feet, whichever is less.
6. Continuing care retirement communities shall meet the following area, density, coverage and
setback requirements:
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-5
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
a. Minimum lot area shall be ten (10) acres.
b. Maximum density shall be twelve (12) units per acre.
c. Maximum impervious lot coverage shall be sixty (60) percent.
d. Minimum vegetative coverage shall be forty (40) percent.
e. No building shall be within twenty-five (25) feet of the lot or property line of the
continuing care retirement community, nor within thirty-five (35) feet of an outside or
public street right-of-way.
f. In instances where there is more than one building on a single lot shall meet the following
minimum building setback requirements:
(1) Front to front: 70 feet.
(2) Front to side: 50 feet.
(3) Front to rear: 40 feet.
(4) Side to rear: 20 feet.
(5) Side to side: 15 feet.
(6) Rear to rear: 30 feet.
(7) Corner to corner: 20 feet.
g. Staging of development. When the continuing care retirement community is to be
developed in stages, the following criteria must be met:
(1) The land development plan presented to the Borough must show the
approximate location and type of use for each stage of the development.
(2) If nonresidential uses will be a part of the development, the sequencing shall be
shown so that not all residential development is constructed prior to the
construction of the nonresidential development, unless the development involves
an existing continuing care retirement community that already includes existing
nonresidential components, in which case the staging requirement would not
apply.
7. Safe vehicular access and areas for discharging and picking up guests shall be provided.
8. The location, orientation and lot circulation shall be coordinated with the Borough in order to
minimize the disturbance of adjacent land uses and neighborhood, and traffic flow and ingressegress
shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.
9. Deed restrictions or covenants should be included to provide for the creation of a property owners
association or board of trustees for the proper protection and maintenance of the development
improvements in the future; at a minimum, all development improvements relating to internal
streets, sidewalks, curbs, parks, parking areas, etc. shall remain private and the responsibility of
the landowner and/or the operator. Should the a property owners association or board of trustees,
or landowner and/or the operator neglect to maintain the designated improvements, as depicted on
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-6
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
the plan, the Borough may then maintain said areas and assess the responsible party for any costs
incurred.
10. The institution shall submit a copy of its emergency operations plan (EOP) to the local and county
emergency management agency coordinator. The EOP shall also include detailed information
regarding solid, medical and hazardous materials and waste handling, including a listing of all
medical and hazardous materials and wastes used and generated on site and evidence indicating
the disposal of all materials and wastes will be accomplished in a manner that complies with
Borough, state, and federal regulations.
11. All uses must comply with Borough building, health, housing, rental, safety, property and other
applicable local, county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such licenses,
certificates, and permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Borough, or shall be a
condition of approval.
12. The applicant shall obtain any required land development approvals.
E. Group Care
1. Whenever a party or parties seeks to occupy a dwelling or other building as a group care facility,
the party or parties shall file a detailed statement of intent with the Borough describing the
proposed use of the dwelling or building. Such statement shall detail the proposed number and
nature of the anticipated occupants. The statement shall identify how said use satisfies a
demonstrative need and shall be conducted in a responsible manner without detriment to
surrounding properties and neighborhood.
2. No portion of a group care facility shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of another group
care facility, group home facility, half way house and/or treatment center, but in no case shall be
located within the same block.
3. All principal structures permitted to be group care uses shall maintain an exterior appearance that
resembles and is compatible with any existing dwellings in the neighborhood. No modification to
the external appearances of the building (except fire and safety requirements) which would alter its
residential character shall be permitted.
4. Fire escapes, where required, shall be located in the rear of the building and shall not be located on
anywall facing a street right-of-way, excluding alleys.
5. A group care facility shall be directly affiliated with a parent institution or organization, which
shall provide full-time supervision and administration to the residents of the group care facility.
6. Under no circumstances shall any uses qualifying for or falling under the definition of a “half-way
house” or “treatment center” be considered a group care facility.
7. The location, orientation and lot circulation shall be coordinated with the Borough in order to
minimize the disturbance of adjacent land uses and neighborhood, and traffic flow and ingressegress
shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.
8. The institution shall submit a copy of its emergency operations plan (EOP) to the local and county
emergency management agency coordinator. The EOP shall also include detailed information
regarding solid, medical and hazardous materials and waste handling, including a listing of all
medical and hazardous materials and wastes used and generated on site and evidence indicating
the disposal of all materials and wastes will be accomplished in a manner that complies with
Borough, state, and federal regulations.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-7
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
9. All uses must comply with Borough building, health, housing, rental, safety, property and other
applicable local, county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such licenses,
certificates, and permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Borough, or shall be a
condition of approval.
10. The applicant shall obtain any required land development approvals.
F. Group Home
1. Whenever a party or parties seeks to occupy a dwelling or other building as a group home facility,
the party or parties shall file a detailed statement of intent with the Borough describing the
proposed use of the dwelling or building. Such statement shall detail the proposed number and
nature of the anticipated occupants. The statement shall identify how said use satisfies a
demonstrative need and shall be conducted in a responsible manner without detriment to
surrounding properties and neighborhood.
2. No portion of a group home shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of another group home
facility, group care facility, half way house and/or treatment center, but in no case shall be located
within the same block.
3. All principal structures permitted to be group home uses shall maintain an exterior appearance that
resembles and is compatible with any existing dwellings in the neighborhood. No modification to
the external appearances of the building (except fire and safety requirements) which would alter its
residential character shall be permitted.
4. Fire escapes, where required, shall be located in the rear of the building and shall not be located on
anywall facing a street right-of-way, excluding alleys.
5. Under no circumstances shall any uses qualifying for or falling under the definition of a “half-way
house” or “treatment center” be considered a group home facility.
6. Occupants of the group home facility shall live as a family unit.
7. All uses must comply with Borough building, health, housing, rental, safety, property and other
applicable local, county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such licenses,
certificates, and permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Borough, or shall be a
condition of approval.
G. Long Term Care Nursing Home or Personal Care Facility
1. Whenever a party or parties seeks to establish a long term nursing home or personal care facility
on a lot or occupy a dwelling or other building as a long term nursing home or personal care
facility, the party or parties shall file a detailed statement of intent with the Borough describing the
proposed use and development of the lot or dwelling or building. Such statement shall detail the
proposed number and nature of the anticipated occupants. The statement shall identify how said
use satisfies a demonstrative need and shall be conducted in a responsible manner without
detriment to surrounding properties and neighborhood.
2. In addition to residential units (living and sleeping quarters with or without kitchen facilities), the
following accessory uses may be provided for the exclusive use of residents and their guests:
a. Dispensaries
b. Medical offices and clinics
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-8
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
c. Common dining facilities
d. Community gardens
e. Parks and other non-commercial recreation uses
f. Indoor recreation uses
g. Daycare
h. Bank
i. Retail business
j. Food Service
k. Personal Service
3. Buildings on the same lot shall meet the following minimum setback requirements between
buildings:
a. Front to front: 70 feet
b. Front to side: 50 feet
c. Front to rear: 20 feet
d. Side to rear: 20 feet
e. Side to side: 15 feet
f. Rear to rear: 30 feet
g. Corner to corner: 20 feet
3. Minimum vegetative coverage shall be 40%.
4. All principal structures permitted to be long term nursing homes and personal care facilities shall
maintain an exterior appearance that resembles and is compatible with any existing dwellings in
the neighborhood. No modification to the external appearances of the building (except fire and
safety requirements) which would alter its residential character shall be permitted.
5. Fire escapes, where required, shall be located in the rear of the building and shall not be located on
anywall facing a street right-of-way, excluding alleys.
6. The location, orientation and lot circulation shall be coordinated with the Borough in order to
minimize the disturbance of adjacent land uses and neighborhood, and traffic flow and ingressegress
shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.
7. A long term nursing home or personal care facility shall be directly affiliated with a parent
institution or organization, which shall provide full-time supervision and administration to the
residents of the long term nursing home or personal care facility.
8. The institution shall submit a copy of its emergency operations plan (EOP) to the local and county
emergency management agency coordinator. The EOP shall also include detailed information
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-9
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
regarding solid, medical and hazardous materials and waste handling, including a listing of all
medical and hazardous materials and wastes used and generated on site and evidence indicating
the disposal of all materials and wastes will be accomplished in a manner that complies with
Borough, state, and federal regulations.
9. All uses must comply with Borough building, health, housing, rental, safety, property and other
applicable local, county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such licenses,
certificates, and permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Borough, or shall be a
condition of approval.
10. The applicant shall obtain any required land development approvals.
H. Mobile Home Park: Mobile home parks are permitted subject to the following criteria:
1. Minimum lot area shall be ten (10) acres.
2. Maximum density in a mobile home park shall be (7) units per acre.
3. Each mobile home stand/pad (or lot if provided on individual lots) shall contain no more than one
(1) mobile home, not more than one (1) family, and be at least four thousand, two hundred fifty
(4,250) square feet of lot area provided for siting each mobile home dwelling unit.
4. Each mobile home stand/pad (or lot if provided on individual lots) shall have a minimum required:
a. Lot width of forty (40) feet
b. Front building setback of twenty (20) feet,
c. Rear building setback of fifteen (15) feet, and
d. Two (2) side building setbacks of ten (10) feet each.
5. In no case shall the distance between any two (2) mobile home units be less than twenty (20) feet
(these setbacks shall also apply to the mobile home park office, service, utility, or other buildings).
6. No mobile home stand/pad (or lot if provided on individual lots), or building shall be within
twenty-five (25) feet of the lot or property line of the mobile home park, nor within thirty-five (35)
feet of an outside public street right-of-way.
7. Protective skirting shall be placed around the area between the stand surface and the floor level of
each mobile home so as to prevent that area from forming a harborage for rodents, creating a fire
hazard, or exposing unsightly conditions.
8. Individual mobile homes shall have a pitched roof with a slope of no less than 4:12, instead of a
flat roof.
9. Individual mobile home owners may install accessory or storage sheds, extensions and additions
to mobile homes, and exterior patio areas. Any such facilities so installed shall not intrude into any
required front, side, or rear building setbacks, and, in every case, shall substantially conform in
style, quality, and color to the existing mobile homes.
10. Each mobile home shall be erected and connected to utilities in accordance with the Chapter 9
relating to buildings and Chapter 22 relating to subdivision and land development of the Codified
Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire , and all applicable state and federal requirements.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-10
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
11. All mobile homes shall abut on a street of the mobile home park’s internal street system. In no
case shall access to such mobile homes and mobile home stands/pads or lots be provided directly
to or abutting public streets.
12. All internal streets shall, as a minimum, comply with local streets standards of Chapter 22 of the
Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire relating to subdivision and land development.
13. The location, orientation and lot circulation shall be coordinated with the Borough in order to
minimize the disturbance of adjacent land uses and neighborhood, and traffic flow and ingressegress
shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.
14. Curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be constructed and installed on both sides of each street within
the mobile home park (whether public or private), in addition to installation of street trees, in
accordance with Chapter 22 relating to subdivision and land Development and/or Chapter 25
relating to trees of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire.
15. There shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the gross acreage of the mobile home park
devoted to active and/or passive common recreational facilities. Responsibility for maintenance of
the recreational areas shall be with the landowner and/or the operator, or property owners
association.
16. Deed restrictions or covenants should be included to provide for the creation of a property owners
association for the proper protection and maintenance of the development improvements in the
future; at a minimum, all development improvements relating to internal streets, sidewalks, curbs,
active and/or passive common recreational facilities, parking areas, etc. shall remain private and
the responsibility of the landowner and/or the operator. Should the a property owners association,
or landowner and/or the operator neglect to maintain the designated improvements, as depicted on
the plan, the Borough may then maintain said areas and assess the responsible party for any costs
incurred.
I. Multi-FamilyDwelling/Apartment
1. All principal buildings permitted to be multi-family dwelling/apartment facilities shall maintain an
exterior appearance that resembles and is compatible with any existing dwellings in the
neighborhood. No modification to the external appearances of the building (except fire and safety
requirements) which would alter its residential character shall be permitted.
2. Fire escapes, where required, shall be located in the rear of the building and shall not be located on
anywall facing a street right-of-way, excluding alleys.
3. There shall be no more than:
a. Six (6) dwelling units permitted on a lot in the R-Mzoning district;
b. Eight (8) dwelling units permitted on a lot in the MN/C zoning district; and
c. Twelve (12) dwelling units permitted on a lot in the CBD zoning district.
4. In those instances where more than one multi-family dwelling/apartment building is located on the
same lot, the following separation distances will be provided between each building:
a. Front to front, rear to rear, parallel buildings shall have at least forty five (45) feet
between faces of the building. If the front or rear faces are obliquely aligned, the above
distances may be decreased by as much as ten (10) feet at one end if increased by similar
or greater distance to the other end.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-11
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
b. A minimum distance of twenty-five (25) is required between end walls of buildings. If
the buildings are at right angles to each other, the distance between the corners of the end
walls of the building may be reduced to a minimum of fifteen (15) feet.
c. A minimum distance of twenty five (25) feet is required between end walls and front or
rear faces of buildings.
d. All multi-family dwelling/apartment buildings shall be set back a minimum of fifteen
(15) feet from any interior access drives or parking facilities contained on commonly held
lands.
e. In no case shall there be more than twelve (12) dwelling units per building.
5. In the CBD zoning district, multi-family dwelling/apartment units shall be permitted on second or
higher floors, above ground or first floor permitted non-residential uses.
6. All uses must comply with Borough building, health, housing, rental, safety, property and other
applicable local, county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such licenses,
certificates, and permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Borough, or shall be a
condition of approval.
7. The location, orientation and lot circulation shall be coordinated with the Borough in order to
minimize the disturbance of adjacent land uses and neighborhood, and traffic flow and ingressegress
shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.
8. The applicant shall obtain any required land development approvals.
J. Single Family Attached Dwelling: Single family attached dwellings are permitted shall be subject to the
following criteria:
1. All principal structures permitted to be single family attached dwellings shall maintain an exterior
appearance that resembles and is compatible with any existing dwellings in the neighborhood.
2. The maximum number of dwelling units in a row shall be six (6), but where four (4) or more
dwelling units are in a row, then no more than sixty (60) percent shall have the same front setback
and roofline that generally parallel the ground along the same horizontal plane
3. No more than two (2) abutting units shall have the same front setback and roofline that generally
parallel the ground along the same horizontal plane.
4. The minimum front setback variation shall be four (4) feet.
5. Single family attached dwellings and buildings shall have a pitched roof with a slope of no less
than 4:12, instead of a flat roof.
6. To the extent feasible, for buildings located on corner lots with single family attached units, there
shall be at least one dwelling unit with its primary front facade, orientation or location of the main
or everyday entrance, and its address, on each of the intersecting streets (excluding alleys).
7. The location, orientation and lot circulation shall be coordinated with the Borough in order to
minimize the disturbance of adjacent land uses and neighborhood, and traffic flow and ingressegress
shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.
8. The applicant shall obtain any required land development approvals.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-12
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
K. Single FamilyDetached Dwelling
1. All principal structures permitted to be single family detached dwellings shall maintain an exterior
appearance that resembles and is compatible with any existing dwellings in the neighborhood.
2. Single family detached dwellings and buildings shall have a pitched roof with a slope of no less
than 4:12, instead of a flat roof.
L. Single Family Semi-Detached Dwelling
1. All principal structures permitted to be single family semi-detached dwellings shall maintain an
exterior appearance that resembles and is compatible with any existing dwellings in the
neighborhood.
2. Single family semi-detached dwellings and buildings shall have a pitched roof with a slope of no
less than 4:12, instead of a flat roof.
3. To the extent feasible, for buildings located on corner lots with single family semi-detached units,
there shall be at least one dwelling unit with its primary front facade, orientation or location of the
main or everyday entrance, and its address, on each of the intersecting streets (excluding alleys).
4. The location, orientation and lot circulation shall be coordinated with the Borough in order to
minimize the disturbance of adjacent land uses and neighborhood, and traffic flow and ingressegress
shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.
M. Two-FamilyDetached Dwelling
1. All principal structures permitted to be two family detached dwellings shall maintain an exterior
appearance that resembles and is compatible with any existing dwellings in the neighborhood
2. Two family detached dwellings shall have a pitched roof with a slope of no less than 4:12, instead
of a flat roof.
3. For buildings located on corner lots with two-family detached units, there shall be at least one
dwelling unit with its primary front facade, orientation or location of the main or everyday
entrance, and its address, on each of the intersecting streets (excluding alleys).
4. The location, orientation and lot circulation shall be coordinated with the Borough in order to
minimize the disturbance of adjacent land uses and neighborhood, and traffic flow and ingressegress
shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.
Section 1402. Additional Supplemental Standards and Requirements for Specific Principal Non-Residential
Uses.
A. Adult Related Uses. Adult-related uses are permitted, subject to the following criteria:
1. No portion of an adult related use shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of an adult
related use, but in no case shall be located within the same block.
2. No portion of a building occupied by an adult-related use shall be located within two hundred fifty
(250) feet of adjacent property in the R-L and R-M zoning districts or existing residential use in
the MN/C zoning district.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-13
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
3. No portion of a building occupied by an adult-related use shall be located within one thousand
(1,000) feet of any property which contains any one (1) or more of the following specified land
uses where minors may congregate:
a. Commercial recreation facility, Indoor/Outdoor;
b. Daycare facility primarily for children;
c. Library;
d. Park, Playground, Playfield;
e. Place of Worship;
f. School, Private/Public;
g. Swimming Pool, Public; or
h. Other lands, buildings, and uses where minors are permitted to congregate.
4. No materials, merchandise, or film offered for sale, rent lease, loan, or for view upon the premises
shall be exhibited or displayed outside of a building or structure.
5. Any building or structure used and occupied as an adult related establishment shall be windowless,
or have an opaque covering over all windows or doors of any area in which materials,
merchandise, or film are exhibited or displayed, and no sale materials, merchandise, or film shall
be visible from outside of the building or structure.
6. All signs shall comply with Part 18 of this Chapter. No sign shall be erected upon the premises
pictorially depicting or giving a visual representation of the type of materials, merchandise or film
offered therein.
7. Each entrance to the premises shall be posted with a notice specifying that persons under the age
of eighteen (18) years are not permitted to enter therein and warning all other persons that they
may be offended upon entry.
8. No adult-related use may change to another adult related use, except upon additional approval by
the entitywith jurisdiction for initial approval.
9. The use shall not create an enticement for minors because of its proximity to nearby uses where
minors may congregate.
10. No unlawful sexual activity or conduct shall be permitted.
11. No more than one (1) adult related use may be located within one (1) building or on one lot.
12. All uses must comply with Borough building, health, safety, property and other applicable local,
county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such licenses, certificates, and
permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Borough, or shall be a condition of
approval.
B. Agriculture Operation
1. Minimum lot area shall be ten (10) acres.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-14
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
2. All agriculture-related building shall not be closer to any lot line than one hundred fifty (150) feet.
3. Surface water run-off from areas where animals are enclosed shall be diverted away from adjacent
properties and shall not contaminate downstream watercourses.
4. Any new operation or expansion of an existing agricultural operation shall not be approved by the
Borough until a Soil Erosion and Sedimentation control plan has been prepared and found
satisfactory by the County Conservation District.
5. A list of all chemicals utilized in the propagation and care of farm products shall be filed annually
with the Zoning Officer.
C. All Other Uses. If a use clearly is not permitted by right, as a special exception use, or as a conditional use
by this Chapter within any zoning district, the use is prohibited, except that the Zoning Hearing Board may
permit such use as a special exception if the applicant specifically proves to the Zoning Hearing Board that
all of the following terms would be met:
1. The proposed use is in general conformity with the most recent version of the Highspire Borough
Comprehensive Plan and harmony with the area and neighborhood in which it is proposed.
2. The proposed use would be equal to or less intensive in external impacts than uses that are
permitted in the zoning district.
3. The proposed use would not endanger the public health and safety if located where proposed and
that the use will not deteriorate the environment or generate nuisance conditions such as traffic
congestion, noise, dust, smoke, glare or vibration.
4. All uses must comply with Borough building, health, housing, rental, safety, property and other
applicable local, county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such licenses,
certificates, and permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Borough, or shall be a
condition of approval.
5. The proposed use is not specifically prohibited in that zoning district where it is proposed.
6. The proposed use would meet the standards that apply under Part 3 of this Chapter pertaining to
Special Exception.
7. The applicant shall provide a detailed description of the proposed use in each of the following
topics:
a. The nature of the on-site activities and operations, the type of products, materials,
equipment and/or processes involved in the proposed use.
b. The number of employees. The total number of employees on each shift.
c. The floor area of the building or gross area of the lot devoted to the proposed use.
d. The magnitude of walk-in trade.
e. The disposal of materials will be accomplished in a manner that complies with State and
Federal regulations.
f. The traffic and environmental impacts that are likely to be generated (e.g. odor, noise,
smoke, dust, litter, glare, vibration, electrical disturbance, wastewater, storm water, solid
waste, etc.) and specific measures employed to mitigate or eliminate any negative
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-15
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
impacts. The applicant shall further furnish evidence that the impacts generated by the
proposed use fall within acceptable levels, as regulated by applicable laws and ordinance,
including but not limited to those listed in Part 4 of this Chapter.
g. The hours of operation.
h. The extent of pervious and impervious surfaces in relationship to that currently present
on adjacent lots and the overall block in which the use and development is proposed.
i. A schematic architectural drawing of the principal building's front façade.
j. Site plans required in Section 306.B of this Chapter.
k. How the proposed use and development complies items 1-6 herein this subsection above.
D. Animal Hospital, Veterinary Office: Animal hospital/veterinary clinics are permitted, subject to the
following criteria:
1. Minimum Lot Area. Unless animals are kept inside within in an enclosed building at all times,
each lot shall contain at least one (1) acre; otherwise, the minimum lot area requirement of the
applicable zoning district shall apply.
2. Within the MN/C and CBD zoning districts, all activities shall be performed within a completely
enclosed building.
3. All structures where animals are kept and/or examined shall be completely enclosed and
soundproofed in a manner to prevent sound and odor from traveling outside, such as solid core
doors, sound absorbent ceilings and forced air ventilation.
4. In the C-G zoning district, all structures where animals are kept that are not completely enclosed,
and also including any outdoor animal pens, stalls, and runways shall not be located be between
the principal building and the public street (excluding alleys), and within all zoning districts, they
shall not be located within any required building setbacks. These outside and unenclosed facilities
shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet from all lot lines, and one hundred (100) feet from any
adjacent property in the R-L and R-M zoning districts or existing residential use in the MN/C
zoning district.
5. Where outdoor animal pens, stalls, or runways are permitted, animals shall be permitted to
exercise outside daily between the hours of 8:00 am to 8:00 pm.
6. The applicant shall furnish evidence of effective means of animal and veterinary waste collection
and disposal that shall be implemented.
E. Automobile, Heavy Equipment and Similar Motor Vehicle Rental/Sales, Repair/Servicing, Washing, and/or
Fuel/Gasoline Sales. Automobile, heavy equipment and similar motor vehicle rental/sales, repair/servicing,
washing and/or fuel/gasoline sales are permitted, subject to the following criteria:
1. The subject property shall front on or have direct access via a public street (excluding alleys) to an
arterial or collector road or to Industrial Road as provided in the most recent version of the
Highspire Borough Comprehensive Plan.
2. Automobiles, boats, heavy equipment, mobile homes, recreational vehicles or similar motor
vehicles offered for rent/sale, in any state of being fixed/serviced, or washed/dried, or otherwise
stored, displayed or serviced shall not occupy any part of the existing or future street right-of-way
(including sidewalks and alleys) or required off-street parking areas.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-16
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
3. Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.
4. On-lot traffic circulation channels, storage, inventory/display/sales, and parking areas shall be
clearly delineated. Additionally, any fuel delivery shall not impede traffic-flow patterns.
5. All areas used for the storage, inventory/display/sales, parking, and otherwise permitted servicing
of automobiles, boats, heavy equipment, mobile homes, recreational vehicles or similar motor
vehicles shall be aligned and displayed in an orderly fashion so that circulation for fire safety can
be maintained at all times.
6. All areas used for the storage, inventory/display/sales, parking, and otherwise permitted servicing
of automobiles, boats, heavy equipment, mobile homes, recreational vehicles or similar motor
vehicles shall be graded for proper drainage and shall be surfaced so as to provide a durable and
dustless surface, such as concrete or bituminous concrete surface, unless an alternative material
and/or design as part of an readily accepted stormwater BMP is approved by the Borough
Engineer.
7. All buildings and structures (including fuel/gasoline pumps, but excluding permitted signs) shall
be setback at least twenty five (25) feet from any street right-of-way or lot line.
8. All permitted activities except for the inventory/display/sales, parking, and those normally
required to be performed at the gasoline/fuel and air pumps, and washing and vacuuming areas
shall be performed within a completely enclosed building.
9. Where outside automobile, boat, heavy equipment, mobile home, recreational vehicle or similar
motor vehicle sales/rental inventory/display areas abut a street right-of-way, a perimeter landscape
strip, a minimum of five (5) feet in width planted with a hedge, masonry wall, and/or other
desirable planting of at least two (2) feet in height, along with grass or other living ground cover
shall be planted, mulched and maintained on all portions of the perimeter landscape strip, and shall
be provided and protected by permanent curbing, or otherwise complywith Part 4 of this Chapter
10. In no case shall any automobile, boat, heavy equipment, recreational vehicle or similar motor
vehicle in any state of servicing/repair, be permitted to be stored between the principal building
and the public street (excluding alleys) in the C-G zoning district.
11. Outside automobile, boat, heavy equipment, mobile home, recreational vehicle or similar motor
vehicle sales/rental inventory/display areas and unenclosed storage facilities shall be a minimum
of fifty (50) feet from any adjacent property in the R-L and R-M zoning districts or existing
residential use in the MN/C zoning district.
12. All materials and activities not within completely enclosed buildings shall be surrounded by a
fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height. Such fence shall be completely sight obscuring and
maintained in good condition. Any gate in a fence shall be similarly constructed and maintained
and shall be kept securely locked at all times when the establishment is not in operation.
13. No more than three (3) such vehicles may be stored per repair/service bay.
14. All ventilation equipment outlets, fume collection, and other similar equipment associated with the
service/repair work area(s) and/or service/repair and wash bay doors/opening shall not be located
or oriented directly toward any abutting property in the R-L and R-M zoning districts or existing
residential use in the MN/C zoning district.
15. The demolition or junking of automobiles, boats, heavy equipment, mobile homes, recreational
vehicles or similar motor vehicles is prohibited. The storage of inoperable automobiles, boats,
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-17
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
heavy equipment, mobile homes, recreational vehicles or similar motor vehicles and related parts
shall be within a completely enclosed building.
16. The outdoor storage automobiles, boats, heavy equipments, recreational vehicles and similar
motor vehicles on the propertywithout current registration is prohibited.
17. No automobile, boat, heavy equipment, mobile home, recreational vehicle or similar motor
vehicle, except those with current registration and offered for sales/rental, shall be stored upon the
site for more than thirty (30) days.
18. The applicant shall furnish evidence that the disposal of materials will be accomplished in a
manner that complies with State and Federal regulations.
19. All uses must comply with Borough building, health, safety, property and other applicable local,
county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such licenses, certificates, and
permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Borough, or shall be a condition of approval
20. In addition to the aforementioned criteria herein this subection above, automobile, boat, heavy
equipment, mobile home, recreational vehicle or similar motor vehicle washing facilities are
permitted, subject to the following additional criteria:
a. All uses must provide sufficient stacking areas for waiting motor vehicles, which shall be
a minimum of three (3) stacking spaces per washing bay, prior to entering such washing
bay.
b. All uses must provide an area of at least eight hundred (800) square feet beyond the exit
end of the washing building to be used for hand finishing operations of the washing
process.
c. The applicant shall provide evidence that adequate measures will be in place to prevent
pollutants from being washed into the groundwater or waterways. Any chemicals that
may be hazardous to aquatic life shall be stored within an area that will completely
contain any leaks or spills.
d. Graywater recycling is mandatory.
e. Water from the vehicle wash operation shall not flow onto sidewalks or streets in such a
manner as could cause ice hazards.
f. Exterior trash and recycling receptacles shall be provided amid any outdoor sales area.
Such trash receptacles shall be routinely emptied so as to prevent the scattering of litter
and debris. All applications shall include a description of a working plan for the cleanup
of litter.
F. AutomobileWrecking, Junk and Scrap Storage and Sales
1. Minimum lot area shall be five (5) acres.
2. All junk, scrap, machinery or equipment stored outside shall be at least fifty (50) feet from any
abutting lot line.
3. All junk, scrap, machinery and equipment stored outside shall be at least two hundred (200) feet
from any adjacent property in the R-L and R-M zoning districts or existing residential use in the
MN/C zoning district.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-18
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
4. All completely enclosed buildings used to store junk, scrap, machinery and equipment shall be set
back at least fifty (50) feet from all lot lines.
5. No junk, scrap, machinery or equipment of any kind shall be stored in required front, side, or rear
setback areas. All unpaved building setback areas shall be covered with grass or similar vegetative
material and shall at all times be clean, vacant and well maintained.
6. All materials and activities not within completely enclosed buildings shall be surrounded by a
fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height. Such fence shall be completely sight obscuring and
maintained in good condition. Any gate in a fence shall be similarly constructed and maintained
and shall be kept securely locked at all times when the establishment is not in operation.
7. No material shall be placed in any establishment in such a manner that it is capable of being
transferred off the premises by wind, water or other natural causes.
a. All paper, cloth and rags and other fibers, and activities involving the same other than
loading and unloading, shall be within fully enclosed building.
8. All junk shall be stored or arranged so as to permit access by firefighting equipment and to prevent
the accumulation of water, and with no junk, scrap, machinery or equipment piled to a height
greater than ten (10) feet.
9. No material may be stored or stacked so that it is visible from abutting properties or adjoining
street rights-of-way.
10. No material shall be burned or incinerated at any time.
11. No automotive wrecking, junk, scrap storage and sales establishments shall be located on land
with a slope in excess of five (5) percent.
12. All vehicles within the automotive wrecking, junk, scrap storage and sales establishments shall be
completely drained of fuel, lubricants, battery fluid, transmission fluid, brake fluids, coolants, and
air conditioning fluids.
13. All additional Federal and State laws shall be satisfied.
14. The establishment shall at all times be maintained in such a manner as to prevent:
(i) any menace to public health and safety;
(ii) offensive or obnoxious odors;
(iii) the breeding, harboring or infestation of rats and other rodents and vermin; and
(iv) violation of any health, sanitary law, ordinance, or regulation of the Borough of
Highspire or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
15. All uses must comply with Borough building, health, safety, property and other applicable local,
county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such licenses, certificates, and
permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Borough, or shall be a condition of approval
16. Every structure erected upon the lot after the effective date of this Chapter shall be of fireproof
construction with the exception of fences.
G. Boat Launching Facility, Boat Storage Facility, andMarina
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-19
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
1. Outside areas for dry storage, repair and/or maintenance of watercraft shall be set back one fifty
(50) feet from any lot line and screened from abutting property in the R-L and R-M zoning
districts or existing residential use in the MN/C zoning district and screened. Otherwise the
required building setback shall be twenty five (25) feet.
2. All materials and activities not within completely enclosed buildings shall be surrounded by a
fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height. Such fence shall be completely sight obscuring and
maintained in good condition. Any gate in a fence shall be similarly constructed and maintained
and shall be kept securely locked at all times when the establishment is not in operation.
3. Major repairs (i.e. fiberglassing, spray painting, sanding) shall be permitted only within a
completely enclosed building.
4. Each interior street or road, parking area and walkway shall be designed to preserve natural
features.
5. Lighting from buildings shall not cause reflections on the surface of the water that will constitute a
hazard to navigation or cause reflections or glare on adjoining properties or streets.
6. If camping or other land based overnight accommodations are provided as part of the this use, then
such use shall comply with all applicable provisions of campgrounds herein this Part,
7. Exterior trash and recycling receptacles shall be provided. Such trash receptacles shall be routinely
emptied so as to prevent the scattering of litter and debris. All applications shall include a
description of a working plan for the cleanup of litter.
8. All uses must comply with Borough building, health, safety, property and other applicable local,
county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such licenses, certificates, and
permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Borough, or shall be a condition of
approval.
H. Campgrounds or Camps
1. The minimum lot area shall be five (5) acres.
2. Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.
3. All campsites shall be located at least twenty five (25) feet from any side or rear lot line and at
least fifty (50) feet from any public street right-of-way.
4. Each campsite shall be at least two thousand (2,000) square feet in size.
5. An internal road system shall be provided. All roads, streets, and access drives shall be designed
and constructed in accordance with Chapter 22 Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance and
construction and materials specifications standards.
6. All outdoor play areas shall be set back fifty (50) feet from any lot line and screened from adjacent
property in the R-L and R-M zoning districts or existing residential use in the MN/C zoning
district. Such outdoor play areas shall be used exclusively by registered guests and their visitors.
7. All campgrounds shall furnish centralized sanitary and garbage collection facilities that shall be
set back a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any lot line. Such facilities shall be screened
adjacent property in the R-L and R-M zoning districts or existing residential use in the MN/C
zoning district;
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-20
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
8. Any accessory retail or service commercial uses shall be set back a minimum of fifty (50) feet
from any lot line. Such accessory commercial uses shall be solely designed and constructed to
serve only the campground’s registered guests and their visitors. Any parking spaces provided for
these commercial uses shall only have vehicular access from the campground’s internal road
rather than the public street right-of-way. All accessory commercial uses and related parking shall
be screened abutting property in the R-L and R-Mzoning districts or existing residential use in the
MN/C zoning district;
9. A minimum of twenty (20) percent of the gross area of the campground shall be devoted to active
and passive recreational facilities, which shall not be located within fifty (50) feet of any lot line.
Responsibility for maintenance of the recreation area shall be with the landowner;
10. During operation every campground shall have an office in which shall be located the person
responsible for operation of the campground.
11. No permanent structures shall be permitted on any campsite other than fire places, pad for
recreational vehicles, and required utility facilities.
12. No recreational vehicles may be parked within a campground for more than one hundred eighty
(180) consecutive days.
13. No persons shall be permitted to permanently reside on any campsite.
14. All uses must comply with Borough building, health, safety, property and other applicable local,
county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such licenses, certificates, and
permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Borough, or shall be a condition of
approval.
I. Cemetery
1. The minimum lot area shall be two and one half (2.5) acres.
2. The total impervious to coverage shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the lot area.
3. All burial plots and all structures shall be located at least twenty five (25) feet from any lot line or
street right-of-way line.
4. No burial plot shall be permitted in any floodplain or flood fringe area.
5. Where permitted, any materials not within completely enclosed buildings shall be surrounded by a
fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height. Such fence shall be completely sight obscuring and
maintained in good condition. Any gate in a fence shall be similarly constructed and maintained
and shall be kept securely locked at all times when the establishment is not in operation.
6. The applicant shall file a site plan with the Borough to demonstrate the design and layout of the
proposed cemetery or cemetery expansion specifically illustrating: the proposed drainage plan, the
internal circulation plan, and the location of accessory building(s).
7. The owner(s) and operator(s) of a cemetery shall incorporate Best Managements Practices as
outlined in the most recent version of the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual (as amended or replaced from time to time by PADEP) to minimize negative impacts of
erosion, siltation and surface water and groundwater contamination.
8. At no time shall a corpse be exposed or visible from a public right-of-way or adjacent property.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-21
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
9. Any escrow account provided for by state or federal law shall be established in favor of the
Borough.
10. The use shall comply with all applicable state laws.
J. Clinic, Medical
1. In the MN/C zoning district, any accessory services, including laboratories and pharmacies for the
use of patients visiting medical practitioners in the clinic, may be permitted as part of the clinic
facility, subject to the following specific conditions:
a. All entrances and access to parts of the building in which these accessory services are
provided shall be from within the building and shall not be directly accessible without
passing through the principal building.
b. The hours during which these services are provided shall be the same as those during the
regular operation of the principal medical or dental clinic.
2. Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.
3. The applicant shall provide detailed information regarding solid, medical and hazardous materials
and waste handling, including a listing of all medical and hazardous materials and wastes used and
generated on site, and evidence indicating the disposal of all materials and wastes will be
accomplished in a manner that complies with Borough, state, and federal regulations.
K. Club, Clubhouse or Lodge, Private
1. All activities shall take place in a completely enclosed building.
2. No sign shall advertising the sale of food and/or beverages shall be permitted.
3. The owner(s) and operator(s) shall be responsible for the conduct and safety of the members and
their guests.
L. Commercial Recreation, Indoor
1. All activities shall take place in a completely enclosed building.
2. All structures where indoor commercial recreation occurs shall be soundproofed in a manner to
prevent sound from traveling outside, such as solid core doors, sound absorbent ceilings and
forced air ventilation.
3. No exterior microphone/speaker system shall be permitted.
4. Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.
M. Commercial Recreation, Outdoor
1. Minimum lot area shall be five (5) acres.
2. The subject property shall front on or have direct access via a public street (excluding alleys) to an
arterial or collector road or to Industrial Road as provided in the most recent version of the
Highspire Borough Comprehensive Plan.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-22
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
3. Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.
4. Required setbacks:
a. All outdoor recreation/activity areas shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from the
street right-of-way and any adjacent property in the R-L and R-M zoning districts or
existing residential use in the MN/C zoning district.
b. Any structures exceeding the maximum permitted height may be permitted so long as
they are set back from all lot lines at least the horizontal distance equal to their height,
plus an additional fifty (50) feet. Furthermore, such structures shall not be used for
occupancy.
c. Any booths or other structures used for the collection of admission and/or parking fees
shall be set back and arranged to prevent vehicle back ups on abutting roads and streets
during peak arrival periods. Any other collection of fees (roaming parking lot attendants)
shall be conducted in a manner to prevent vehicle back ups on adjoining street.
d. Otherwise all structures shall complywith the underlying zoning district setbacks.
5. Any exterior microphone/speaker system shall be oriented, arranged and/or screened to prevent
any objectionable noise impact on adjoining properties.
6. Exterior trash and recycling receptacles shall be provided amid any outdoor retail sales area. Such
trash receptacles shall be routinely emptied so as to prevent the scattering of litter and debris. All
applications shall include a description of a working plan for the cleanup of litter.
7. All outdoor storage not within completely enclosed buildings shall be surrounded by a fence or
wall at least six (6) feet in height. Such fence shall be completely sight obscuring and maintained
in good condition. Any gate in a fence shall be similarly constructed and maintained and shall be
kept securely locked at all times when the establishment is not in operation.
N. Communication Antennas, Towers, and Equipment Building Transmitting & Receiving Facilities
1. Applications for the construction of communication antennas, support structures, and related
facilities shall include a written report containing the following:
a. Information describing the tower height and design.
b. A cross section of the structure.
c. Engineering specifications detailing construction of tower, base, and guywire anchorage.
d. Information describing the proposed painting and lighting schemes.
e. Information describing the tower’s capacity, including the number and type of antennas
that it can accommodate.
f. All tower structure information shall be certified by a licenses professional engineer;
g. Certification that there is not suitable space on existing sites or structures where the
intended facility can be accommodated and function as required without reasonable
modification;
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-23
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
h. Technological evidence that the facility must go where proposed in order to satisfy its
function in the grid system and provide the quality of service required by law;
i. Written authorization from the property owner of the proposed site;
j. Inventory of existing antenna support structures within a two (2) mile radius of the
proposed site, discussing the unavailability of sites and reasons therefore; and
k. Evidence of the applicant’s good faith efforts to locate the antenna on an existing
structure.
l. Applicant shall demonstrate that he/she is licensed by the FCC to operate a
communications tower and/or communications antenna.
m. All uses must comply with Borough building, health, safety, property and other
applicable local, county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such
licenses, certificates, and permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Borough,
or shall be a condition of approval.
2. All other uses ancillary to the antenna, tower, and associated equipment are prohibited (except
accessory equipment buildings), unless otherwise permitted in the zoning district in which the site
is located. This includes, but is not limited to, business offices, maintenance depots and vehicle
storage.
3. Other standards of approval for antenna support structures and antenna-related facilities include
the following:
a. Setbacks
(1) Antenna support structures shall be set back from all property lines a distance
equal to the height of the antenna.
(2) The structure shall be self-collapsing or have a clear fall area setback equal to
the height of the structure and any attached antennas.
b. Antenna support structure height
(1) The maximum height of any single antenna support structure located at a single
site for one antenna shall be at the lowest height to function at the proposed
location, based upon specific engineering data pertaining to the function of the
antenna support structure, to be supplied to the applicant.
(2) An antenna support structure may exceed the maximum allowable height to
allow for the collocation of another antenna, provided that the applicant shows
evidence that the antenna support structure will be a shared location site.
c. Landscaping and screening
(1) If the antenna support structure site is located in an area of existing woodlands,
the existing woodlands shall be preserved to the fullest extent possible. The
existing woodlands shall be supplemented as needed to fully screen the antenna
support base.
(2) If the site is not wooded, the entire perimeter of the fence surrounding the
antenna support structure compound shall be planted with evergreen trees for
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-24
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
other planting at least six (6) feet in height at the time of planting. The planting
area around the antenna support structure shall have a minimum radius of ten
(10) feet. The evergreens shall be planted every five (5) feet on center.
(3) The site shall be landscaped to a density and height sufficient enough to screen
the facility base tower and buildings from abutting properties.
d. Equipment or accessory buildings. Accessory buildings must conform to the required
building setbacks as required for the zoning district in which the tower is located.
e. Security, maintenance, and fencing
(1) The site shall be secured by a fence with a minimum height of eight (8) feet to
limit accessibility by the general public.
(2) All guy wires shall be clearly marked so as to be visible at all times and shall be
located within the fence enclosure.
(3) All equipment and buildings must comply with Borough building, health, safety,
property and other applicable local.
f. Lighting and signs
(1) No signs shall be mounted on a communications tower except as may be
required by the Federal Communications Commission, Federal Aviation
Administration, or other governmental agencywhich has jurisdiction.
(2) All communications towers shall have lights as may be required by the Federal
Communications Commission, Federal Aviation Administration, or other
governmental agencies which have jurisdiction. If lighting is not required by
other agencies, then lighting acceptable to the Borough shall be required.
h. Antenna support structures shall be painted in the color that best allows it to blend into
the surroundings unless otherwise required by the Federal Aviation Administration
regulations. The use of grays, blues and greens may be appropriate.
i. Antenna support structure design and structural integrity. The owner of the antenna or
antenna support structure shall provide a registered professional engineer’s report
documenting that the structure meets the structural standards of the applicable building
code in the Telecommunications Industry Association.
j. Other
(1) Prior to issuance of a zoning permit for the erection of an antenna or antenna
support structure, the applicant shall obtain any required land development
approvals.
(2) A formal land development plan is not required if the antenna is to be mounted
on an existing structure.
(3) Evidence shall be submitted from a registered professional engineer certifying
that the proposed installation will not exceed the structural capacity of the
building or structure, taking into consideration winds and other loads associated
with location.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-25
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
(4) The applicant, owner, or operator of the antenna shall be licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission.
(5) The tower shall comply with all applicable Federal Aviation Administration,
Commonwealth Bureau of Aviation, and zoning regulations.
(6) Certification of insurance evidencing general liability in the minimum amount of
$1,000,000 per incident and property damage coverage in the minimum amount
of $1,000,000 per incident is required to cover the tower, antenna and structures.
k. Abandonment
(1) If an antenna support structure is unused, as evidenced by notice to the Federal
Communications Commission of intent to cease operations, for a continuous
period of twelve (12) months after said notice, it shall be deemed abandoned.
(2) Any antenna support structure or antenna that is deemed to be “abandoned”
must be removed within ninety (90) days.
(3) Removal of the antenna support structure shall be the responsibility of the owner
of the antenna support structure. At the time of land development plan approval,
the owner and/or his successors and assigns of the antenna support structure
must enter into an agreement with the Borough regarding the removal of an
abandoned antenna support structure, as herein defined.
(4) In the case of multiple operators sharing the use of a single tower, this provision
shall become effective when all users cease operation.
O. CommunityGarden/Market Garden
1. The following shall be permitted as part of a community garden and/or market garden:
a. Greenhouses, hoophouses, cold-frames, and similar structures used to extend the growing
season.
b. Open space associated with and intended for use as garden areas.
c. Signs limited to identification, information and directional signs, including sponsorship
information where the sponsorship information is clearly secondary to other permitted
information on any particular sign.
d. Benches, bike racks, raised/accessible planting beds, compost bins, picnic tables,
seasonal farm stands, fences, garden art, rain barrel systems, chicken coops, beehives,
and children's play areas.
e. Buildings, limited to tool or utility/storage sheds, shade pavilions, barns, restroom
facilities with composting toilets, and planting preparation houses.
f. Off-street parking and walkways.
g. Uses and structures shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the following
regulations.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-26
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
(1). Location. Buildings shall be set back at least five (5) feet from any abutting
property in the R-L and R-M zoning districts or existing residential use in the
MN/C zoning district.
(2). Height. No building or other structure shall be greater than twenty-five (25) feet
in height.
(3). Building Coverage. The combined area of all buildings, excluding greenhouses
and hoophouses, shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the garden site lot area.
(4). Parking and Walkways. Off-street parking shall be required only for those
garden sites exceeding fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in lot area. In
addition to the parking reduction and alternative accommodations provided for
in Part 19 of this Chapter, such parking shall be limited in size to ten (10)
percent of the garden site lot area and shall be either unpaved or surfaced with
gravel or similar loose material or shall be paved with pervious paving material.
Walkways shall be unpaved except as necessary to meet the needs of individuals
with disabilities.
(5). Signs. Signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area per side and shall not
exceed four (4) feet in height.
(6). Seasonal Farm Stands. Seasonal farm stands shall be removed from the premises
or stored inside a building on the premises during that time of the year when the
garden is not open for public use.
3. Market gardens shall not be permitted in the R-L and R-M zoning districts.
4. The environmental impacts that are likely to be generated by surface water and
stormwater run-off and specific measures employed to mitigate or eliminate any negative
impacts. The applicant shall further furnish evidence that the impacts generated by the
proposed use fall within acceptable levels, as regulated by applicable laws and ordinance,
including but not limited to those listed in Part 4 of this Chapter. At a minimum, surface
water and stormwater run-off from the site shall be diverted away from adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way, and shall not contaminate downstream watercourses.
P. Contractors’ Office and Storage Yard
1. That portion of the lot (including buildings) intended or utilized for the outdoor storage of
contractor's equipment or building materials shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any
adjacent property in the R-L and R-M zoning districts or existing residential use in the MN/C
zoning district.
2. In no case shall any outdoor storage area of contractor's equipment or building materials be
permitted to be stored between the principal building and the public street (excluding alleys) in the
C-G zoning district.
3. A contractor’s yard that abuts property in the R-L and R-M zoning districts or existing residential
use in the MN/C zoning district shall not begin mechanical operations until 7:00 A.M. and shall
cease all mechanical operations by 9:00 P.M.
4. On-lot traffic circulation channels, storage/inventory, and parking areas shall be clearly delineated.
5. All outdoor storage areas shall not occupy any part of the existing or future street right-of-way
(including sidewalks and alleys) or required off-street parking areas.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-27
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
6. All unpaved building setback areas shall be covered with grass or similar vegetative material and
shall at all times be clean, vacant and well maintained.
7. All areas used for the storage and parking areas shall be aligned and displayed in an orderly
fashion so that circulation for fire safety can be maintained at all times.
8. All areas used for the storage/inventory and parking areas shall be graded for proper drainage and
shall be surfaced so as to provide a durable and dustless surface, such as concrete or bituminous
concrete surface, unless an alternative material and/or design as part of a readily accepted
stormwater BMP is approved by the Borough Engineer.
9. Within the C-G zoning district, all permitted accessory activities which are clearly incidental to
the principal use, including drilling, cutting, sawing, mixing, crushing, or some other preparation
of building materials, plus any testing or repair of motorized equipment, shall be conducted within
a completely-enclosed building.
10. All materials and activities not within completely enclosed buildings shall be surrounded by a
fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height. Such fence shall be completely sight obscuring and
maintained in good condition. Any gate in a fence shall be similarly constructed and maintained
and shall be kept securely locked at all times when the establishment is not in operation.
11. There shall be no retail or wholesale sales of contractor's equipment or building materials.
12. Any exterior microphone/speaker system shall be oriented, arranged and/or screened to prevent
any objectionable noise impact on adjoining properties.
Q. Convenience Store, General
1. The subject property shall have direct access via a public street (excluding alleys) to an arterial or
collector road as provided in the most recent version of the Highspire Borough Comprehensive
Plan.
2. Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.
3. If motor vehicle washing and/or fuel/gasoline sales are provided as part of the general convenience
store, then such use shall comply with all applicable provisions of automobile, heavy equipment
and similar motor vehicle washing, and/or fuel/gasoline sales herein this Part, except that no
sale/rental or repair/servicing of motor vehicles shall occur, and all activities except parking and
those normally required to be performed at the fuel and air pumps and washing and vacuuming
areas shall be performed within a completely enclosed building.
4. If restaurant and food service facilities are provided as part of the general convenience store, then
such use shall comply with all applicable provisions of restaurants and food services herein this
Part.
R. Convenience Store, Neighborhood
1. If restaurant and food service facilities are provided as part of the general convenience store, then
such use shall comply with all applicable provisions of restaurants and food services herein this
Part.
S. Daycare, Commercial
1. Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-28
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
2. An outdoor play areas for children shall be provided. Off street parking lots and areas shall not be
used as outdoor play areas. Outdoor play areas shall not be located between the principal building
and the public street (excluding alleys). All outdoor play areas must provide a means of shade,
such as a shade tree(s) or pavilion(s). Any vegetative materials located within the outdoor play
areas shall be of a non-harmful type (poisonous, thorny, allergenic, etc.)
a. Additionally, outdoor play areas shall be located at least twenty (20) feet from abutting
property in the R-L and R-M zoning districts or existing residential use in the MN/C
zoning district, and screened in accordance with Part 4 of this Chapter, along with a fence
at least four (4) feet in height. Outdoor play areas shall be limited to use between 8:00 am
and 8:00 pm.
3. No part of a child daycare property shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of a property
containing an adult-related facility.
4. Off-street parking areas shall be provided and arranged so that persons and/or children do not have
to cross streets on or adjacent to the site.
5. Primary passenger “drop-off” and “pickup” areas should be provided on site and arranged so that
the passengers do not have to cross traffic lanes on or adjacent to the site, and passenger “dropoff”
and “pickup” areas shall be located in a manner that minimizes detrimental traffic impacts
(both pedestrian and vehicular) on the surrounding neighborhood.
6. Enrollment shall be defined as the largest number largest number of persons and/or children under
daycare supervision at any one time during a seven (7) day period.
7. All uses must comply with Borough building, health, safety, property and other applicable local,
county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such licenses, certificates, and
permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Borough, or shall be a condition of
approval.
T. Dog Day Care
1. Minimum Lot Area - Unless animals are kept inside at all times, each site shall contain at least one
(1) acre; otherwise, the minimum lot area requirement of the applicable zoning district shall apply.
2. In the C-G zoning district, all outside play areas shall be located within the rear yard, behind the
principal building. In all zoning districts, outside play areas shall be completely surrounded by a
solid six foot (6) high fence. Play areas shall be located a minimum of twenty five (25) feet from
all lot lines, and seventy five (75) feet from any adjacent property in the R-L and R-M zoning
districts or existing residential use in the MN/C zoning district.
3. Animals shall be permitted to exercise outside in the play areas during the hours of 8:00 am to
8:00 pm.
4. The applicant shall furnish evidence of effective means of animal waste collection and disposal
that shall be implemented.
U. Farmer’s Market and/or Flea Market
1. The retail display/sales area shall be considered to be that of the smallest rectangle, or other
regular geometric shape which encompasses all display stands, booths, tables or stalls, plus any
adjoining aisles and/or walkways from which consumers can inspect items for sale. The retail
display/sales area shall include all indoor and/or outdoor areas as listed above.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-29
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
2. All areas used for outdoor retail display/sales area shall comply with Outside Sales and Display
areas in Part 4 of this Chapter.
3. All outdoor display and sales of merchandise shall begin no earlier than 6:00 a.m., and be
completed no later than official sunset.
4. Any exterior microphone/speaker system shall be oriented, arranged and/or screened to prevent
any objectionable noise impact on adjoining properties.
5. Exterior trash and recycling receptacles shall be provided amid any outdoor retail sales area. Such
trash receptacles shall be routinely emptied so as to prevent the scattering of litter and debris. All
applications shall include a description of a working plan for the cleanup of litter.
V. Food Service
1. The owner(s) and operator(s) of a food service facility shall be responsible for the conduct and
safety of the patrons.
2. Kitchen windows capable of being open, and ventilation equipment outlets and other similar
equipment associated with such uses shall not be located or oriented directly toward any abutting
property in the R-L and R-M zoning districts or existing residential use in the MN/C zoning
district.
3. Adequate provision for the collection and disposal of greases shall be demonstrated.
4. In addition to other provisions in this Part relating to accessory outdoor café/seating, where
accessory outdoor café/seating may be permitted, exterior speaker/microphone systems shall be
oriented away from and/or screened to prevent objectionable noise impact on abutting properties.
5. In the MN/C and CBD zoning districts, accessory drive-thrus and drive-ins are not permitted.
6. All uses must comply with Borough building, health, safety, property and other applicable local,
county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such licenses, certificates, and
permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Borough, or shall be a condition of
approval.
W. Forestry
Forestry or commercial timber harvesting, excluding the cutting of trees for the personal use of the
landowner or for pre-commercial timber stand improvement, is permitted subject to the following criteria:
1. Timber harvesting shall be setback a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any lot line.
2. All timber harvesting practices must protect nearby structures and utility lines. No uncontrolled
felling shall be allowed.
3. To avoid traffic congestion and sound disturbance, all activities should start after 7:30 a.m. and
end by 6:00 p.m. during the working week. No forestry activities shall take place between the
hours of 6:00 pm and 7:30 am neither on weekdays nor at any time on weekends or holidays.
4. Notification of Commencement or Completion
For all timber harvesting operations that are expected to exceed one-half (1/2) acres, the
landowner shall notify the Zoning Officer at least thirty (30) days before the operation commences
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-30
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
and within fifteen (15) days before the operation is completed. No timber harvesting shall occur
until the notice has been provided. Notification shall be in writing and shall specify the land on
which harvesting will occur, the expected size of the harvest area and, as applicable, the
anticipated starting or completion date of the operation and logging plan. This written notification
shall also specify any roads affected, dates of affect, plans to restore any damages to roads and
contact information for the logging operations submitted to owners abutting the road used to
access the logging site.
5. Preparation of a Logging Plan
Every landowner on whose land timber harvesting is to occur shall prepare a written logging plan
in the form specified in this subsection. No timber harvesting shall occur until the plan has been
prepared and proper notification of commencement is provided to the Borough. The provisions of
this plan shall be followed throughout the operation. The plan shall be available at the harvest site
at all times during the operation and shall be provided to the Zoning Officer upon request.
6. Responsibility for Compliance
The landowner and the operator shall be jointly and severally responsible for complying with the
terms of the logging plan.
7. Contents of the Logging Plan
a. As a minimum, the logging plan shall include the following:
(1). Design, construction, maintenance and retirement of the access system,
including haul roads, skid roads, skid trails and landings.
(2). Design, construction and maintenance of water control measures and structures
such as culverts, broad-based dips, filter strips and water bars.
(3). Design, construction and maintenance of stream and wetland crossings.
(4). The general location of the proposed operation in relation Borough streets and
state highways, including any accesses to those streets and highways.
b. Each logging plan shall include a site map containing the following information:
(1). Site location and boundaries, including both the boundaries of the property on
which the timber harvest will take place and the boundaries of the proposed
harvest area within that property.
(2). Significant topographic features related to potential environmental problems.
(3). Location of all earth disturbance activities such as roads, landings and water
control measures and structures.
(4). Location of all crossing of waters of the Commonwealth.
(5). The general location of the proposed operation to Borough streets and state
highways, including any accesses to those streets and highways.
8. Compliance with Applicable Regulations
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-31
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
The logging plan shall address and comply with the requirements of all applicable state laws and
regulations and Borough ordinances, including, but not, limited to, the following:
a. Soil Erosion and Sedimentation control regulations and standards of the County
Conservation District and/or PA DEP requirements.
b. Stream crossing and wetlands protection regulations of PA DEP and/or the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers.
c. Stormwater management plans and regulations issued pursuant to the Borough of
Highspire Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
9. Relationship of State Laws, Regulations, and Permits to the Logging Plan
Any permits required by state laws and regulations shall be attached to and become part of the
logging plan. A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan that satisfies the requirements of
Section 25 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 102 shall also satisfy the minimum requirements for the
logging plan and associated map specified previously, provided that all information required by
these subsections is included or attached.
10. Responsibility for RoadMaintenance and Repair; Road Bonding
The landowner and the operator shall be responsible for repairing any damage to Borough streets
caused by traffic associated with the timber harvest operation pursuant to the provisions of Section
67 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 189, hauling in excess of posted weight limit. The Borough may
require the landowner and/or operator to furnish a bond to guarantee the repair of any such
damage, pursuant to the said provisions of the Pennsylvania Code.
X. Funeral Home
1. The subject property shall front on or have direct access via a public street (excluding alleys) to an
arterial or collector road as provided in the most recent version of the Highspire Borough
Comprehensive Plan, but in no case shall a funeral procession will be allowed to form on 2nd
Street.
2. Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.
3. All rooms available for funerals and viewing shall be located within the principal building.
4. There shall be no receiving vault, preparation room, or display of merchandise visible from
outside of the principal building.
5. The applicant shall provide detailed information regarding solid, medical and hazardous materials
and waste handling, including a listing of all medical and hazardous materials and wastes used and
generated on site and evidence indicating the disposal of all materials and wastes will be
accomplished in a manner that complies with Borough, state, and federal regulations.
6. All uses must comply with Borough building, health, safety, property and other applicable local,
county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such licenses, certificates, and
permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Borough, or shall be a condition of
approval.
Y. Home Improvement Center, Lumber, and Building Materials Sales
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-32
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
1. The subject property shall front on or have direct access via a public street (excluding alleys) to an
arterial or collector road or to Industrial Road as provided in the most recent version of the
Highspire Borough Comprehensive Plan.
2. Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.
3. On-lot traffic circulation channels, storage, inventory/display/sales, and parking areas shall be
clearly delineated.
4. All outdoor storage, sales, display, and inventory areas shall not occupy any part of the existing or
future street right-of-way (including sidewalks and alleys) or required off-street parking areas.
5. All outdoor storage, sales, display, and inventory areas shall be set back at least twenty-five (25)
feet from the street right-of-way line and lot lines, and shall not be permitted in required front,
side, or rear building setback areas. All unpaved building setback areas shall be covered with grass
or similar vegetative material and shall at all times be clean, vacant and well maintained.
6. All outdoor storage, sales, display, and inventory areas shall be set back a minimum of fifty (50)
feet from any adjacent property in the R-L and R-M zoning districts or existing residential use in
the MN/C zoning district.
7. All areas used for the storage, inventory/display/sales and parking areas shall be aligned and
displayed in an orderly fashion so that circulation for fire safety can be maintained at all times.
8. Outdoor storage, sales, display, and inventory areas shall be all areas open for public display,
including, but not limited to, shelves, racks, bins, stalls, tables, and booths, plus any adjoining
aisles or walkways from which consumers can inspect items for sale.
9. All areas used for the storage, inventory/display/sales and parking areas shall be graded for proper
drainage and shall be surfaced so as to provide a durable and dustless surface, such as concrete or
bituminous concrete surface, unless an alternative material and/or design as part of an readily
accepted stormwater BMP is approved by the Borough Engineer.
10. All permitted activities, including drilling, cutting, sawing, mixing, crushing, or some other
preparation of building materials, plus any testing or repair of motorized equipment, except for the
inventory/display/sales, parking, shall be conducted within a completely-enclosed building.
11. All outdoor storage, sales, display, and inventory areas shall be completely enclosed by
surrounded by a fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height.
a. Additionally, where outdoor storage, sales, display, and inventory areas abut a street
right-of-way, a perimeter landscape strip, a minimum of five (5) feet in width planted
with a hedge, masonry wall, and/or other desirable planting of at least two (2) feet in
height, along with grass or other living ground cover shall be planted, mulched and
maintained on all portions of the perimeter landscape strip, and shall be provided and
protected by permanent curbing.
12. Any exterior microphone/speaker system shall be oriented, arranged and/or screened to prevent
any objectionable noise impact on adjoining properties.
12. Exterior trash and recycling receptacles shall be provided amid any outdoor sales area. Such trash
receptacles shall be routinely emptied so as to prevent the scattering of litter and debris. All
applications shall include a description of a working plan for the cleanup of litter.
Z. Hospital
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-33
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
1. The subject property shall have direct access via a public street (excluding alleys) to an arterial or
collector road as provided in the most recent version of the Highspire Borough Comprehensive
Plan.
2. Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.
3. Primary visitor or passenger “drop-off” and “pickup” areas should be provided on site and
arranged so that the passengers do not have to cross traffic lanes on or adjacent to the site.
4. Emergency entrances shall not be located or oriented directly toward any adjacent property in the
R-L and R-M zoning districts or existing residential use in the MN/C zoning district.
5. Sufficient off-street stacking area for the movement of the emergency vehicles shall be provided
on the site. A minimum one hundred (100) foot long on-site stacking area for the emergency
vehicles shall be provided on the site. No emergency vehicle will be allowed to stack or be stored
on public streets.
6. The institution shall submit a copy of its emergency operations plan (EOP) to the local and county
emergency management agency coordinator. The EOP shall also include detailed information
regarding solid, medical and hazardous materials and waste handling, including a listing of all
medical and hazardous materials and wastes used and generated on site and evidence indicating
the disposal of all materials and wastes will be accomplished in a manner that complies with
Borough, state, and federal regulations.
7. All uses must comply with Borough building, health, safety, property and other applicable local,
county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such licenses, certificates, and
permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Borough, or shall be a condition of
approval.
AA. Hotel
1. Any accessory eating, drinking, retail, or meeting room use should be directly accessible by
passing through the principal hotel building:
a. But in no case shall drive-thru facilities be permitted; and,
b. One (1) additional freestanding signs (other than those permitted for the principal hotel
use) shall be permitted.
2. Each rental unit/room shall have its own toilet and bathing or shower facilities.
3. No guest vehicles will be allowed to form or stack on 2nd Street.
BB. Industrial Use, General
1. The subject property shall have direct access via a public street (excluding alleys) to an arterial or
collector road as provided in the most recent version of the Highspire Borough Comprehensive
Plan.
2. Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.
3. The applicant shall provide a detailed description of the proposed use in each of the following
topics:
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-34
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
a. The nature of the on-site processing operations, the materials used in the process, the
products produced, and the generation and methods for disposal of any by-products. In
addition the applicant shall furnish evidence that the disposal of materials will be
accomplished in a manner that complies with State and Federal regulations.
b. The general scale of the operation in terms of its market area, specific floor space
requirements for each step of the industrial process, the total number of employees on
each shift, and an overall needed site size.
c. Any environmental impacts that are likely to be generated (e.g. odor, noise, smoke, dust
litter, glare, vibration, electrical disturbance, waste water, storm water, solid waste, etc.)
and specific measures employed to mitigate or eliminate any negative impacts. The
applicant shall further furnish expert evidence that the impacts generated by the proposed
use fall within acceptable levels as regulated by applicable laws and ordinances,
including, but not limited to, those of Part 4 of this Chapter.
4. No machinery, equipment, or materials shall be stored in required front, side, or rear building
setback areas. All unpaved building setback areas shall be covered with grass or similar vegetative
material and shall at all times be clean, vacant and well maintained.
5. All machinery, equipment, or materials provided in unenclosed storage facilities shall be a
minimum of fifty (50) feet from any adjacent property in the R-L and R-M zoning districts or
existing residential use in the MN/C zoning district.
6. All machinery, equipment, or materials and activities not within a completely enclosed buildings
shall be surrounded by a fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height. Such fence shall be
completely sight obscuring and maintained in good condition. Any gate in a fence shall be
similarly constructed and maintained and shall be kept securely locked at all times when the
establishment is not in operation.
7. All machinery, equipment, or materials shall be stored or arranged in an orderly fashion so that
circulation for fire safety can be maintained at all times.
8. All uses must comply with Borough building, health, safety, property and other applicable local,
county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such licenses, certificates, and
permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Borough, or shall be a condition of
approval.
CC. Industrial Use, Light Industrial, Light Uses. Light industrial uses are permitted subject to the following
criteria:
1. The applicant shall provide a detailed description of the proposed use in each of the following
topics:
a. The nature of the on-site processing operations, the materials used in the process, the
products produced, and the generation and methods for disposal of any by-products. In
addition the applicant shall furnish evidence that the disposal of materials will be
accomplished in a manner that complies with State and Federal regulations.
b. The general scale of the operation in terms of its market area, specific floor space
requirements for each step of the industrial process, the total number of employees on
each shift, and an overall needed site size.
c. Any environmental impacts that are likely to be generated (e.g. odor, noise, smoke, dust
litter, glare, vibration, electrical disturbance, waste water, storm water, solid waste, etc.)
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-35
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
and specific measures employed to mitigate or eliminate any negative impacts. The
applicant shall further furnish expert evidence that the impacts generated by the proposed
use fall within acceptable levels as regulated by applicable laws and ordinances,
including, but not limited to, those of Part 4 of this Chapter.
2. In the C-G zoning district, in no case shall machinery, equipment, or materials of any kind be
permitted to be stored between the principal building and the public street (excluding alleys).
3. No machinery, equipment, or materials shall be stored in required front, side, or rear building
setback areas. All unpaved building setback areas shall be covered with grass or similar vegetative
material and shall at all times be clean, vacant and well maintained.
4. All accessory storage of machinery, equipment, or materials and activities not within a completely
enclosed buildings shall be surrounded by a fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height. Such fence
shall be completely sight obscuring and maintained in good condition. Any gate in a fence shall be
similarly constructed and maintained and shall be kept securely locked at all times when the
establishment is not in operation.
5. All machinery, equipment, or materials shall be stored or arranged in an orderly fashion so that
circulation for fire safety can be maintained at all times.
6. All machinery, equipment, or materials provided in unenclosed storage facilities shall be a
minimum of fifty (50) feet from any adjacent property in the R-L and R-M zoning districts or
existing residential use in the MN/C zoning district.
7. Within the CBD zoning district, all activities shall be performed within a completely enclosed
building.
8. All uses must comply with Borough building, health, safety, property and other applicable local,
county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such licenses, certificates, and
permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Borough, or shall be a condition of
approval.
DD. Kennel, Commercial
1. Minimum Lot Area - Unless animals are kept inside at all times, each site shall contain at least one
(1) acre; otherwise, the minimum lot area requirement of the applicable zoning district shall apply.
2. All structures where animals are kept shall be completely enclosed and soundproofed in a manner
to prevent sound and odor from traveling outside, such as solid core doors, sound absorbent
ceilings and forced air ventilation.
3. In the C-G zoning district, all structures where animals are kept that are not completely enclosed,
and also including any outdoor animal pens, stalls, and runways shall not be located be between
the principal building and the public street (excluding alleys), and within all zoning districts, they
shall not be located within any required building setbacks. These outside and unenclosed facilities
shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet from all lot lines, and one hundred (100) feet from any
adjacent property in the R-L and R-M zoning districts or existing residential use in the MN/C
zoning district.
4. Where outdoor animal pens, stalls, or runways are permitted, animals shall be permitted to
exercise outside daily between the hours of 8:00 am to 8:00 pm.
5. The applicant shall furnish evidence of effective means of animal waste collection and disposal
that shall be implemented.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-36
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
6. The kennel shall be operated in full compliance with the State Animal Welfare Act and applicable
state kennel regulations.
EE. Laundry & Dry Cleaning Establishment (Industrial)
1. The applicant shall provide a detailed description of the proposed use in each of the following
topics:
a. The nature of the on-site processing operations, the materials used in the process, and the
generation and methods for disposal of any by-products. In addition the applicant shall
furnish evidence that the disposal of materials will be accomplished in a manner that
complies with State and Federal regulations.
b. The general scale of the operation in terms of its market area, specific floor space
requirements for each step of the industrial process, the total number of employees on
each shift, and an overall needed site size.
c. Any environmental impacts that are likely to be generated (e.g. odor, noise, smoke, dust
litter, glare, vibration, electrical disturbance, waste water, storm water, solid waste, etc.)
and specific measures employed to mitigate or eliminate any negative impacts. The
applicant shall further furnish expert evidence that the impacts generated by the proposed
use fall within acceptable levels as regulated by applicable laws and ordinances,
including, but not limited to, those of Part 4 of this Chapter.
2. No equipment or materials shall be stored in required front, side, or rear building setback areas.
All unpaved building setback areas shall be covered with grass or similar vegetative material and
shall at all times be clean, vacant and well maintained.
3. All accessory storage of equipment or materials and activities not within a completely enclosed
buildings shall be surrounded by a fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height. Such fence shall be
completely sight obscuring and maintained in good condition. Any gate in a fence shall be
similarly constructed and maintained and shall be kept securely locked at all times when the
establishment is not in operation.
4. All equipment or materials shall be stored or arranged in an orderly fashion so that circulation for
fire safety can be maintained at all times.
5. All equipment or materials provided in unenclosed storage facilities shall be a minimum of fifty
(50) feet from any adjacent property in the R-L and R-M zoning districts or existing residential
use in the MN/C zoning district.
6. All uses must comply with Borough building, health, safety, property and other applicable local,
county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such licenses, certificates, and
permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Borough, or shall be a condition of
approval.
FF. Laundry & Dry Cleaning Establishment (Personal)
1. All activities shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building.
2. Laundry and dry cleaning establishments shall be intended for personal use only.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-37
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
3. Any exhaust ventilation equipment outlets and other similar equipment associated with such uses
shall not be located or oriented directly toward any abutting property in the R-L and R-M zoning
districts or existing residential use in the MN/C zoning district.
4. In the MN/C and CBD zoning districts, accessory drive-thrus and drive-ins are not permitted.
GG. Library
1. In the R-L, R-M, MN/C, and CBD zoning districts, any permitted public building shall maintain
an exterior appearance that resembles and is compatible with any existing dwellings and buildings
in the neighborhood, and building height and setbacks shall be consistent with surrounding
development in the neighborhood. In all other districts, all height, area, setback and coverage
standards within the underlying zoning district shall apply.
HH. Mini-Storage Warehouses
1. Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.
2. All areas used for storage and loading, interior traffic aisles, required off-street parking areas, and
accessways shall be graded for proper drainage and shall be surfaced so as to provide a durable
and dustless surface, such as concrete or bituminous concrete surface, unless an alternative
material and/or design as part of an readily accepted stormwater BMP is approved by the Borough
Engineer.
3. Nothing shall be stored in interior traffic aisles, required off-street parking areas, loading areas or
accessways.
4. Outdoor storage shall be limited to recreational vehicles, boats and trailers parked on paved areas.
All such items stored outside of an unenclosed building must be licensed and inspected, if
applicable, and in operable condition.
5. All permitted outdoor storage of recreational vehicles, boats and trailers not within a completely
enclosed buildings shall be surrounded by a fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height. Such fence
shall be completely sight obscuring and maintained in good condition. Any gate in a fence shall be
similarly constructed and maintained and shall be kept securely locked at all times when the
establishment is not in operation.
6. The storage inoperable, unlicensed, or inspected motor vehicles outside of a completely enclosed
building shall be prohibited
7. All mini-storage units shall be of fire-resistant construction.
8. Mini-storage units shall be used solely for the dead storage of property. The following lists
examples of uses expressly prohibited upon the site:
a. Auctions, commercial wholesale or retail sales, or garage sales.
b. Offices or residential dwellings.
c. The servicing, repair, or fabrication of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, lawn mowers,
appliances, or other similar equipment.
d. The operation of power tools, spray-painting equipment, table saws, lathes, compressors,
welding equipment, kilns, or other similar equipment.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-38
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
e. The establishment of a transfer and storage business.
f. The storage of trash, radioactive or highly toxic substances, garbage, refuse, explosives or
flammable materials, hazardous substances, animal carcasses or skins, or similar items
that are dangerous, noxious or offensive because of odors, dust, noise, fumes, or
vibrations.
g. The applicant shall adequately demonstrate that all mini-storage/ rental and/or use
contracts shall specifically prohibit these uses.
9. All garage doors of mini-storage units or outdoor storage areas shall not be located directly facing
toward abutting property in the R-L and R-M zoning districts or existing residential use in the
MN/C zoning district.
10 All buildings and permitted outdoors storage shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any
adjacent property in the R-L and R-M zoning districts or existing residential use in the MN/C
zoning district.
11. Minimum separation between buildings shall be twenty (20) feet, which shall allow passage by
emergency vehicles.
12. No building shall be longer than two hundred (200) feet.
13. Exterior trash and recycling receptacles shall be provided amid any outdoor sales area. Such trash
receptacles shall be routinely emptied so as to prevent the scattering of litter and debris. All
applications shall include a description of a working plan for the cleanup of litter.
HH. Motel
1. Any accessory eating, drinking, retail, or meeting room use shall be physically attached to the
principal motel building subject to the following:
a. No drive-thru shall be permitted; and,
b. One (1) additional freestanding signs (other than those permitted for the principal motel
use) shall be permitted.
2. Each rental unit/room shall have its own toilet and bathing or shower facilities.
II. Municipal Owned Uses
1. In the R-L, R-M, MN/C, and CBD zoning districts, any permitted public building shall maintain
an exterior appearance that resembles and is compatible with any existing dwellings and buildings
in the neighborhood, and building height and setbacks shall be consistent with surrounding
development in the neighborhood. In all other districts, all height, area, setback and coverage
standards within the underlying zoning district shall apply.
2. In the R-L, R-M, and MN/C zoning districts, the outdoor storage of vehicles, materials, and
equipment shall not be permitted.
JJ. Nightclubs
1. A nightclub serving and/or selling alcohol shall be located in accordance and otherwise comply
with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-39
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
2. All buildings shall be completely enclosed and soundproofed in a manner to prevent sound from
traveling outside, such as solid core doors.
3. The owner(s) and operator(s) of a nightclub shall be responsible for the conduct and safety of the
patrons.
4. Exterior trash and recycling receptacles shall be provided amid any outdoor sales area. Such trash
receptacles shall be routinely emptied so as to prevent the scattering of litter and debris. All
applications shall include a description of a working plan for the cleanup of litter.
5. All uses must comply with Borough building, health, safety, property and other applicable local,
county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such licenses, certificates, and
permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Borough, or shall be a condition of
approval.
LL. Offices, Business Professional
1. Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.
MM. Offices, Medical
1. The applicant shall provide detailed information regarding solid, medical and hazardous materials
and waste handling, including a listing of all medical and hazardous materials and wastes used and
generated on site and evidence indicating the disposal of all materials and wastes will be
accomplished in a manner that complies with Borough, state, and federal regulations.
NN. Parking Lot. Parking Structure and Lots
1. Driveways, access drives or other points of ingress/egress for motor vehicles shall generally be
taken from alleys.
2. No ingress or egress points shall be taken from 2nd Street in the CBD zoning district.
3. Off-street surface parking lots shall not be located along, have frontage, or otherwise abut 2nd
Street in the MN/C and CBD zoning districts
3. Off-street surface parking lots shall not be located on corner lots, on or adjacent to the intersection
of two (2) streets.
4. Off-street surface parking lots abutting public street right-of-way including alleys, shall be
provided with a continuous street-fronting three and one half (3 ½) foot high masonry wall or a
perimeter planting at least five (5) feet in depth measured from all sides of the parking area
towards the property/street line with a mix of high and low level screening in accordance with Part
4 of this Chapter. Wall breaks for driveways shall be not more than twenty four (24) feet in width.
5. All above ground off-street parking garage and structures shall comply with all provisions for
principal buildings and uses in the zoning district where the parking structures and building is
proposed.
6. In the MN/C and CBD zoning districts, parking garages and structures located along any street
right-of-way line (excluding alleys) shall be provided with continuous, usable, street-fronting,
ground-level, non-residential facades, space, uses along the entire length of the structure, except
for ingress and egress points necessary for retail store entrances and pedestrian entrances to stairs
and elevator lobbies into the garage or structure.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-40
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
7. Parking garages and structures shall comply with additional design standards set forth in Chapter
22 Subdivision and Land Development.
8. In no case shall parking lots be permitted as a principal use or as an accessory use on a lot without
a permitted principal use on the lot in the R-L and R-M zoning districts. In order to provide for
additional accessory parking for a permitted principal use, such parking shall be located on the
same lot as the permitted principal use.
OO. Parks, Playgrounds and Other Non-Commercial Recreational Uses.
1. Parks, playgrounds, and other non-commercial recreational uses shall be developed in a manner
that preserves natural features, watercourses, unique rock outcrops, slopes of greater than fifteen
(15) percent, and vegetation.
2. Hours of operation and activities shall comply with all applicable Borough policies and
regulations relating to parks and public outdoor facilities.
3. Exterior trash and recycling receptacles shall be provided. Such trash receptacles shall be routinely
emptied so as to prevent the scattering of litter and debris. All applications shall include a
description of a working plan for the cleanup of litter.
PP. Place of Worship and Related Uses
1. In the R-L, R-M, MN/C, and CBD zoning districts, any permitted place of worship shall maintain
an exterior appearance that is compatible with any existing dwellings and buildings in the
neighborhood.
2. In R-L, R-M, MN/C, and CBD zoning districts, building height and setbacks shall be consistent
with surrounding development in the neighborhood. In all other districts, all height, area, setback
and coverage standards within the underlying zoning district shall apply.
3. Primary passenger “drop-off” and “pickup” areas should be provided on site and arranged so that
the passengers do not have to cross traffic lanes on or adjacent to the site, and passenger “dropoff”
and “pickup” areas shall be located in a manner that minimizes detrimental traffic impacts
(both pedestrian and vehicular) on the surrounding neighborhood.
4. All places of worship with attendance or seating capacity of two hundred-fifty (250) or more
students shall front and have access to an arterial or collector road as provided in the most recent
version of the Highspire Borough Comprehensive Plan.
5. Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.
6. Off-street parking areas shall be provided and arranged so that persons do not have to cross streets
on or adjacent to the site.
QQ. Plant Nursery
1. The display and sale of items not grown or produced on the premises (or adjacent properties) shall
be incidental and accessory to the plant nursery operation. The display and sales area for those
items shall be limited to not more than twenty five (25) percent of the total gross display and sales
area (indoor and outdoor) on the property.
a. The display, sale and/or repair of power tools or motorized nursery, lawn or garden
equipment shall not be permitted in the PR/OS zoning district.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-41
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
2. All outdoor display areas shall be set back at least twenty-five (25) feet from the street right-ofway
line, and fifty (50) feet from any adjacent property in the R-L and R-M zoning districts or
existing residential use in the MN/C zoning district.
3. All structural improvements (including parking and loading facilities and inventory/sales/display
areas, but not including a free standing sign) shall be screened from abutting property in the R-L
and R-Mzoning districts or existing residential use in the MN/C zoning district.
RR. Post Office
1. In the MN/C and CBD zoning districts, any permitted post office shall maintain an exterior
appearance that resembles and is compatible with any existing dwellings and buildings in the
neighborhood, and building height and setbacks shall be consistent with surrounding development
in the neighborhood. In all other districts, all height, area, setback and coverage standards within
the underlying zoning district shall apply.
2. In the MN/C and CBD zoning districts, the outdoor storage of vehicles, materials, and equipment
shall not be permitted.
SS. Public/Private Utility Building or Structure
1. The applicant must demonstrate that the selected location is necessary for public service and the
use cannot be supplied if located elsewhere.
2. In the R-L, R-M, MN/C, and CBD zoning districts, any permitted public building shall maintain
an exterior appearance that resembles and is compatible with any existing dwellings and buildings
in the neighborhood, and building height and setbacks shall be consistent with surrounding
development in the neighborhood. In all other districts, all height, area, setback and coverage
standards within the underlying zoning district shall apply.
3. In the R-L, R-M, MN/C, and CBD zoning districts, the outdoor storage of vehicles, materials, and
equipment shall not be permitted.
4. Principal buildings and structures shall be setback fifty (50) feet from an abutting property in the
R-L and R-M zoning districts or existing residential use in the MN/C zoning district.
TT. Restaurant
1. The owner(s) and operator(s) of a restaurant shall be responsible for the conduct and safety of the
patrons.
2. Kitchen windows capable of being open, and ventilation equipment outlets and other similar
equipment associated with such uses shall not be located or oriented directly toward any abutting
property in the R-L and R-M zoning districts or existing residential use in the MN/C zoning
district.
3. Adequate provision for the collection and disposal of greases shall be demonstrated.
4. Exterior trash and recycling receptacles shall be provided amid any outdoor sales area. Such trash
receptacles shall be routinely emptied so as to prevent the scattering of litter and debris. All
applications shall include a description of a working plan for the cleanup of litter.
5. In addition to other provisions in this Chapter relating to accessory outdoor café/seating, where
accessory outdoor café/seating may be permitted, exterior speaker/microphone systems shall be
oriented away from and/or screened to prevent objectionable noise impact on abutting properties.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-42
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
6. In the MN/C and CBD zoning districts, accessory drive-thrus and drive-ins are not permitted.
7. All uses must comply with Borough building, health, safety, property and other applicable local,
county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such licenses, certificates, and
permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Borough, or shall be a condition of
approval.
UU. Retail Business
1. In the MN/C and CBD zoning districts, accessory drive-thrus and drive-ins are not permitted.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-43
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
VV. Sawmill
1. All cutting, sawing, grinding, or other processing shall be conducted within a completely-enclosed
building.
2. Storage and loading areas, and other activities of similar nature shall not occupy any part of the
existing or future street right-of-way (including sidewalks and alleys) or required off-street
parking areas.
3. All storage and loading areas shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any adjacent property in
the R-L and R-M zoning districts or existing residential use in the MN/C zoning district.
4. All permitted outdoor storage not within a completely enclosed buildings shall be surrounded by a
fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height. Such fence shall be completely sight obscuring and
maintained in good condition. Any gate in a fence shall be similarly constructed and maintained
and shall be kept securely locked at all times when the establishment is not in operation.
5. On-lot traffic circulation channels, storage, loading, and parking areas shall be clearly delineated.
6. All areas used for storage, loading, and parking shall be aligned and displayed in an orderly
fashion so that circulation for fire safety can be maintained at all times.
7. All areas used for the storage, loading, parking areas shall be graded for proper drainage and shall
be surfaced so as to provide a durable and dustless surface, such as concrete or bituminous
concrete surface, unless an alternative material and/or design as part of an readily accepted
stormwater BMP is approved by the Borough Engineer.
8. The applicant shall provide a detailed description of the proposed use in each of the following
topics:
a. The nature of the on-site activities and operations, the types of materials stored, the
frequency of distribution and restocking, the duration period of storage of materials, and
the methods for disposal of any surplus or damaged materials. In addition, the applicant
shall furnish evidence that the disposal of materials will be accomplished in a manner that
complies with State and Federal regulations.
b. Any environmental impacts that are likely to be generated (e.g. odor, noise, smoke, dust,
litter, glare, vibration, electrical disturbance, wastewater, storm water, solid waste, etc.)
and specific measures employed to mitigate or eliminate any negative impacts. The
applicant shall further furnish evidence that the impacts generated by the proposed use
fall within acceptable levels, as regulated by applicable laws and ordinance, including but
not limited to those listed in Part 4 of this Chapter.
9. All uses must comply with Borough building, health, safety, property and other applicable local,
county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such licenses, certificates, and
permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Borough, or shall be a condition of
approval.
WW. Schools, Commercial
1. Enrollment shall be defined as the largest number of students under educational supervision at any
one time during a seven (7) day period.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-44
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
2. All schools with an enrollment of two hundred-fifty (250) or more students shall front and have
access to an arterial or collector road as provided in the most recent version of the Highspire
Borough Comprehensive Plan.
3. Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.
XX. Schools, Public or Private
1. In the R-L, R-M, MN/C, and CBD zoning districts, any permitted school shall maintain an exterior
appearance that is compatible with any existing dwellings and buildings in the neighborhood.
2. In R-L, R-M, MN/C, and CBD zoning districts, building height and setbacks shall be consistent
with surrounding development in the neighborhood. In all other districts, all height, area, setback
and coverage standards within the underlying zoning district shall apply.
3. Primary passenger “drop-off” and “pickup” areas should be provided on site and arranged so that
the passengers do not have to cross traffic lanes on or adjacent to the site, and passenger “dropoff”
and “pickup” areas shall be located in a manner that minimizes detrimental traffic impacts
(both pedestrian and vehicular) on the surrounding neighborhood.
4. All schools with an enrollment of two hundred-fifty (250) or more students shall front and have
access to an arterial or collector road as provided in the most recent version of the Highspire
Borough Comprehensive Plan.
5. Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.
6. No part of the school property shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of a property
containing an adult-related facility.
7. Enrollment shall be defined as the largest number of students under educational supervision at any
one time during a seven (7) day period.
8. Off-street parking areas shall be provided and arranged so that students and teachers do not have
to cross streets on or adjacent to the site.
YY. Schools, Vocational. Vocational schools are permitted, and developments which involve training and
education for service/repair of automobile, heavy equipment, and other similar type motor vehicle or
require outdoor storage of materials, they shall be subject to the following criteria:
1. Enrollment shall be defined as the largest number of students under educational supervision at any
one time during a seven (7) day period.
2. All schools with an enrollment of two hundred-fifty (250) or more students shall front and have
access to an arterial or collector road or to Industrial Road as provided in the most recent version
of the Highspire Borough Comprehensive Plan.
3. Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.
4. On-lot traffic circulation channels, storage, loading, and parking areas shall be clearly delineated.
5. All areas used for storage, loading, and parking shall be aligned and displayed in an orderly
fashion so that circulation for fire safety can be maintained at all times.
6. All areas used for the storage, loading, parking areas shall be graded for proper drainage and shall
be surfaced so as to provide a durable and dustless surface, such as concrete or bituminous
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-45
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
concrete surface, unless an alternative material and/or design as part of an readily accepted
stormwater BMP is approved by the Borough Engineer.
7. All storage and loading areas shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any adjacent property in
the R-L and R-M zoning districts or existing residential use in the MN/C zoning district.
8. All outdoor storage and other activities not within a completely enclosed buildings shall be
surrounded by a fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height. Such fence shall be completely sight
obscuring and maintained in good condition. Any gate in a fence shall be similarly constructed
and maintained and shall be kept securely locked at all times when the establishment is not in
operation.
9. All ventilation equipment outlets, fume collection, and other similar equipment associated with the
service/repair work area(s) and/or service/repair bay doors/opening shall not be located or oriented
directly toward any adjacent property in the R-L and R-M zoning districts or existing residential
use in the MN/C zoning district.
10. The applicant shall provide a detailed description of the proposed use in each of the following
topics:
a. The nature of the on-site activities and operations, the types of materials stored, the
duration period of storage of materials, and the methods for disposal of any surplus or
damaged materials. In addition, the applicant shall furnish evidence that the disposal of
materials will be accomplished in a manner that complies with State and Federal
regulations.
b. Any environmental impacts that are likely to be generated (e.g. odor, noise, smoke, dust,
litter, glare, vibration, electrical disturbance, wastewater, storm water, solid waste, etc.)
and specific measures employed to mitigate or eliminate any negative impacts. The
applicant shall further furnish evidence that the impacts generated by the proposed use
fall within acceptable levels, as regulated by applicable laws and ordinance, including but
not limited to those listed in Part 4 of this Chapter.
11. All uses must comply with Borough building, health, safety, property and other applicable local,
county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such licenses, certificates, and
permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Borough, or shall be a condition of approval
ZZ. Taverns/Bars
1. A tavern/bar shall be located in accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Liquor
Control Board.
2. The owner(s) and operator(s) of a tavern/pub shall be responsible for the conduct and safety of the
patrons.
3. Kitchen windows capable of being open, and ventilation equipment outlets and other similar
equipment associated with such uses shall not be located or oriented directly toward any abutting
property in the R-L and R-M zoning districts or existing residential use in the MN/C zoning
district.
4. Adequate provision for the collection and disposal of greases shall be demonstrated.
5. Exterior trash and recycling receptacles shall be provided amid any outdoor sales area. Such trash
receptacles shall be routinely emptied so as to prevent the scattering of litter and debris. All
applications shall include a description of a working plan for the cleanup of litter.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-46
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
6. In addition to other provisions in this Chapter relating to accessory outdoor café/seating, where
accessory outdoor café/seating may be permitted, exterior speaker/microphone systems shall be
oriented away from and/or screened to prevent objectionable noise impact on abutting properties.
7. All uses must comply with Borough building, health, safety, property and other applicable local,
county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such licenses, certificates, and
permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Borough, or shall be a condition of
approval.
AAA. Treatment Center
1. All uses must comply with Borough building, health, housing, rental, safety, property and other
applicable local, county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such licenses,
certificates, and permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Borough, or shall be a
condition of approval.
2. A treatment center shall be directly affiliated with a parent institution or organization, which shall
provide full-time supervision and administration to the residents of the treatment center.
3. A common cooking and eating area must be provided; no cooking or dining facilities shall be
provided in individual rooms or suites.
4. The residents of the treatment center shall reside on the premises to benefit from the services
provided.
5. No portion of a treatment center shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of another
treatment center, group home facility, group care facility, and/or half way house, but in no case
shall be located within the same block.
6. No portion of a building occupied by a treatment center use shall be located within one thousand
(1,000) feet of any property which contains any one (1) or more of the following specified land
uses where minors may congregate:
a. Commercial recreation facility, Indoor/Outdoor;
b. Daycare facility primarily for children;
c. Library;
d. Park, Playground, Playfield;
e. Place of Worship;
f. School, Private/Public;
g. Swimming Pool, Public; or
h. Other lands, buildings, and uses where minors congregate.
7. Each application shall be accompanied by a statement describing the following:
a. The composition of the treatment center;
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-47
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
b. The policies and goals of the treatment center and the means proposed to accomplish
those goals;
c. The characteristics of the residents and number of residents to be served;
d. The operating methods and procedures to be used; and
e. Any other facts relevant to the proposed operation of the treatment center.
f. Any use permit granted for the treatment center shall be bound to the type and number of
clients listed on the application. Any change in the type or number of clients being
housed shall require a new review and subsequent consideration for approval.
8. The institution shall submit a copy of its emergency operations plan (EOP) to the local and county
emergency management agency coordinator. The EOP shall also include detailed information
regarding solid, medical and hazardous materials and waste handling, including a listing of all
medical and hazardous materials and wastes used and generated on site and evidence indicating
the disposal of all materials and wastes will be accomplished in a manner that complies with
Borough, state, and federal regulations.
BBB. Warehousing, Distribution, and Wholesaling
1. The subject property shall front on or have direct access via a public street (excluding alleys) to an
arterial or collector road or to Industrial Road as provided in the most recent version of the
Highspire Borough Comprehensive Plan.
2. Storage, loading, parking areas, and other activities of similar nature shall not occupy any part of
the existing or future street right-of-way (including sidewalks and alleys) or required off-street
parking areas.
3. Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.
4. On-lot traffic circulation channels, storage, loading, and parking areas shall be clearly delineated.
5. All areas used for storage, loading, and parking shall be aligned and displayed in an orderly
fashion so that circulation for fire safety can be maintained at all times.
6. All areas used for the storage, loading, parking areas shall be graded for proper drainage and shall
be surfaced so as to provide a durable and dustless surface, such as concrete or bituminous
concrete surface, unless an alternative material and/or design as part of an readily accepted
stormwater BMP is approved by the Borough Engineer.
7. All storage and loading areas shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any adjacent property in
the R-L and R-M zoning districts or existing residential use in the MN/C zoning district.
8. All permitted outdoor storage and other activities not within a completely enclosed buildings shall
be surrounded by a fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height. Such fence shall be completely
sight obscuring and maintained in good condition. Any gate in a fence shall be similarly
constructed and maintained and shall be kept securely locked at all times when the establishment
is not in operation.
9. The applicant shall provide a detailed description of the proposed use in each of the following
topics:
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-48
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
a. The nature of the on-site activities and operations, the types of materials stored, the
frequency of distribution and restocking, the duration period of storage of materials, and
the methods for disposal of any surplus or damaged materials. In addition, the applicant
shall furnish evidence that the disposal of materials will be accomplished in a manner that
complies with State and Federal regulations.
b. The general scale of the operation, in terms of its market area, specific floor space
requirements for each activity, the total number of employees on each shift and an overall
needed site size.
c. Any environmental impacts that are likely to be generated (e.g. odor, noise, smoke, dust,
litter, glare, vibration, electrical disturbance, wastewater, storm water, solid waste, etc.)
and specific measures employed to mitigate or eliminate any negative impacts. The
applicant shall further furnish evidence that the impacts generated by the proposed use
fall within acceptable levels, as regulated by applicable laws and ordinance, including but
not limited to those listed in Part 4 of this Chapter.
10. All uses must comply with Borough building, health, safety, property and other applicable local,
county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such licenses, certificates, and
permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Borough, or shall be a condition of approval
Section 1403. Additional Supplemental Standards and Requirements for Specific Accessory Uses.
A. Accessory Apartment. Accessory apartments are permitted subject to the following criteria:
1. The principal use of the building and propertymust be a single-family detached dwelling.
2. No more than two (2) total dwelling units shall be permitted per lot.
3. The accessory apartment dwelling unit shall not be less than three hundred fifty (350) and not
more than seven hundred (700) square feet.
4. The accessory apartment must have separate kitchen and bathroom facilities as well as
living/sleeping spaces, as well as access to the outside or a common hallway or balcony.
5. The owner must reside on the premises.
6. Accessory apartments within the principal single-family detached building are permitted in as
much as there shall be no alterations to the exterior appearance of the building and that it
continues to resemble and is compatible with any existing dwellings in the neighborhood. No
modifications to the external appearance of the principal building, including additional door/wall
openings (except fire escapes) which would alter its residential character shall be permitted.
7. Fire escapes, where required, shall be located in the rear of the principal building and shall not be
located on any wall facing a street right-of-way, excluding alleys.
8. Accessory apartments in accessory buildings shall not otherwise occupy ground floor, off-street
garage floor area/space, thereby displacing otherwise usable off-street parking spaces provided on
the lot.
9. All new accessory structures constructed for the exclusive use as an accessory apartment, the
accessory structure shall be designed to have an appearance architecturally compatible with the
principal building (including design, materials, and colors, and roof pitch).
10. In no case shall there be an accessory apartment and a home occupation permitted on one lot.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-49
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
11. All uses must comply with Borough building, health, housing, rental, safety, property and other
applicable local, county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such licenses,
certificates, and permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Borough, or shall be a
condition of approval.
B. Automated Banking Facility. Automated banking facilities are permitted subject to the following criteria:
1. Within the MN/C and CBD Zoning Districts, drive-thru facilities shall be prohibited.
2. Trash receptacles shall be provided and routinely emptied to present the scattering of litter, and the
applicant shall furnish and implement a working plan for the cleanup of litter and debris.
3. All on-site, outdoor lighting of buildings and surrounding areas shall be designed to prevent glare
to adjoining properties by employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that confine glare to
the site, and security lighting should be directed toward the building, rather than the area around it.
4. All automated teller machines shall be located, or contain convenient parking spaces, so that the
movement of vehicles will not be hampered by those cars belonging to persons using the
automated teller machines.
5. Where practicable, all drive-thru window lanes shall be separated from the parking lot's interior
driveways.
6. Where practicable, all drive thru window facilities and lanes shall be located on a building wall
facing away from an adjoining property within a residential zoning district or any existing,
adjacent residential use.
7. Where practicable, all drive thru window facilities and lanes shall be located on a building wall
facing away from a public street, except alleys.
8. Sufficient stacking lanes shall be provided associated with drive-thru windows, to prevent vehicle
backups on adjoining streets. A minimum one hundred (100) foot long on-site stacking area for
the vehicles shall be provided on the site. No vehicle will be allowed to stack or form on public
streets. Furthermore each drive-thru lane shall have on-site directional signs, indicator lights or
pavement markings identifying the direction of travel and lane status (ie. open vs. closed).
9. Screening shall be provided in accordance with Part 4 of this Chapter for drive-thru facilities.
C. Community Gardens. Community gardens are permitted, subject to the criteria for community gardens set
forth in Section 1402.
D. Daycare, Accessory. Accessory daycares as defined in this Chapter are exempted from zoning permit
requirements, except that the principal residential dwelling must comply with all other applicable
requirements of this Chapter.
E. Daycare, Family. Family daycare uses are permitted, subject to the following criteria:
1. Family daycare facilities shall be conducted within a single-family detached dwelling.
2. A family day-care facility shall offer care and supervision to no more than six (6) different nonresident
persons during any calendar day.
3. All principal structures permitted to be family daycare facilities shall maintain an exterior
appearance that resembles and is compatible with any existing dwellings in the neighborhood. No
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-50
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
modification to the external appearances of the building (except fire and safety requirements)
which would alter its residential character shall be permitted.
4. Fire escapes, where required, shall be located in the rear of the building and shall not be located on
anywall facing a street right-of-way, excluding alleys.
5. An outdoor play areas for children shall be provided. Off street parking lots and areas shall not be
used as outdoor play areas. Outdoor play areas shall not be located between the principal building
and the public street (excluding alleys). All outdoor play areas must provide a means of shade,
such as a shade tree(s) or pavilion(s). Any vegetative materials located within the outdoor play
areas shall be of a non-harmful type (poisonous, thorny, allergenic, etc.)
a. Additionally, outdoor play areas shall be located at least twenty (20) feet from property in
the R-L and R-M zoning districts or existing residential use in the MN/C zoning district,
and screened in accordance with Part 4 of this Chapter, along with a fence at least four
(4) feet in height. Outdoor play areas shall be limited to use between 8:00 am and 8:00
pm.
6. No part of a family daycare property shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of a
property containing an adult-related facility.
7. Off-street parking areas shall be provided and arranged so that persons do not have to cross streets
on or adjacent to the site.
8. Primary passenger “drop-off” and “pickup” areas should be provided on site and arranged so that
the passengers do not have to cross traffic lanes on or adjacent to the site, and passenger “dropoff”
and “pickup” areas shall be located in a manner that minimizes detrimental traffic impacts
(both pedestrian and vehicular) on the surrounding neighborhood.
9. Enrollment shall be defined as the largest number largest number of persons under daycare
supervision at any one time during a seven (7) day period.
10. All uses must comply with Borough building, health, housing, rental, safety, property and other
applicable local, county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such licenses,
certificates, and permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Borough, or shall be a
condition of approval.
F. Drive-Thru Facilities for Permitted Uses
1. The subject property shall front on an arterial or collector road as provided in the most recent
version of the Highspire Borough Comprehensive Plan.
2. No part of the subject property shall be located within fifty (50) feet of any adjacent property in
the R-L and R-M zoning districts or existing residential use in the MN/C zoning district.
3. Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets. Ingress and
egress standards shall meet the requirements of the Borough of Highspire Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
4. All drive-in facility buildings and structures shall be designed and planned to take advantage of
and be compatible with natural and built features of the site and area.
5. Where practicable, all drive-thru window lanes shall be separated from the parking lot's interior
driveways.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-51
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
6. Where practicable, all drive thru window facilities and lanes shall be located on a building wall
facing away from an abutting property in the R-L and R-M zoning districts or existing residential
use in the MN/C zoning district.
7. Where practicable, all drive thru window facilities and lanes shall be located on a building wall
facing away from a public street, except alleys.
8. On-lot traffic circulation channels and parking areas shall be clearly delineated
9. Sufficient stacking lanes shall be provided associated with drive-thru windows, to prevent vehicle
backups on adjoining streets. A minimum one hundred (100) foot long on-site stacking area for
the vehicles shall be provided on the site. No vehicle will be allowed to stack or form on public
streets. Furthermore each drive-thru lane shall have on-site directional signs, indicator lights or
pavement markings identifying the direction of travel and lane status (ie. open vs. closed).
10. Any exterior microphone/speaker system shall be oriented, arranged and/or screened to prevent
any objectionable noise impact on abutting property in the R-L and R-M zoning districts or
existing residential use in the MN/C zoning district.
11. Within the CBD Zoning District, drive thrus shall be prohibited.
12. A traffic study is required to demonstrate safe access and control of traffic into and out of the
facility. The traffic study shall include at a minimum the following study elements:
a. A study of the internal traffic patterns in the off-street parking area to ensure the safe
movement of traffic for pedestrians and vehicles and convenient access to the
development and nearby areas.
b. The traffic study shall be completed in accordance with Chapter 22 of the Codified
Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire, relating to subdivision and land development.
G. Home Occupations
1. The business use shall be clearly incidental to the principal use of the premises as a single-family
detached dwelling for living purposes.
2. No more than three (3) persons per lot, at least one (1) of whom shall be a resident of the dwelling,
may be engaged in the home occupation use.
3. There shall be not more than one (1) home occupation per lot, but such business use may be
located in the principal dwelling unit and/or accessory building.
a. If more than one home occupation is accessory to a dwelling, the total aggregate impact
of the home occupations shall be considered in determining compliance with this
Chapter.
4. Any permitted home occupation use shall maintain an exterior appearance that resembles and is
compatible with any existing dwellings in the neighborhood. No modifications to the external
appearance of the building (except fire escapes) which would alter its residential character shall be
permitted.
5. All business activities shall take place in a completely enclosed building. No outdoor storage or
display or unenclosed storage related to the home occupation shall be permitted.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-52
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
6. Home occupations shall be limited to not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor
area of the principal dwelling unit, or five hundred (500) square feet of gross floor area, whichever
is less, even if the use is conducted within an accessory building.
7. No sales of any goods or merchandise shall occur on the premises other than those goods or
merchandise which are produced on the premises or are customarily incidental to the accessory
home occupation business use and directly related thereto, such as hair care products by a barber
or beautician.
8. No goods shall be displayed or stored so as to be visible from the exterior of the premises.
9. Activities associated with the home occupation shall be conducted in such a way that no traffic
congestion, noise, glare, air pollution, odor, smoke, vibration, fire hazards, safety hazards,
electromagnetic interference, or otherwise, shall be noticeable at or beyond the property line.
a. A description of the operations proposed in sufficient detail to indicate the effects of
those operations in producing traffic congestion, noise, glare, air pollution, water
pollution, vibration, fire hazards, safety hazards, or the emission of any potentially
harmful or obnoxious matter or radiation and other performance standards in accordance
with Part 4 of this Chapter.
10. The use shall not require delivery or pickup by tractor-trailer trucks.
11. A home occupation shall not be conducted in a manner that is perceptible to other residents
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
12. The use shall not involve commercial repair of motor vehicles or similar type equipment.
13. Drive thrus shall be prohibited.
14. Signs shall be provided in accordance with Part 17 of this Chapter
15. All off-street parking shall comply with Part 18 of this Chapter.
16. In no case shall there be an accessory apartment and a home occupation permitted on one lot.
17. The business may not involve any illegal activity.
18. All uses must comply with Borough building, health, housing, rental, safety, property and other
applicable local, county, state, and federal code and licensing requirements. All such licenses,
certificates, and permits shall have been obtained and presented to the Borough, or shall be a
condition of approval.
H. No-Impact Home Occupation.
1. The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the property and surrounding
residential uses.
2. The business shall employ no employees other than familymember residing in the dwelling.
3. There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or inventory of a substantial
nature.
4. There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including but not limited to, parking, signs
or lights.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 14)
PART 14-53
Specific Criteria and Supplemental Regulations for Specific Uses
5. The business activity may not use any equipment or process which creates noise, vibrations, glare,
fumes, odors or electrical or electronic interference, including interference with radio or television
reception, which is detectable in the neighborhood.
6. The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage discharge, in volume or type,
which is normally associated with residential use in the neighborhood.
7. The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and may not occupy more than
twenty five (25) of the habitable floor area.
8. The business may not involve any illegal activity.
I. Outdoor Café/Dining. Outdoor Cafés/Dining shall be permitted as an accessory to a permitted restaurant or
establishment which serves food, subject to the following criteria:
1. Outdoor furnishings shall be limited to tables, chairs, umbrellas, benches, trash/recycling type
facilities, outdoor heaters, and reservation podium.
2. Outdoor furnishings shall be stored in an enclosed facility after normal operating hours.
3. The limits of the outdoor dining area shall be defined. In addition to decorative fencing and
landscaping, decorative planters, posts with ropes, and other removable enclosures, as well as
reservation podium are encouraged as a way of defining the area occupied by the outdoor dining
area.
4. Any exterior microphone/speaker system shall be oriented, arranged and/or screened to prevent
any objectionable noise impact on abutting property in the R-L and R-M zoning districts or
existing residential use in the MN/C zoning district.
5. Exterior trash and recycling receptacles shall be provided amid any outdoor dining area. Such
trash receptacles shall be routinely emptied so as to prevent the scattering of litter and debris. All
applications shall include a description of a working plan for the cleanup of litter.
6. Advertising or promotional features, other than permitted signs in accordance with Part 18 of this
Chapter, shall be limited to umbrellas and canopies.
7. Outdoor dining shall not impede public sidewalks. Where permission is granted by the entity
having jurisdiction over the public right-of-way in which the outdoor dining is proposed, a
minimum of six (6) feet uninterrupted (obstacle free) pathway can be continuously maintained,
public sidewalks may be utilized for outdoor dining areas.
8. All reasonable provisions shall be made to prevent or minimize noise, odor, and vibration, light or
electrical interference adjoining property within a residential zoning district or any existing,
adjacent residential use in accordance with Part 4 of this Chapter.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: September 18, 2012 (27, PART 15)
PART 15-1
Floodplain Overlay
PART 15
“FP” FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Section 1500. Statutory Authorization
A. The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage of the Pennsylvania Floodplain
Management Act of 1978, delegated the responsibility to local government units to adopt floodplain
management regulations to promote public health, safety and the general welfare of its citizenry.
Therefore, the Council of the Borough of Highspire, does hereby order as follows.
Section 1501. Purpose
A. The purpose of these provisions is to set forth zoning related floodplain management regulations deemed
necessary to prevent the loss of property and life, the creation of health and safety hazards, the disruption of
commerce and governmental services, the extraordinary and unnecessary expenditure of public funds for
flood protection and relief, and the impairment of the tax base by:
1. regulating uses, activities, and development which, acting alone or in combination with other
existing or future uses, activities, and development, will cause unacceptable increases in flood
heights, velocities and frequencies;
2. restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities, and development from locating within areas
subject to flooding;
3. requiring all those uses, activities, and developments that do occur in flood-prone areas to be
protected and/or flood proofed against flooding and flood damage; and
4. protecting individuals from buying lands and structures which are unsuited for intended purposes
because of flood hazards.
B. These provisions shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the Borough of Highspire in the
identified floodplain area, which shall be any areas of the Borough of Highspire, classified as Special Flood
Hazard Areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate
Maps (FIRMs) and the accompanying maps or the most recent revision thereof as issued by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), including all digital data developed as part of the Flood
Insurance Study.
C. No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be located, relocated, constructed,
reconstructed, enlarged, or structurally altered except in full compliance with the terms and provisions of
this Part and any other applicable ordinances and regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of
this Chapter.
D. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this Part is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge
openings restricted by debris. This Chapter does not imply that areas outside the identified Floodplain
Districts or that land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damages.
Further, these provisions shall not create liability on the part of Highspire Borough or any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on these provisions or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.
E. This Part supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in effect in identified floodplain areas.
However, any other ordinance provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: September 18, 2012 (27, PART 15)
PART 15-2
Floodplain Overlay
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the provisions of this Part, the more
restrictive shall apply.
Section 1502. Establishment of Flood Districts
A. Basis of Flood Districts. The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of the Borough of Highspire,
classified as SFHAs in the FIS and the accompanying FIRMs dated August 2, 2012 and issued by the
FEMA or the most recent revision thereof, including all digital data developed as part of the FIS. The
above referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions and amendments are hereby adopted by the
Borough of Highspire and declared to be a part of this ordinance.
B. Delineation of Flood Districts.
1. FW (Floodway Area) - the areas identified as "Floodway" in the AE Zone in the FIS prepared by
FEMA, which represents the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent lands that must be reserved
in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by
more than one foot at any point. The term shall also include floodway areas which have been
identified in other available studies or sources of information for those floodplain areas where no
floodway has been identified in the FIS.
2. SFA (Special Floodplain Area) - the areas identified as Zones AE and A1-30 in the FIS which are
subject to inundation by the one (1)-percent-annual chance flood event determined by detailed
methods and have Base Flood Elevations (BFEs) shown.
The basis for the outermost boundary of this area shall be the BFE as shown in the flood profiles
contained in the Flood Insurance Study.
3. FA (Approximate Floodplain Area) - the areas identified as Zone A in the FIS which are subject to
inundation by the one (1)-percent-annual-chance flood event determined using approximate
methodologies. Because detailed hydraulic analyses have not been performed, no BFEs or flood
depths are shown.
4. Shallow Flooding Area - the areas identified as Zones AO and AH in the FIS. These areas are
subject to inundation by one (1)-percent-annual-chance shallow flooding where average depths are
between one (1) and three (3) feet.
C. Overlay Concept.
1. The Floodplain Districts described above shall be overlays to the existing underlying districts as
shown on the Official Zoning Map, and as such, the provisions of the Floodplain Districts shall
serve as a supplement to the underlying district provisions.
2. Where there happens to be any conflict between the provisions or requirements of any of the
Floodplain provisions or requirements of any of the Floodplain Districts and those of any
underlying district, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.
D. Zoning Map. The boundaries of the Floodplain Districts are established as incorporated into the Highspire
Borough Zoning Map. Refer to the map labeled “Borough of Highspire, Dauphin County, PA: Floodplain
Overlay District Map” for reference purposes only. Applicants shall refer to the FIS prepared for Dauphin
County dated August 2, 2012 and the accompanying FIRMS or the most recent revision thereof as issued
by FEMA, including all digital data developed as part of the FIS for official determination.
E. Flood District Boundary Changes. The delineation of any of the Floodplain Districts may be revised by the
Highspire Borough Council where natural or man-made changes have occurred and/or more detailed
studies conducted or undertaken by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Susquehanna River Basin
Commission, or other qualified agency or individual documents the need or possibility for such change.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: September 18, 2012 (27, PART 15)
PART 15-3
Floodplain Overlay
However, prior to any such change, approval must be obtained from FEMA. Additionally, as soon as
practicable, but not later than six (6) months after the date such information becomes available, Highspire
Borough shall notify the FEMA of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data.
Section 1503. Flood District Provisions
A. Introduction
1. All uses, activities, and development occurring within any Floodplain District shall be undertaken,
only, in strict compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and with all other applicable codes
and ordinances, such as the Highspire Borough Building Construction Ordinance (Chapter 5) and
the Highspire Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (Chapter 22).
2. Under no circumstances shall any use, activity and/or development adversely affect the capacity of
the channels or floodways of any watercourse, drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or
system.
3. Prior to proposed alteration or relocation of any stream, watercourse, etc., within the Highspire
Borough, a permit shall be obtained from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP), Bureau of Dams and Waterway Management. Further, notification of the
proposal shall be given to all affected adjacent municipalities. Copies of such notifications shall be
forwarded to both the FIA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic
Development (DCED).
4. No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made to any watercourse unless
it can be shown that the activity will not reduce or impede the flood carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
5. In addition, the FEMA and DCED shall be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of any
watercourse.
6. Technical or scientific data shall be submitted by the applicant to FEMA for a Letter of Map
Revision (LOMR) within six (6) months of the completion of any new construction, development,
or other activity resulting in changes in the BFE.
a. any development occurring in Zone A which will cause a rise of more than one (1) foot in
the base flood elevation (as determined using methodology in Section 1503.C); or
b. alteration or relocation of a stream (including but not limited to installing culverts and
bridges).
B. Floodway District (FW). In the FW, any new construction, encroachment, and/or development that would
cause any increase in flood heights shall be prohibited.
1. Permitted Uses. In the FW, the following uses and activities are permitted provided they are in
compliance with the provisions of the underlying district and are not prohibited by any other Part
and provided that they do not require structures, fill, or storage of materials and equipment:
a. agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting;
b. public and private recreational uses and activities such as parks, day camps, picnic
grounds, golf courses, boat launching and swimming areas, hiking, and horseback riding
trails, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, and hunting and fishing
areas;
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: September 18, 2012 (27, PART 15)
PART 15-4
Floodplain Overlay
c. accessory residential uses such as yard areas, gardens, play areas, and pervious parking
area; and
d. accessory industrial and commercial uses such as yard areas, pervious parking and
loading areas, etc.
2. Uses Permitted by Special Exception. The following uses and activities may be permitted by
Special Exception provided that they are in compliance with the provisions of the underlying
district and are not prohibited by any other Chapter:
a. structures, except for manufactured homes, accessory to the uses and activities in
§1503.B.1 above;
b. utilities and public facilities and improvements such as railroads, streets, bridges,
transmission lines, pipe lines, water and sewage treatment plants, and other similar or
related uses;
c. water-related uses and activities such as marinas, docks, wharves, piers, etc.;
d. temporary uses such as circuses, carnivals, and similar activities;
e. storage of materials and equipment provided that they are not buoyant, flammable or
explosive, and are not subject to major damage by flooding, or provided that such
material and equipment is firmly anchored to prevent flotation or movement, and/or can
be readily removed from the area within the time available after flood warning; and
f. other similar uses and activities provided they cause no increase in flood heights and/or
velocities. All use, activities and structural development, shall be undertaken in strict
compliance with the flood proofing provisions contained in all other applicable codes and
ordinances.
3. Uses Specifically Prohibited. The following uses shall be specifically prohibited if located
partially or entirelywithin any identified FW:
a. all residential dwellings
b. hospitals - public or private
c. nursing homes
d. jails
e. new manufactured home parks and manufactured home subdivisions, and substantial
improvements to existing manufactured home parks and manufactured home
subdivisions.
f. any structure of the kind described in §1503A.1 and §1503B.1.
C. Special Floodplain Area District (SFA) and Approximated Floodplain District (FA).
1. Permitted Uses. In the SFA and FA, the development and/or use of land shall be permitted in
accordance with the regulations of the underlying district, provided that all such uses, activities,
and/or development shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the flood proofing and related
provisions contained in all other applicable codes and ordinances.
2. Special Requirements.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: September 18, 2012 (27, PART 15)
PART 15-5
Floodplain Overlay
a. In SFAs and FAs, no new construction or development shall be located within the area
measured fifty (50) feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
b. In SFAs without a designated floodway, no new development shall be permitted unless it
can be demonstrated that the cumulative effect of all past and projected development will
not increase the BFE by more than one (1) foot.
c. When available, information from other Federal, State, and other acceptable sources shall
be used to determine the base elevation, as well as a floodway area, if possible. When no
other information is available, the base elevation shall be determined by using a point on
the boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site in
question. In lieu of the above, the Borough may require the applicant to determine the
elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of
demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly
reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall
be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by Borough
officials.
3. Special Provisions for Certain Uses and Development.
a. Refer to §1504 for special requirements and procedures for certain kinds of development
within the SFA and FA.
4. Uses Specifically Prohibited. The following uses shall be specifically prohibited if located
partially or entirelywithin any identified SFA and FA.
a. hospitals - public or private;
b. nursing homes;
c. jails; and
d. new manufactured home parks and manufactured home subdivisions, and substantial
improvements to existing manufactured home parks and manufactured home
subdivisions.
D. Shallow Flooding Area
1. Special Requirements.
a. Establish drainage paths to guide floodwaters around and away from structures on slopes.
Section 1504. Special Provisions forCertain Kinds of DevelopmentWithin Floodplain Districts
A. Development Which May Endanger Human Life.
1. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management Act (Act 166), as amended, and the
regulations adopted by the Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic Development
as required by the Act, any new or substantially improved structure which will be used for the
production or storage of any of the following materials or substances or which will be used for any
activity requiring the maintenance of a supply (more than five hundred fifty [550] gallons or other
comparable volume or any amount of radioactive substances) of any of the following materials or
substances on the premises, shall be subject to the provisions of this section, in addition to all
other applicable provisions:
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: September 18, 2012 (27, PART 15)
PART 15-6
Floodplain Overlay
a. acetone
b. ammonia
c. benzene
d. calcium carbide
e. carbon disulfide
f. celluloid
g. chlorine
h. hydrochloric acid
i. hydrocyanic acid
j. magnesium
k. nitric acid and oxides or nitrogen
l. petroleum products (gasoline, fuel, oil, etc.)
m. phosphorus
n. potassium
o. sodium
p. sulphur and sulphur products
q. pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides and rodenticides)
r. radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise regulated.
2. Within any FWany structure of the kind described in §1504.A.1, above, shall be prohibited.
3. Where permitted in any SFA or Approximated Floodplain District (FA), any structure of the kind
described in §1504.A.1, above, shall be:
a. elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up to at least one and onehalf
(l 1/2) feet above the BFE, and
b. designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during the course of a one
hundred (100) year flood.
4. Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the BFE shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the standards for completely dry flood proofing contained in the
publication “Flood Proofing Regulations” (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972) or with
some other equivalent water-tight standard.
B. Special Requirements for Manufactured Homes.
1. Within any FloodwayDistrict (FW), manufactured homes shall be prohibited.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: September 18, 2012 (27, PART 15)
PART 15-7
Floodplain Overlay
2. Where permitted within any SFA or FA, all manufactured homes, including those which have
incurred “substantial damage” as the result of a flood, and any improvements thereto shall be:
a. Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by providing over-the-top and
frame ties to ground anchors in accordance with the American National Standards as
specified in the Standard for the Installation of Manufactured Homes including
Manufactured Home Park Requirements (NFPA No. 501A-1974 (ANSI A119.3-1975) as
amended, for Manufactured Homes in Hurricane Zones or other appropriate standards
such as the following:
(1). over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the four (4) corners of the
manufactured home, with two (2) additional ties per side at intermediate
locations for units fifty (50) feet or more in length, and one (1) additional tie per
side for units less than fifty (50) feet in length;
(2). frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the manufactured home, with five
(5) additional ties per side at intermediate locations for units fifty (50) feet or
more in length, and four (4) additional ties per side for units less than fifty (50)
feet in length; and
(3). all anchoring systems shall be designed by a Registered Professional Engineer
and all calculations shall be submitted to the Borough for review,
b. Elevated on a permanent foundation in accordance with the following requirements:
(1). the stands or lots shall be elevated on compacted fill, or on pilings so that the
lowest floor of the manufactured home will be one and one-half (1 1/2) feet or
more above the BFE.
(2). adequate surface drainage is provided.
(3). adequate access for a hauler is provided.
(4). where pilings are used for elevation, the lots shall be large enough to permit
steps; piling foundations shall be placed in stable soil no more than ten (10’) feet
apart; reinforcement shall be provided for pilings that will extend for six (6) feet
or more above the ground level.
(5). an evacuation plan indicating alternate vehicular access and escape routes shall
be filed with the appropriate Borough officials for manufactured home parks.
c. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with the manufacturers’
installation instructions as provided by the manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot
provide the above information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 International
Residential Building Code or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development’s
Permanent Foundations for Manufactured Housing, 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision
thereto shall apply and 34 PA Code Chapter 401-405.
d. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the 2009 IBC, and the
2009 IRC or the most recent revisions thereto and 34 PA Code, as amended where
appropriate and/or applicable to units where the manufacturers’ standards for anchoring
cannot be provided or were not established for the units(s) proposed installation.
C. Special Requirements for Subdivisions.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: September 18, 2012 (27, PART 15)
PART 15-8
Floodplain Overlay
1. All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least fifty (50) lots or at least
five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser, in flood hazard areas where BFE data are not available,
shall be supported by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine BFEs and
floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer in a
format required by FEMA for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision or Letter of Map Revision.
Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
D. Special Requirements for Recreational Vehicles.
1. Recreational vehicles in any identified floodplain zone must either:
a. be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days.
b. be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
c. meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in Section 1504.B.
Section 1505. Existing Structures in Floodplain Districts
A. A structure or use of a structure or premises which lawfully existed before the enactment of this Chapter,
but which is not in conformitywith this Chapter may be continued subject to the following conditions:
1. no expansion or enlargement of an existing structure and/or use shall be allowed within any
floodway district that would cause any increase in flood heights.
2. any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to an existing structure
and/or use to an extent or amount of fifty (50) percent or more of its market value shall constitute
a substantial improvement and shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of
this Chapter.
3. any modifications, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to an existing structure
and/or use to an extent or amount of less than fifty (50) percent of its market value, shall be
elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest extent possible.
4. no expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed within any Special
Floodplain Area (SFA) that would, together with all other existing and anticipated development,
increase the BFE more than one (1) foot at any point.
5. the above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 PA Code, as amended, and the
2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
Section 1506. Special Exceptions in Floodplain Districts
A. Review Factors. In acting upon applications for Special Exceptions, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
consider all relevant factors and procedures specific in other sections of this Chapter and:
1. the danger to life and property due to increased flood elevations or velocities caused by
encroachments.
2. the danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or downstream to the injury of others.
3. the proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent
disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions.
4. the susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such
damage on the individual owners.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: September 18, 2012 (27, PART 15)
PART 15-9
Floodplain Overlay
5. the importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community.
6. the requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.
7. the availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use.
8. the compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in
the foreseeable future.
9. the relationship of the proposed use to the most recent version of the Highspire Borough
Comprehensive Plan and floodplain management program for the area,
10. the safety of access to the property in time of flood of ordinary and emergency vehicles.
11. the expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters
expected at the site.
a. such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this Chapter.
B. Supplemental Technical Review. The Zoning Hearing Board may refer any application and accompanying
documentation pertaining to any request for a special exception to any engineer or other qualified persons
or agency for technical assistance in evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood heights and
velocities, and the adequacy of the plans for protection and other related matters.
C. Conditions For Approving Special Exceptions.
1. Special exceptions shall only be issued after the Zoning Hearing Board has determined that the
granting of such will not result in:
a. unacceptable or prohibited increases in flood heights,
b. additional threats to public safety,
c. extraordinary public expense,
d. the creation of nuisances,
e. any fraud or victimization of the public, or
f. any conflict with local laws or ordinances.
2. No special exception shall be granted for any proposed use, development, or activity within any
FWthat will cause any increase in flood elevations.
D. Application Requirements for Special Exceptions.
1. In addition to the requirements set forth in Part 3 relating to Applications for Special Exceptions,
Applicants for Special Exceptions shall also provide the following items:
a. A completed Building Permit Applicant Form.
b. A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one (1) inch being equal
to one hundred (100) feet or less, showing the following:
(1). north arrow, scale, and date;
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: September 18, 2012 (27, PART 15)
PART 15-10
Floodplain Overlay
(2). topography based upon the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988,
showing existing and proposed contours at intervals of two (2) feet;
(3). all property and lot lines including dimensions, and the size of the site expressed
in acres or square feet;
(4). the location of all existing streets, drives, other accessways and parking areas,
with information concerning widths, pavement types and construction, and
elevations; and
(5). the location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses, buildings,
structures and other public or private facilities, including railroad tracks and
facilities, and any other natural and man-made features affecting, or affected by,
the proposed activity or development;
(6). the location of the floodplain boundary line, information and spot elevations
concerning the BFE elevations, and information concerning the flow of water
including direction and velocities;
(7). the location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities, and other
improvements, including the location of any existing or proposed subdivision
and land development; and,
(8). any other information which the Borough considers necessary for adequate
review of the application.
c. Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements, drawn at suitable
scale showing the following:
(1). sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings, including floor plans,
sections, and exterior building elevations, as appropriate;
(2). the proposed lowest floor elevation (including basement) of any proposed
building and, as required, the elevation of any other floor based upon National
Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1988 or the datum referenced on the maps;
(3). the elevation of the base flood;
(4). information concerning flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift
forces and other factors associated with a BFE;
(5). detailed information concerning any proposed flood proofing measures;
(6). cross section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other accessways, and
parking areas, showing all rights-of-way and pavement widths;
(7). profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives, and vehicular accessways
including existing and proposed grades; and,
(8). plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer systems water supply
systems, and any other utilities and facilities.
d. The following data and documentation:
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: September 18, 2012 (27, PART 15)
PART 15-11
Floodplain Overlay
(1). Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the activity or
development is proposed is an existing separate and single parcel, owned by the
applicant or the client he represents.
(2). Certification from a registered professional engineer, architect, or landscape
architect that the proposed construction has been adequately designed to protect
against damage from the BFE.
(3). Detailed information needed to determine compliance with §1509.C.6 Storage,
and §1504.A Development Which May Endanger Human Life, including:
i. the amount, location and purpose of any materials or substances
referred to in §1509.C.6 and §1504.A which are intended to be used,
produced, stored or otherwise maintained on site.
ii. a description of the safeguards incorporated into the design of the
proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills or of the dangerous
materials or substances listed in §1504.A during a base flood.
iii. a statement, certified by a registered professional engineer, architect, or
other qualified person which contains a complete and accurate
description of the nature and extent of pollution that might occur from
the development during the course of a base flood, including a
statement concerning the effects such pollution may have on human life
(4). A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, which
contains a complete and accurate description of the effects the proposed
development will have on BFE elevations and flows.
(5). A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, which
contains a complete and accurate description of the kinds and amounts of any
loose buoyant materials or debris that may possibly exist or be located on the
site below the BFE and the effects such materials and debris may have on BFE
elevations and flows.
(6). The appropriate component of the DEP “Planning Module for Land
Development.”
(7). Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the requirements
of the DEP, to implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control.
(8). Any other applicable permits such as, but not limited to, a permit for any activity
regulated by the DEP under Section 302 of Act 1978-166.
(9). An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which the site will be
safely evacuated before or during the course of a base flood.
Section 1507. Variances Within the Floodplain Districts
A. General. If compliance with any of the requirements of this Chapter would result in an exceptional hardship
for a prospective builder, developer, or landowner, the Zoning Hearing Board may, upon request, grant
relief from the strict application of the requirements.
B. Variance Procedures and Requirements. In addition to the procedures set forth in Part 3 of this chapter
relating to variances, requests for variances shall be considered by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance
with the following:
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: September 18, 2012 (27, PART 15)
PART 15-12
Floodplain Overlay
1. No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use or activity within any
floodway area that would cause any increase in the BFE.
2. No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or activity within any SFA
that would, together with all other existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more
than one (1) foot at any point.
3. Except for a possible modification of the freeboard requirements involved, no variance shall be
granted for any of the other requirements pertaining specifically to Development Which May
Endanger Human Life (§1504.A)
4. If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary to provide relief.
5. In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall attach whatever reasonable conditions
and safeguards it considers necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and
to achieve the objectives of this Chapter.
6. Whenever a variance is granted, the Zoning Hearing Board shall notify the applicant in writing
that:
a. the granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance.
b. such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
7. In reviewing any request for a variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider, but not be
limited to the following:
a. that there is good and sufficient cause.
b. that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
c. that the granting of the variance will not result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase
in flood elevations, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense,
create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimization of the public or conflict with any other
applicable local or State ordinance and regulations.
d. refer to criteria presented in §1506.
e. notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be designed and
constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the one (1) percent annual chance
flood.
8. A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be maintained by the Zoning
Hearing Board. In addition, a report of all variances granted during the year shall be included in
the annual report to the FIA.
Section 1508. Building Permit Requirements
A. A building permit shall be required for all construction and development within any Floodplain District,
which shall include, but not be limited to, buildings or other structures, placement of manufactured homes,
paving, grading, filling, excavation, mining, dredging, or drilling activities.
B. The Zoning Officer within the Highspire Borough is hereby appointed to administer and enforce these
regulations and shall be referred to herein as Floodplain Administrator.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: September 18, 2012 (27, PART 15)
PART 15-13
Floodplain Overlay
C. Issuance of Building Permits in Floodplain Districts.
1. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a Building Permit only after it has been determined that
the proposed work to be undertaken will be in conformance with the requirements of this and all
other applicable codes and ordinances.
2. Prior to the issuance of any Building Permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
application for permit to determine if all other necessary governmental permits required by State
and Federal Laws have been obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act (Act 1966-537, as amended); the Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (Act 1978-
325, as amended); the U.S. Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33, U.S.C. 1334: and the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended). No permit shall be issued until this determination
has been made.
3. No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made to any watercourse until
all adjacent municipalities which may be affected by such action have been notified by the
Borough and until all required permits or approvals have been first obtained from the DEP,
Bureau of Dams and WaterwayManagement.
In addition, the Federal Insurance Administrator and DCED, shall be notified by the Borough
prior to any alteration or relocation of anywatercourse.
4. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or authorized official shall inspect
the premises to determine that the work is progressing in compliance with the information
provided on the permit application and with all applicable Borough laws and ordinances. He shall
make as many inspections during and upon completion of the work as are necessary.
5. In the discharge of his duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall have the authority to enter any
building, structure, premises or development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
6. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does not complywith the permit
application or any applicable laws and ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall revoke the permit and
report such fact to the Zoning Hearing Board for whatever action it considers necessary.
7. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain all records associated with the requirements of this
chapter including, but not limited to, permitting, inspection and enforcement.
8. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34 PA Code and the 2009
IBC and the 2009 IRC or latest revisions thereof.
D. Application Procedure and Requirements. In addition to the information and documentation ordinarily
required for Building Permits, applicants shall also include the following specific information along with
any application for construction or development within any floodplain district:
1. Application for such a Building Permit shall be made, in writing, to the Floodplain Administrator
on forms supplied by Highspire Borough. Such application shall contain the following:
a. Name and address of applicant;
b. Name and address of owner of land on which proposed construction is to occur;
c. Name and address of contractor;
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: September 18, 2012 (27, PART 15)
PART 15-14
Floodplain Overlay
d. Site location including address;
e. Listing of other permits required;
f. Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a breakout of floodrelated
cost and the market value of the building before the flood damage occurred where
appropriate; and,
g. A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the proposed construction, as
well as any existing buildings or structures.
2. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or partially within any identified
floodplain district, applicants for Building Permits shall provide all the necessary information in
sufficient detail and clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
a. all such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and conform
with the requirements of this and all other applicable codes and ordinances;
b. all utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
c. adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards;
d. structures, including manufactured homes, will be anchored to prevent floatation,
collapse, or lateral movement;
e. building materials are flood-resistant;
f. appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used; and,
g. electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service
facilities have been designed and/or located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
3. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other pertinent information as
may be required by the Floodplain Administrator to make the above determination:
a. A completed Building Permit Applicant Form.
b. A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one (1) inch being equal
to one hundred (100) feet or less, showing the following:
(1). north arrow, scale, and date;
(2). topographic contour lines, if available
(3). all property and lot lines including dimensions, and the size of the site expressed
in acres or square feet;
(4). the location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, and other
improvements, including the location of any existing or proposed subdivision
and land development;
(5). the location of all existing streets, drives, and other accessways; and
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: September 18, 2012 (27, PART 15)
PART 15-15
Floodplain Overlay
(6). the location of any existing bodies of water of watercourses, identified
floodplain areas, and if available, information pertaining to the floodway,
and the flow of water including direction and velocities.
c. Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements, drawn at suitable
scale showing the following:
(1). the proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building based upon
National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1988 or the datum referenced on the maps;
(2). the elevation of the base flood;
(3). if available, information concerning flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact
and uplift forces and other factors associated with a base flood elevation;
(4). detailed information concerning any proposed flood proofing measures and
corresponding elevations; and,
(5). supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 PA Code, the 2009 IBC
or the 2009 IRC.
d. The following data and documentation:
(1). When any part of a proposed structure or a substantial improvement to an
existing structure is to be built below the elevation of the base flood, the
applicant must submit a document, certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, which states that the proposed construction has been
adequately designed to withstand the base flood elevations, pressures, velocities,
impact and uplift forces associated with the one (1) percent chance annual flood.
Such statement shall include a description of flood-proofing measures which
have been incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the development
and corresponding elevations.
(2). Detailed information needed to determine compliance with §1509.C.6 Storage,
and §1504.A Development Which May Endanger Human Life, including:
i. the amount, location and purpose of any materials or substances
referred to in §1509.C.6 and §1504.A which are intended to be used,
produced, stored or otherwise maintained on site.
ii. a description of the safeguards incorporated into the design of the
proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills or of the dangerous
materials or substances listed in §1504.A during a base flood.
(3). Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, to
show that the cumulative effect of any proposed development within a SFA
when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not
increase the BFE more than one (1) foot at any point.
(4). The appropriate component of the DEP “Planning Module for Land
Development.”
(5). Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the requirements
of the DEP, to implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: September 18, 2012 (27, PART 15)
PART 15-16
Floodplain Overlay
E. Review by County Conservation District.
1. A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or development in any
floodplain district to be considered for approval shall be submitted by the Floodplain
Administrator to the Dauphin County Conservation District for review and comment prior to the
issuance of a building permit. The recommendations of the Conservation District shall be
considered by the Floodplain Administrator for possible incorporation into the proposed plan.
F. Review of Application by Others.
1. A copy of all plans and application for any proposed construction or development in any
floodplain district to be considered for approval may be submitted by the Floodplain
Administrator to any other appropriate agencies and/or individuals (e.g Planning Commission,
Borough Engineer, FEMA, etc.) for review and comment.
G. Changes.
1. After the issuance of a Building Permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes of any kind
shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans, specifications or other documents
submitted with the application without the written consent or approval of the Floodplain
Administrator. Requests for any such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the
applicant to Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
H. Placards.
1. In addition to the Building Permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard which shall
be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in progress. This placard shall show
the number of the permit the date of its issuance and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
I. Start of Construction.
1. Work on the proposed construction and/or development shall begin within one hundred eighty
(180) days after the date of issuance and shall be completed within twelve (12) months after the
date of issuance of the permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted, in
writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The actual start of construction means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction
does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means
the first, alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
2. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted by the applicant, which sets
forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request.
J. Appeals.
1. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain Administrator concerning the
administration of the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board in
accordance with Part 3 of this chapter. Such appeal must be filed, in writing, within thirty (30)
days after the decision, determination or action of the Floodplain Administrator.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: September 18, 2012 (27, PART 15)
PART 15-17
Floodplain Overlay
2. Upon receipt of such appeal the Zoning Hearing Board shall set a time and place, within not less
than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days, for the purpose of considering the appeal. Notice of
the time and place at which the appeal will be considered shall be given to all parties.
3. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may seek relief there from by
appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this State including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain
Management Act.
Section 1509. General Technical Provisions
In order to prevent excessive damage to buildings and structures due to flooding, the following provisions shall
apply to all proposed construction or development occurring in any of the floodplain districts identified in the
Borough Zoning Chapter, as amended:
A. Residential Structures.
1. In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, the lowest floor (including basement) of any new construction of,
or substantial improvement to residential structures shall be at least one and one-half (1 1/2) feet
above the BFE.
2. In A Zones, where there are no BFEs specified on the FIRM, the lowest floor (including
basement) of any new construction of, or substantial improvement to residential structures shall be
at least one and one-half (1 1/2) feet above the BFE in accordance with Section 1503.C.2.
3. In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) at or above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified on the FIRM.
4. The design and construction standards and specifications contained in the 2009 International
Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 PA Code (Chapters 401-405 as amended) shall be utilized.
B. Nonresidential Structures.
1. In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, the lowest floor (including basement) of any new construction of,
or substantial improvement to nonresidential structures shall be at least one and one-half (1 1/2)
feet above the regulatory flood elevation or be designed and constructed so that the space enclosed
below the regulatory flood elevation:
a. is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water and;
b. has structural components with the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy.
2. In A Zones, where there are no BFEs specified on the FIRM, any new construction of, or
substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
floodproofed up to at least one and one-half (1 1/2) feet above the regulatory flood elevation.
3. In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated or completely floodproofed above the highest adjacent grade at
least as high as the depth number specified on the FIRM.
4. Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be floodproofed in accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards contained in
the publication entitled “Flood Proofing Regulations” (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972,
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: September 18, 2012 (27, PART 15)
PART 15-18
Floodplain Overlay
as amended March 1992), or some other equivalent standard for that type of construction. All
plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be accompanied by a statement certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect which states that the proposed design and methods of
construction are in conformance with the above referenced standards.
5. The design and construction standards and specifications contained in the 2009 International
Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 PA Code (Chapters 401-405 as amended) shall be utilized.
C. General Design and Construction Standards. The following minimum standards shall apply for all
construction and development proposed to be undertaken within any identified floodplain district:
1. Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
a. extend laterally at least fifteen (15) feet beyond the building line from all points;
b. consist of soil or small rock materials only. Sanitary landfills shall not be permitted;
c. be compacted to provide necessary permeability and resistance to erosion, scouring, or
settling;
d. be no steeper than one (1) vertical to two (2) horizontal, unless substantiated data,
justifying steeper slopes arc submitted to, and approved by the Floodplain Administrator;
and
e. to be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent properties.
2. Drainage. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of storm water runoff in a
safe and efficient manner. The system shall insure proper drainage along streets, and provide
positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to prevent the discharge
of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
3. Water and Sanitary Sewer Facilities and Systems.
a. All new or replacement water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be located,
designed and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of
flood waters.
b. Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent the discharge of
untreated sewage into flood waters.
c. No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any identified floodplain
district, except in strict compliance with all State and local regulations for such systems.
If any such system is permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
4. Other Utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and telephone systems shall be
located, elevated (where possible) and constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a
flood.
5. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than one (1) foot below the BFE.
6. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or, in times of flooding, could be
injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and not listed in §1504.A Development Which May
Endanger Human Life, shall be stored at or above the BFE and/or floodproofed to the maximum
extent possible.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: September 18, 2012 (27, PART 15)
PART 15-19
Floodplain Overlay
7. Placement of Buildings and Structures. All buildings and structures shall be designed, located, and
constructed so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to
have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of flood water.
8. Anchoring.
a. All buildings and structures, including manufactured homes, shall be firmly anchored in
accordance with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement,
b. All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or components located
below the BFE shall be securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
9. Floors,Walls, and Ceilings.
a. Wood flooring used at or below the BFE shall be installed to accommodate a lateral
expansion of the flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing structural
damage to the building.
b. Plywood used at or below the BFE shall be of a “marine” or “water-resistant” variety.
c. Walls and ceilings at or below the BFE shall be designed and constructed of materials
that are water-resistant and will withstand inundation.
d. Windows, doors, and other components at or below the BFE shall be made of metal or
other water-resistant material.
10. Paints and Adhesives.
a. Paints or other finishes used at or below the BFE shall be of a “marine” or water-resistant
quality.
b. Adhesives used at or below the BFE shall be of a “marine” or water-resistant quality.
c. All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall he finished with a “marine” or
water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
11. Electrical Components.
a. Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three (3) feet above the BFE.
b. Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be dropped from above.
12. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating units, and other electrical,
mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall not be located below the BFE.
13. Fuel Supply Systems. All gas mid oil supply systems shall be designed to prevent the infiltration
of flood waters into the system and discharges from the system into the flood waters. Additional
provisions shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the event that flood water infiltration
occurs.
14. Space below the lowest floor.
a. Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (including basement) is prohibited.
RETTEW
Draft Date: April 5, 2012
Enacted: September 18, 2012 (27, PART 15)
PART 15-20
Floodplain Overlay
b. Partially enclosed space below the lowest floor (including basement) which will be used
solely for the parking of a vehicle, building access, or incidental storage in an area other
than a basement, shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and
exit of flood waters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls.
The term "partially enclosed space" also includes crawl spaces. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, or
meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(1). a minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less than one (1)
square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(2). the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade.
(3). openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc. or other coverings or
devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 16)
PART 16-1
Neighborhood Compatibility Overlay
PART 16
“NCS” NEIGHBORHOOD COMPATIBILITY STANDARDS OVERLAY DISTRICT
Section 1600. Intent
The purpose of the Neighborhood Compatibility Standards Overlay is to:
A. Protect and enhance the development patterns and characteristics of well established neighborhoods in
Highspire Borough by accommodating new uses, reuse, replacement, and infill development that is
consistent and compatible with the character and scale of the established development patterns and
distinctive features of the neighborhoods via the Neighborhood Development Compatibility Design
Guidelines and Standards set forth herein this Part below.
B. Address the purposes, objectives, and standards of Article VII-A, Traditional Neighborhood Development,
of the MPC;
C. Provide a manual of written and graphic design guidelines to assist applicants in the preparation of
proposals for traditional neighborhood development in accordance with Section 708-A of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code
Section 1601. Designation of the Overlay District
A. For the purposes of this Part the Neighborhood Compatibility Standards Overlay shall include those areas
and properties identified on the Highspire Borough Zoning Map as the “Neighborhood Compatibility
Standards Overlay” or subsequent “Neighborhood Compatibly Standards Overlay” district map adopted as
part of this Chapter.
Section 1602. Conflict
A. Except for the standards and regulations established in Part 15 Floodplain Overlay of this Chapter and as
otherwise specifically noted elsewhere, wherever and whenever the requirements of this Part are at variance
with the standards and requirements of any other Part of this Chapter, those standards and regulations set
forth in this Part shall govern development
Section 1603. Permitted Uses
A. In the Neighborhood Compatibility Standards Overlay new development shall be permitted in accordance
with the regulations of the underlying zoning district, provided that all such uses, activities, and/or
development shall be undertaken in compliance with the Neighborhood Development Compatibility Design
Guidelines and Standards set forth herein this Part below.
Section 1604. Neighborhood Development Compatibility Design Guidelines and Standards
A. The Neighborhood Development Compatibility Design Guidelines and Standards is enabled by Section
708-A of the MPC as the manual of written and graphic design guidelines
B. These compatibly design guidelines and standards provide the Borough officials, residents, business
owners, builders, and other interested parties with a written and visual set of compatibility design standards
and characteristics prevalent in and important to the protecting and enhancing the established development
patterns and features of neighborhoods in Highspire Borough.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 16)
PART 16-2
Neighborhood Compatibility Overlay
C. These design guidelines and standards provide the desired direction for new development within
neighborhoods in Highspire Borough to ensure consistency and compatibility between established building
and development types, styles, and patterns, and new development.
D. In addition to the general building and land requirements set forth elsewhere in this Chapter, proposals for
development shall be generally consistent with the compatibility design standards and guidelines set forth
herein this Part. If a design guideline or standard is not specifically indicated in these compatibility design
guidelines and standards, refer to the most recent version of the Highspire Borough Comprehensive Plan
Comprehensive Plan, and/or other applicable plans adopted by Highspire Borough.
E. These compatibility design guidelines and standards highlight important design characteristics relating to
buildings and land development via written standards and visual images which are intended to provide
guidance and inspiration for implementing the desired design concepts set forth in the most recent version
of the Highspire Borough Comprehensive Plan, and/or other applicable plans adopted by Highspire
Borough. The images and visual examples of these design guidelines and standards are provided for
general illustrative purposes only, and shall not be construed to be operative language of the ordinance. The
written standards of these design guidelines and standards shall take precedent and therefore govern.
F. Applications for Zoning and/or Building Permits
1. In addition to the information, required in Part 3 of this Chapter, applications for development,
including construction of new principal buildings or additions/expansions to existing principal
buildings in this Neighborhood Compatibility Standards Overlay shall be submitted with the
following information:
a. A complete set of calculations (i.e. averages of setbacks, heights, lot access etc.) used to
determine and demonstrate compliance with all applicable standards set forth herein this
section below.
b. A schematic architectural drawing of the principal building's front façade(s).
G. Specific building and development compatibly design guidelines and standards shall apply to the following
features:
1. Front Building Setback
2. Side Building Setback
3. Building Height
4. Building Orientation
5. Lot Access
6. Parking
H. Required Front Building Setback
1. For a lot proposed for development, the distance the front of the principal building is set back
from the street right-of-way shall be similar to those distances between existing principal buildings
on the abutting lots and the abutting street right-of-way in accordance with the following standard:
a. Identify the existing principal buildings on the lots abutting the lot proposed for
development.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 16)
PART 16-3
Neighborhood Compatibility Overlay
b. Using these results, calculate the average setback distance between the existing principal
buildings on the abutting lots and the street rights-of-way line.
(1). If an abutting lot is vacant, the required setback of the abutting vacant lot shall
be assumed to be the minimum front setback standard defined in the underlying
zoning district in which it is situated.
(2). For corner lots, the standards set forth in this section above shall be calculated
using each abutting lot, which includes those abutting lots having frontage on
and the existing principal buildings oriented toward the intersecting street.
c. The required front building setback for the building on the lot proposed for development
shall be the average setback distance calculated in subsections a. and b. above, which
may be adjusted by not more fifteen percent (15%), unless all buildings on the abutting
lots have the same set back distance.
(1). Front building façades and/or covered front porches shall be permitted to fulfill
this requirement.
d. However, no building shall extend into any street right-of-way.
e. Otherwise the building on the lot proposed for development shall comply with all front
setback standards defined in the underlying zoning district in which it is situated.
2. Front Building Setback Graphic Examples
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 16)
PART 16-4
Neighborhood Compatibility Overlay
I. Minimum Side Building Setback
1. For a lot proposed for development, the distance the building is set back from its side lot lines, and
other buildings on abutting lots to the side, shall be similar to those distances between existing
principal buildings on abutting lots and the respective side lot lines in accordance with the
following standard:
a. Identify the existing principal buildings on the lots abutting the lot proposed for
development.
b. Using these results, calculate the average setback distance between the existing principal
buildings on the abutting lots from their respective side lot lines.
(1). If an abutting lot is vacant, the minimum setback of the abutting vacant lot shall
be assumed to be the minimum side setback standard defined in the underlying
zoning district in which it is situated.
(2). For corner lots, the standards set forth in this section above shall be calculated
using each abutting lot, which includes those abutting lots having frontage on
and the existing principal buildings oriented toward the intersecting street.
c. The minimum side building setback for the principal building on the lot proposed for
development shall be the average setback distance calculated in subsections a. and b.
above.
(1.). This average distance may not be decreased unless the principal building is
constructed with a shared common party wall and the written consent of the
owner of the abutting lot and building.
d. However, no principal building shall extend closer than fifteen (15) feet from another
principal building without the written consent of the owner of the abutting lot and
building.
e. Otherwise the principal building on the lot proposed for development shall comply with
all side setback standards defined in the underlying zoning district in which it is situated.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 16)
PART 16-5
Neighborhood Compatibility Overlay
2. Side Building Setback Graphic Examples
J. Building Height
1. For a lot proposed for development, the height of the principal building shall be similar to those
building heights (in stories and feet) for existing principal buildings on abutting lots in accordance
with the following standard:
a. Roof heights, cornice lines, eaves, parapets and porches of the principal building on the
lot proposed for development shall respect and maintain the architectural context of the
principal buildings on the abutting lots and, when feasible, shall incorporate the scale and
character of the majority of the existing principal buildings on the same shared block face
(between two [2] intersecting streets) along the same side of the street.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 16)
PART 16-6
Neighborhood Compatibility Overlay
b. Identify the existing principal buildings on the lots abutting the lot proposed for
development.
c. Using these results, calculate the average number of stories and feet of the heights of the
existing principal buildings on the abutting lots.
(1). If an abutting lot is vacant, unless the building height standards defined in the
underlying zoning district in which it is situated have a different minimum
building height, the number of stories for an abutting vacant lot shall be assumed
to be one story.
(2). For corner lots, the standards set forth in this section above shall be calculated
using each abutting lot, which includes those abutting lots having frontage on
and the existing principal buildings oriented toward the intersecting street.
(3). No principal building shall have less than the average number of stories or feet
of the heights of the existing principal buildings on abutting lots, and shall not
have more stories or height in feet than the tallest of the existing principal
buildings on the abutting lots.
d. However, no principal building height shall be less than one story.
e. Otherwise the principal building on the lot proposed for development shall comply with
all building height standards defined in the underlying zoning district in which it is
situated.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 16)
PART 16-7
Neighborhood Compatibility Overlay
2. Building Height Graphic Examples
K. Building Orientation
1. Unless otherwise noted herein this subsection below, for a lot proposed for development, the
orientation or location of the main or everyday entrance and windows for the principal building
shall be similar to those building orientations for existing principal buildings on abutting lots in
accordance with the following standard:
a. Interior Lots
Principal buildings shall have their primary front facades, provided with a main or
everyday front entrance and windows, oriented toward and facing the public street
(excluding alleys).
b. Corner Lots
Principal buildings on lots abutting more than one (1) public street shall have their
primary front facades, provided with a main or everyday front entrance and windows,
oriented towards and facing (in order of preference):
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 16)
PART 16-8
Neighborhood Compatibility Overlay
(1). the corner; or
(2). the street (excluding alleys) upon which the majority of the principal buildings
on the adjacent lots are oriented towards.
c. Lots Abutting 2nd Street
Principal buildings on lots abutting 2nd Street shall have at their primary front facades,
provided with a main or everyday front entrance and windows, oriented toward and
facing 2nd Street in accordance with the following standard:
(1). Interior Lots
Principal buildings shall have their primary front facades, provided with a main
or everyday front entrance and windows, oriented toward and facing 2nd Street.
(2). Corner Lots
Principal buildings on lots fronting on more than one (1) public street shall have
their primary front facades, provided with a main or everyday front entrance and
windows, oriented towards and facing (in order of preference):
(a). both 2nd Street and the intersecting street (excluding alleys); or
(b). the corner.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 16)
PART 16-9
Neighborhood Compatibility Overlay
2. Building Orientation Graphic Examples
L. Lot Access and Parking
1. For a lot proposed for development and abutting an alley, access to the lot shall not be taken from
the front of a property to a public street.
a. Lot access shall be provided at the rear of lots from the alley for those lots abutting
alleys.
b. No new curb cut for a driveway or access drive shall be provided along a public street for
lots abutting alleys, and required off-street parking (lots and areas) shall:
(1). be provided in the rear of the principal building; and
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 16)
PART 16-10
Neighborhood Compatibility Overlay
(2). not be located between the principal building and the public street (excluding
alleys).
2. For a lot proposed for development that does not abut an alley, or for a lot proposed for
development that abuts an alley where the majority of the existing adjacent lots on the same shared
block face (between two [2] intersecting streets) along the same side of the street have access to
the public street from the front of the lot, new lot access may be taken from the front of the lot via
curb cuts for access drives and driveways in accordance with Part 4 of this Chapter and the
standards below:
a. Where sidewalks are installed, access drive or driveway surfacing shall end at the
backside or building-side of the sidewalk and on the front-side or street side of the
sidewalk, and no access drive or driveway surfacing shall extend over the sidewalk area.
b. However, no non-residential off-street parking (lots and areas) shall be located between
the principal building and the public street (excluding alleys).
3. Lot Access Graphic Examples
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 16)
PART 16-11
Neighborhood Compatibility Overlay
4. Off-Street Parking Graphic Examples
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 17)
PART 17-1
Airport Zoning Overlay
PART 17
“APZ” AIRPORT ZONING OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Section 1700. Application.
The regulations and standards contained in this Part shall apply within the Airport Zoning Overlay District to all
applications to:
A. erect a new structure;
B. add to or increase the height of an existing structure; and
C. establish, erect, and/or maintain any use, structure, or object (natural or manmade.
Section 1701. Purpose and Intent
The purpose and intent of the Airport Zoning OverlayDistrict is to:
A. create an overlay zoning district that considers safety issues around the Capital City Airport (CXY) and
Harrisburg International Airport (MDT);
B. regulate and restrict the heights of established uses, constructed structures, and objects of natural growth;
C. create appropriate related zones, establishing the boundaries thereof and providing for changes in the
restrictions and boundaries of such zones; and
D. create a permitting process for certain uses, structures, and objects within said related zones.
Section 1702. Relation to Other Zoning Districts
The Airport Zoning Overlay Zoning District shall not modify the boundaries of any other overlay zoning district.
Where identified, the Airport Zoning Overlay District shall impose certain requirements on land use, construction,
and development in addition to those contained in the applicable underlying zoning district and/or applicable overlay
zoning district for the same area.
Section 1703. Conflict
Wherever and whenever the requirements of this Part are at variance with the requirements of any other Part and/or
Section of this Chapter, the most restrictive, or that imposing the higher standards shall govern.
Section 1704. Establishment of Airport Zones
The Airport Zoning Overlay District is hereby established and certain zones within the Airport Zoning Overlay
District, defined in Part 2 of this Chapter and depicted on Figure 17-1 and illustrated on the “Borough of Highspire,
Dauphin County, PA: Airport Zoning Overlay District Map”, as follows:
A. Approach Surface Zone.
B. Conical Surface Zone.
C. Horizontal Surface Zone.
D. Primary Surface Zone.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 17)
PART 17-2
Airport Zoning Overlay
E. Transitional Surface Zone.
Figure 17-1 FAR Part 77 Surfaces and Dimension Requirements (Source: Model Zoning Ordinance Language for an
Airport District Overlay; PennDOT, 2010)
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 17)
PART 17-3
Airport Zoning Overlay
Section 1705. Permit Applications
A. As regulated by Act 164 and defined by 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 77.13(a) (as amended or
replaced), proposals for applications to:
1. erect a new structure;
2. add to or increase the height of an existing structure; or
3. establish, erect, and/or maintain any use, structure, or object (natural or manmade), in the Airport
Zoning Overlay District;
shall first notify PennDOT’s Bureau of Aviation (BOA) by submitting PENNDOT Form AV-57 to obtain
an obstruction review of the proposal at least thirty (30) days prior to commencement thereof. PennDOT’s
BOA response must be included with this permit application for it to be considered complete. If
PennDOT’s BOA returns a determination of no penetration of airspace, the permit request should be
considered in compliance with the intent of this Airport Zoning Overlay District. If PennDOT’s BOA
returns a determination of a penetration of airspace, the permit shall be denied, and the project sponsor may
seek a variance from such regulations as outlined herein Section 1706.
B. Exceptions. In the following circumstances notification of an approval by PennDOT’s Bureau of Aviation
(BOA) shall not be required:
1. No permit is required for the routine maintenance and repairs to, or the replacement of parts of
existing structures which do not enlarge or increase the height of an existing structure.
2. In the areas lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and/or conical zone, no permit shall be
required for any tree or structure less than seventy-five (75) feet or vertical height above the
ground, except when, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, such tree or
structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for such zones.
3. In the areas lying within the limits of the approach zones, but at a horizontal distance of not less
than four thousand two hundred (4,200) feet from each end of the runway, no permit shall be
required for any tree or structure less than seventy-five (75) feet of vertical height above the
ground, except when, because of terrain, land contour or topographic features, such tree or
structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for such approach zones.
4. In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones beyond the perimeter of the horizontal
zones, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than seventy-five (75) feet of
vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure, because of terrain, land
contour, or topographic feature, would extend above the height limit prescribed for such transition
zones.
5. Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as permitting or intending
to permit any construction, or alteration of any structure, or growth of any tree in excess of any of
the height limits established by this Zoning Overlay District, except that no permit is required to
make maintenance repairs to or to replace parts of existing structures which do not enlarge or
increase the height of an existing structure.
Section 1706. Variances.
In addition to the provisions set forth in Part 3 of this Chapter relating to variances, any request for a variance shall
include documentation in compliance with 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 77 Subpart B (FAA Form 7460-1 as
amended or replaced). Determinations of whether to grant a variance will depend on the determinations made by the
Federal Aviation Administration’s (FAA) and PennDOT’s BOA as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 17)
PART 17-4
Airport Zoning Overlay
air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable air space. In particular, the request for a variance
shall consider which of the following categories the FAA has placed the proposed construction in:
A. No Objection
The subject construction is determined not to exceed obstruction standards and marking/lighting is not
required to mitigate potential hazard. Under this determination a variance shall be granted.
B. Conditional Determination
The proposed construction/alteration is determined to create some level of encroachment into an airport
hazard area which can be effectively mitigated. Under this determination, a variance shall be granted
contingent upon implementation of mitigating measures as described herein Section 1709.
C. Objectionable
The proposed construction/alteration is determined to be a hazard and is thus objectionable. A variance
shall be denied and the reasons for this determination shall be outlined to the applicant. Such requests for
variances shall be granted where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations
will result in unnecessary hardship and that relief granted will not be contrary to the public interest, will not
create a hazard to air navigation, will do substantial justice, and will be in accordance with the purpose and
intent of this Part.
Section 1707. Use Restrictions
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Part, no use shall be made of land, water, or structure within the
Airport Zoning OverlayDistrict in such a manner as to:
A. create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communications between the airport and
aircraft;
B. make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others;
C. impair visibility in the apply within the Airport Zoning Overlay District;
D. create bird strike hazards; or
E. otherwise endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff or maneuvering of aircraft utilizing the airport(s).
Section 1708. Pre-Existing Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Trees
The regulations prescribed by this Part shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or otherwise change
to, or alteration of any use, structure, and/or tree identified as non-conforming to the regulations of this Part as of the
effective date of this Part, or to otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming use, structure, and/or
tree. No nonconforming use or structure shall be altered, nor tree permitted to grow higher, so as to increase the
nonconformity (relating to height and the use restrictions set forth herein this Part). A nonconforming use, structure
or tree, once abandoned or damaged or destroyed as per to the standards in Part 5 of this Chapter may only be
reestablished consistent with the provisions herein this Part and Part 5 of this Chapter.
Section 1709. Obstruction Marking and Lighting
Any permit or variance granted pursuant to the provisions of this Part and Part 5 of this Chapter may be conditioned
according to the process described herein Section 1706 to require the owner of the structure or object of natural
growth in question to permit the Borough of Highspire, at its own expense, or require the person requesting the
permit or variance, to install, operate, and maintain such marking or lighting as deemed necessary to assure both
ground and air safety.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 18)
PART 18-1
Sign Regulations
PART 18
SIGN REGULATIONS
Section 1800. Applicability
A. Purpose. This Part is intended to: promote and maintain overall community aesthetic quality; establish time,
place and manner of regulations for the exercise of free speech, without regulating content; promote traffic safety
by avoiding distractions and sight distance obstructions; and protect property values and ensure compatibility
with the character of neighboring uses.
B. Permit Required. A zoning permit shall be required for all signs except for:
1. signs meeting the requirements of Section 1803; and
2. (non-illuminated window signs constructed of paper, poster board or similar materials that are not of a
permanent nature. Only types, sizes and heights that are specifically permitted by this Part within the
applicable zoning district shall be allowed.
C. Changes on Signs. Any lawfully existing sign (including legally nonconforming signs) may be painted or
repaired or changed in logo or message without a new permit under this Part, provided that the changes do not
increase the sign area or otherwise result in noncompliance or an increased non-conformity with this Part.
Section 1801. General Regulations for All Signs
A. Signs must be constructed of durable material and maintained in good condition.
B. No sign shall be maintained within Highpsire in such a state of disrepair as to have the appearance of complete
neglect, which is rotting or falling down, which is illegible, or has loose parts separated from original fastenings.
C. Whenever a sign becomes structurally unsafe or endangers the safety of the building or premise, or endangers the
public safety, the Zoning Officer shall give written notice to the owner of the premises on which the sign is
located that such sign shall be made safe or removed within five (5) days.
D. Signs, excluding Borough approved community murals, painted upon or displayed upon a building or structure
shall be regarded as a flat wall sign and the regulations pertaining thereto shall apply.
E. Each sign shall be removed when the circumstances leading to its erection no longer apply.
F. Signs in the MN/C, CBD, C-G, and I zoning districts may be illuminated by floodlights or spot lights that shall be
so shielded, installed and aimed that they do not project their output into the windows of buildings on adjacent
lots, past the sign being illuminated, skyward, onto adjacent properties or public rights-of-way.
G. Directly illuminated signs, designed to give forth artificial light directly or through transparent or translucent
material from a source of light within such sign, including, but not limited to neon, will be permitted within the
CBD, C-G, and I zoning districts, provided that all such lighting emitted from the sign shall not cause a glare, nor
emit direct light transmitted to other properties or public rights-of-way.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 18)
PART 18-2
Sign Regulations
H. Flashing, blinking, strobe, twinkling, animated, streaming or moving signs of any type shall be permitted in the
C-G and I zoning districts. Otherwise, in the CBD and MN/C zoning districts signs may only change from one
message to another message provided the message does not change more than once every hour, except that
displays of time and temperature may change more frequently. In addition, flashing lights visible from the public
right-of-way shall not be used to attract attention to a business. This restriction specifically includes window
signs, but does not prohibit seasonal Christmas lighting or displays that comply with this Part.
I. No sign shall be located so as to interfere with visibility for motorists at street or driveway intersections.
J. No sign located within three hundred (300) feet of any traffic light shall be illuminated with red, green, or yellow
lights.
K. All electrically illuminated signs shall be constructed to the standards of the National Board of Fire Underwriters.
L. Signs must be positioned so that they do not interfere with any clear sight triangle as defined herein Part 4.
M. No loud, vulgar, indecent, or obscene advertising matter shall be displayed in any manner, including, but not
limited to:
1. Any graphic illustration pertaining to specified sexual activities, specified anatomical areas, or both;
and,
2. Scenes wherein artificial devices are employed to depict, or drawings are employed to portray any of
the prohibited signs, photographs or graphic representations described above;
N. No sign shall be erected or located as to prevent free ingress or egress from any window, door or fire escape.
O. No sign shall be placed in such a position that it will obscure light or air from a building or which would create a
traffic danger.
P. No sign shall be permitted attached to public utility poles or trees which are within the right-of-way of any street.
Q. Within an area regulated by Part 15 of this Chapter relating to the Floodplain Overlay, no freestanding sign shall
be permitted and no wall mounted sign shall exceed six (6) square feet.
R. In the event that a symbol, trademark or other such figure is used as a sign post or standard which could be
constructed to indicate or identify a particular use or business, that symbol, trademark or figure is to be computed
as part of the total allowable sign area.
S. Only those signs referring directly to services, materials or products made, sold, or displayed on the premises
shall be permitted, except as otherwise provided in this Part.
T. Unless otherwise specific stated in this Chapter, no point of any sign, including trim, border and supports, shall
be located within ten (10) feet of any property line or street right-of-way.
U. No sign shall emit smoke, visible vapors or particles, sound or odors.
V. No sign shall contain information that states or implies that a lot may be used for any purpose not permitted
under the applicable provisions of this Chapter.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 18)
PART 18-3
Sign Regulations
W. No signs shall be of such character, form, shape or color that they imitate or resemble any official traffic sign,
signal or device or that have any characteristics which are likely to confuse or distract the operator of a motor vehicle on
a public street.
X. No sign shall display words or images that are obscene or pornographic.
Y. Any sign attached to a building shall not be placed on the roof, be higher than the wall to which it is attached, or
located on a parapet wall.
Z. No point of a wall projecting sign shall be located less than eight and one-half (8 ½) feet above the grade directly
below the sign.
AA. No sign shall be affixed to any motor vehicle or trailer in such a manner that the carrying of such sign is no
longer incidental to the vehicle’s primary purpose of transporting persons and goods.
BB. No sign or sign structure shall constitute a hazard to public safety or health, including a sign which fails in the
determination of the Zoning Officer to properly shield its light source from providing unacceptable glare to a
neighboring property or the public street.
CC. No sign shall by reason of size, location, content, coloring or manner of illumination, obstruct the vision
of drivers, either when leaving or entering a roadway from another roadway or driveway, or obstruct or detract
from the visibility or effectiveness of any traffic sign or control device on public streets and roads.
DD. No signs shall make use of words such as “stop”, “look”, “one-way,” “danger,” “yield” or any similar words,
phrases, symbols, lights or characters in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
EE. No sign located on public property or a public right-of-way shall bear any commercial advertising or
announcement.
FF. No sign shall be painted on, attached to or supported by a tree, stone, cliff or other natural object.
GG. Nothing in these regulations shall be construed as prohibiting signs intended for viewing principally from within
a building or signs temporarily attached to the inside face of a display window, announcing a sale or similar
feature, provided that the latter shall not occupy more than thirty-three and one-third (33 1/3) percent of the total
display window area for a period not to exceed ten (10) days.
Section 1802. Determination of Size of Sign Area
A. The area of a sign shall be construed to include all lettering, wording and accompanying designs and symbols,
together with the background, whether open or enclosed, on which they are displayed, including any border
framing or decorative attachments, but not including any supporting framework or bracing incidental to the
display itself. Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to a building, wall or window, the
area of the sign shall be considered to be that of the smallest rectangle or other regular geometric shape which
encompasses all of the letters and symbols.
B. Where a sign has two (2) or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of the
sign; provided, however, for a double-face sign, if the interior angle formed by the two faces of the double-face
sign is less than forty-five degrees (45°) and the two faces are at no point no more than three (3) feet from one
another, the area of only the larger face shall be used to determine the sign area.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 18)
PART 18-4
Sign Regulations
Section 1803. Miscellaneous Signs Not Requiring Permits
See footnotes at the end of the table.
Type and Definition of Signs
Not Requiring Permits
Max. No. of
Signs per
Lot
Max. Sign Area
per Sign* on a
Residential Lot
(Sq. Ft.)
Max. Sign Area
per Sign* on a
Non-Residential
Lot * (Sq. Ft.) Other Requirements
Athletic Field Signs – Such as those
commonly found on the inside side of
outfield walls / fences of baseball fields N/A N/A N/A Signs shall only be placed facing
the ballfield.
Christmas Tree Sign – Advertises the
seasonal sale of Christmas trees 2 8 20
Shall only be posted during
seasons when such products are
actively offered for sale
Charitable Event Sign – Advertises a
special event that primarily is held to
benefit an established tax-exempt
nonprofit organization
2 4 20
Shall be placed a maximum of
14 days prior to event and
removed a maximum of 4 days
after event
Contractor’s Sign – Advertises a
building tradesperson, engineer or
architect who is actively conducting
significant work on a particular lot that
is not such person’s place of business
1 per company
working on the
site
4 20
Shall only be permitted while
such work is actively and clearly
underway and a maximum of 4
days afterward. Shall not be
illuminated.
Apartment numbers or parking courts in
a development, fire lanes, parking or
closely similar information regarding
the same lot as the sign is on, and that
does not include advertising
Flag – A banner or pennant made of
fabric or materials with a similar
appearance that is hung from a pole in
such a way to flow in the wind and that
includes the words “Open” or some
type of advertising message.
1 15 20
Governmental flags and flags
without an advertising message
are not regulated by this Part.
Also, a corporate flag may be
displayed on a flag pole.
Home Occupation Sign – Advertises a
permitted home occupation 1 4 4
Shall not be illuminated if
within a residential district.
Shall be attached to the principal
building or within a building
window and shall not be
freestanding.
Identification Sign – Only identifies the
name and/or occupation of the
resident/occupant and/or the name,
street address and/or use of a lot, but
that does not include other advertising
1 1 1 No freestanding sign permitted
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 18)
PART 18-5
Sign Regulations
Type and Definition of Signs
Not Requiring Permits
Max. No. of
Signs per
Lot
Max. Sign Area
per Sign* on a
Residential Lot
(Sq. Ft.)
Max. Sign Area
per Sign* on a
Non-Residential
Lot * (Sq. Ft.) Other Requirements
Open House Sign – Advertises the
temporary and periodic open house of a
property for sale or rent
2 per event 4 4
Shall be placed maximum of 4
days before open house begins,
and be removed max.of 24
hours after open house ends.
Political Sign – Advertises a person or
party seeking political office or a
political cause or opinion on a
referendum or matter of political
concern
Max. of 1 sign
per candidate
or issue
4 32
Persons posting political signs
shall maintain a written list of
locations of such signs, unless
posting signs on their own
property. Political signs shall
not be placed on property
without the prior consent of the
owner. If a political sign does
not meet these requirements,
then it shall be regulated as an
“off-premises sign.”
Public Services Sign – Advertises the
availability of restrooms, telephone or
other similar public convenience. No max. 2 2
Real Estate Sign – Advertises the
availability of property on which the
sign is located for sale, rent or lease.
1 per street that
the lot abuts 4 15
Shall only be placed on the
property while it is actively for
sale, lease or rent, and shall be
removed a maximum of 7 days
after settlement or start of lease.
Roadside Stand Sign – for the sale of
agricultural products grown and sold
upon the same property 2 per property 6 6
Service Organization/Place of Worship
Sign – An off-premises sign stating
name of a recognized incorporated
service organization or place of worship
and that states the place and times of
meetings or services and/or an arrow
directing persons to such location
1 2 2
Special Sale Signs – Temporary
banners, flags and other signs that
advertise a special sales event or grand
opening at a lawful principal
commercial business.
2 per lot Not permitted
Total of 30 sq. ft. for
all such banners, flags
and other temporary
signs
Shall be displayed a maximum
of 7 days per event. Such signs
shall not flash or obstruct safe
sight distances.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 18)
PART 18-6
Sign Regulations
Type and Definition of Signs
Not Requiring Permits
Max. No. of
Signs per
Lot
Max. Sign Area
per Sign* on a
Residential Lot
(Sq. Ft.)
Max. Sign Area
per Sign* on a
Non-Residential
Lot * (Sq. Ft.) Other Requirements
Time and Temperature Sign – With a
sole purpose to announce the current
time and temperature and any nonprofit
public service messages
1 Not permitted 20
Shall not include advertising. If
includes advertising see signs
permitted by zoning district.
Trespassing Sign – Indicating that a
road is private, that trespassing is
prohibited on a lot, or controlling
certain activities such as hunting and
fishing on the lot
No max. 2 2
Abbreviations: “max.” = maximum; “min.” = minimum; “hrs.” = hours
* A “Non-residential Lot” shall be considered a lot occupied by a lawful principal commercial,
industrial, public/semi-public/institutional, or mixed (commercial/residential) use.”
Section 1804. Signs Not Regulated by This Part
A. Historic Sign. A sign that memorializes an important historic place, event or person and that is specifically
authorized by the Borough of Highspire or Dauphin County, State or Federal agency.
B. Holiday Decorations. Decorations that commemorate a holiday recognized by the Borough of Highspire,
County, State or Federal Government and that does not include advertising.
C. Not Readable Sign. A sign that is not readable from any public street or any exterior lot line.
D. Official Sign. A sign erected by the State, Dauphin County, Borough of Highspire or other legally constituted
governmental body, or specifically authorized by the Borough of Highspire ordinance or resolution, and which
exists for public purposes, such as but not limited to, identifying public transit stops.
E. Required Sign. A sign that only includes information required to be posted outdoors by a government agency or
Borough of Highspire.
F. Right-of-Way Sign. A sign posted within the existing right-of-way of a public street and officially authorized by
the Borough of Highspire or PennDOT.
Section 1805. Freestanding, Wall and Window Signs
A. The following signs are permitted within the specified zoning districts, in compliance within the following
regulations. In addition signs set forth in Sections 1803, 1804, and “Temporary Signs” listed herein this Part, are
permitted in all districts by other provisions of this Part. See definitions of the types of signs in Part 2.
See footnotes at the end of the table.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 18)
PART 18-7
Sign Regulations
Zoning District
or Type of Use
Freestanding Signs
Maximum Area of
Wall Signs
Maximum Area of
Maximum Area Window Signs
and Number of
Freestanding Signs
Maximum Total
Height of
Freestanding
Signs
R-L and R-M Zoning
Districts, with these
signs limited to allowed
principal non-residential
uses.
One sign on each street the
lot abuts, each with a
maximum sign area of 8
sq. ft., except that the sign
area may be increased to
15 square feet for a place
of worship, primary or
secondary school,
fire station, post office, or
name of residential
development
5 feet 10 sq. ft.
May be used in place of a
wall sign with the same
restrictions. Such signs shall
be on the inside of windows
or printed on the window
itself.
MN/C* and
CBD *
When the front of the
building is setback 25 feet
or more from the public
right-of-way line, then only
one sign per lot with a
maximum area of 12 sq.
ft.** shall be permitted.
Otherwise, freestanding
signs shall not be
permitted.
6 feet 15 sq. ft. per business
Temporary non-illuminated
window signs are not
regulated. Other window
signs are regulated under
wall signs. Such signs shall
be on the inside of windows
or printed on the window
itself.
C-G District*
One sign per lot with a
maximum area of 24 sq.
ft.**, ***, ****
20 feet
5% of the vertical area
of the building side on
which the signs are
attached, but in no case
exceeding a maximum
total of 175 square feet
per building.
Temporary non-illuminated
window signs are not
regulated. Other window
signs are regulated as wall
signs.
I-1 District*
One sign per street that the
lot abuts, each with a
maximum area of 24 sq. ft.
**, ***, ****
20 feet
5% of the vertical area
of the building side on
which the signs are
attached, up to a
maximum total of 175
square feet per building.
Temporary non-illuminated
window signs are not
regulated. Other window
signs are regulated as wall
signs.
PR/OS District*
One sign per street that the
lot abuts, each with a
maximum area of 20 sq.
ft.**
8 feet 20 sq. ft. per use
Temporary non-illuminated
window signs are not
regulated. Other window
signs are regulated as wall
signs.
*In the MN/C, CBD, C-G, and I Zoning Districts, the following additional signs shall be allowed:
1. A maximum of one projecting sign shall be permitted per business, provided:
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 18)
PART 18-8
Sign Regulations
a. Such sign has a minimum clearance over the sidewalk of eight and one half (8 ½) feet (unless
a differing standard is established Chapter 5 relating to buildings of the Codified Ordinances
of the Borough of Highspire).
b. Has a maximum sign area of twelve (12) square feet for one (1) side (but permitted to a
projecting sign have two (2) sides, with no one side exceeding twelve (12) square feet).
c. Is securely attached to the building.
2. A maximum of one additional wall or projecting sign shall be permitted per business, provided:
a. The business is located in a building within the MN/C or CBD zoning district.
b. The lot upon which the business is located, is provided with lot access at the rear of lot from
an alley, and parking is provided at the rear of the principal building in which the business is
located.
c. The total maximum sign area shall be one half (1/2) of the total permitted sign area for the
applicable sign type in the respective zoning district.
d. Such sign shall only be located on the rear of the principal building in which the business is
located, facing the parking lot.
e. Such sign shall comply with all other sign standards provided herein this Part.
3. A maximum of one Sidewalk Sign (or “sandwich board sign”) shall be permitted per business provided:
a. Such sign has a maximum sign area of eight (8) square feet on each of two (2) sides, has a
maximum separation width of three (3) feet, and has a maximum height of four (4) feet.
b. Such sign is taken indoors during all hours when the business is not open to the public.
c. Such sign is not in a location that would interfere with pedestrian traffic, emergency access or
parking spaces and retains a four (4) feet wide minimum clear path for pedestrians, and such
sign is kept as close to the building as is feasible.
d. Such sign is attractive, well-maintained and durably constructed.
e. Such sign is only allowed for a restaurant or retail sales use.
** If the permitted freestanding sign area is not used, such sign area may be added to the permitted wall
sign area. In the C-G Zoning District, an auto service station may also include an additional twenty-four
(24) square feet of sign area to display fuel prices.
*** If a lot includes three (3) or more distinct non-residential establishments, then along a single street, the
maximum freestanding sign area may be increased to 40 square feet.
**** If a lot includes ten (10) or more distinct non-residential establishments and is adjacent to two or more
public streets, then one additional freestanding sign shall be permitted on each of the streets, eachwith a
maximum sign area of two hundred (200) square feet.
B. Placement and Maximum Height of Wall Signs
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 18)
PART 18-9
Sign Regulations
1. A wall sign shall not be placed upon a wall that faces onto a residential zoning district. This shall not
prevent the placement of a wall sign on a building side that faces onto an abutting public right-of-way.
2. The maximum height of wall signs shall be equal to the top of a structural wall to which the sign is
attached. A sign shall not be attached to a parapet wall or to a pitched or mansard roof, and shall not
extend above a roof.
3. A sign may be placed on canopy over gasoline sales, however, the square footage of such sign shall be
included as permitted wall sign area.
C. Portable Signs (Including “Signs on Mobile Stands”) and Other Temporary Signs
1. Portable signs are prohibited in all districts, except as a temporary Charitable Event sign complying
with this Part and except for a sandwich board sign meeting the requirements of this Part.
Section 1806. Construction of Signs
A. Every sign (except allowed temporary signs) shall be constructed of durable materials. Every sign shall be kept
in good condition and repair. The Zoning Officer shall by written notice require a property owner or lessee to
repair or remove a damaged, dilapidated or unsafe sign within a specified period of time. If such order is not
complied with, the Borough of Highspire may repair or remove such sign at the expense of such owner or lessee.
Section 1807. Definitions of Signs
A. See Part 2.
Section 1808. Abandoned or Outdated Signs
A. Signs advertising a use no longer in existence shall be removed within ninety (90) days of the cessation of such
use. If the owner of a property does not remove such sign within thirty (30) days after receiving a written notice
from the Zoning Officer, the sign may be removed by the Borough of Higspire at the expense of the property
owner.
B. These time limits shall not apply to a sign intended to be reused with a new sign face serving a building that is
clearly temporarily vacant and being offered to new tenants or for purchase.
Section 1809. Location of Signs
A. Setbacks
1. A sign shall not intrude into or project over an existing street right-of-way, unless specifically
authorized by a permit from Borough of Highspire or PennDOT. The Borough of Highspire Police
Department, Zoning Officer, his/her designee or the owner of a pole or tree shall have the authority to
remove and dispose of signs attached to a utility pole or tree. The Borough Council of Highspire
Borough may approve a temporary banner over a street cartway to advertise a charitable event.
2. Unless specifically stated otherwise, a freestanding sign shall be setback a minimum of five (5) feet
from the street right-of-way. Unless specifically stated otherwise, a freestanding sign shall be setback a
minimum of ten (10) feet from a lot occupied by a primarily residential use.
3. These setbacks shall not apply to Official Signs, Identification Signs on mailboxes, Public Service Signs
and Directional Signs.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 18)
PART 18-10
Sign Regulations
B. Sight Clearance
No sign shall be so located that it interferes with the sight clearance requirements of this Chapter.
C. Off-Premises
No signs except permitted Off-Premise, Official, Political or Public Service Signs shall be erected on a property
to which it does not relate.
D. Permission of Owner
No sign shall be posted on any property or sign pole or public utility pole, unless permission has been received
from the owner.
Section 1810. Off-Premise Signs (Including Billboards)
A. Purposes: Off-premise signs are controlled by this Part for the following purposes, to:
1. ensure that a physical environment is maintained that is attractive to desirable types of development,
especially light industrial and office parks;
2. prevent visual pollution in Highspire and protect property values, especially in consideration of the fact
that most commercial areas of Highspire are within close proximity to existing residences;
3. prevent glare on adjacent property and streets;
4. avoid the creation of additional visual distractions to motorists, especially along busy arterial streets that
involve complex turning movements and numerous traffic hazards;
5. recognize the numerous alternative forms of free speech are available in Highspire, including existing
nonconforming off-premise signs, on-premise signs and temporary signs and printed and electronic
media.
B. Nonconforming Off-Premise Signs
This section is not intended to require the removal of an existing lawfully-placed off-premise sign that is
in structurally sound condition.
C. PennDOT Signs
Signs erected and maintained by PennDOT are permitted by right in all zoning districts.
D. Permitted Off-Premise Signs
1. Zoning Districts. An off-premise sign is only permitted in the C-G and I zoning districts.
2. Location. An off-premise sign shall be setback a minimum of:
a. twenty-five (25) feet from all non-residential lot lines and street rights-of-way
b. two hundred (200) feet of a lot line for a residential zoning district or existing dwelling.
3. Maximum Sign Area. Eight (8) feet high by twenty (20) feet in length, but not more than one hundred
sixty (160) square feet.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 18)
PART 18-11
Sign Regulations
4. Spacing. Any off-premise sign shall be separated by a minimum of five hundred (500) feet from any other offpremise
sign, including signs on either side of a street and including existing signs in other municipalities. No lot or
structure shall include more than one off-premise sign.
5. Maximum Height. Whichever is less of the following:
a. Twelve (12) feet above the ground level upon which off-premise is located, or
b. Twelve (12) feet above the elevation of the centerline of pavement of the adjacent street
at the point nearest the sign.
6. Attached. No off-premise sign or sign face shall be attached in any way to a building. Additionally, no
off-premise sign or sign face shall be attached in any way any other off-premise sign, except that a sign
may have two (2) sign faces if they are placed approximately back-to-back.
7. No off-premise sign shall be illuminated.
8. Landscaping Requirements:
a. A decorative landscaped strip shall be located immediately adjoining the supporting structure
of the off-premise sign in all directions;
b. A hedge or other desirable planting of at least two (2) feet in height shall extend the entire
length and breadth of the required landscaped strip; and
c. The rear side of a single-faced off-premise sign shall be of one (1) color and screened by
existing or natural landscaping materials or by a planting or evergreen trees at least six (6) feet
tall.
9. The sign shall be maintained in a good and safe condition. The area around the sign shall be kept free
of debris.
Section 1811. Permits to Build New Permanent Signs or Alter or Move Existing Permanent Signs
A. No permanent sign shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered or moved until the person proposing to erect,
alter or move such sign shall have obtained a permit from the Zoning Officer. Such permit shall be issued only
when the Zoning Officer is satisfied that such sign will, in every respect, comply with all the applicable
provisions of this Chapter. The fee for granting such a permit shall be as per the schedule of officially approved
fees.
B. Any person desiring such a permit shall file an application on a form which shall contain or have attached thereto
the following information:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
2. A map showing the location of the building, structure or lot to which the sign is to be attached or
erected and showing the position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings and thoroughfares; such a
map must be to scale.
3. A plan showing the design of the sign, materials used and method of construction and means of
attachment to the building or the ground; such plans must be to scale.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (27, PART 18)
PART 18-12
Sign Regulations
4. The name of the person, firm, corporation or association erecting, altering or moving said sign.
5. The written consent of the owner of the land on which the sign is to be erected, altered or relocated.
6. Any electrical or building permit required and issued for said sign under the Borough of Highpsire
Building Code or other ordinance.
7. Any other information as the Zoning Officer shall require in order to show full compliance with this
Chapter and all other applicable laws of the Borough of Highspire
Section 1812. Permits for Temporary Signs
A. All temporary signs as they are defined in this Chapter, except those signs enumerated in Section 1803
must have a permit.
B. Application for a permit for a temporary sign shall be made on a form provided by the Zoning Officer. A permit
for temporary signs must be kept on the premises where signs are displayed and must be shown to the Zoning
Officer at request.
C. The size, content and location of a temporary sign may be varied at any time so long as the variations remain
within the overall restrictions of this Chapter.
D. Permits for temporary signs are valid for sixty (60) days but may be renewed for one (1) additional period for
thirty (30) days.
Section 1813. Nonconforming Signs
A. Unless otherwise provided in Part 5 of this Chapter, signs legally existing at the time of enactment of this Part
and which do not conform to the requirements of this Chapter shall be considered nonconforming signs. A
nonconforming sign shall not be expanded or extended in any manner that would make it more nonconforming.
B. An existing lawful nonconforming sign may be replaced with a new sign, provided that the new sign is not more
nonconforming in any manner than the previous sign.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-1
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
PART 19
LOT ACCESS, PARKING, AND LOADING REGULATIONS
Section 1900. General Provisions
A. The lot access, parking, and loading provisions of this Chapter shall apply as follows:
1. For all buildings and structures erected and all uses of land established after the effective date of
this Chapter, accessory parking and loading, and where applicable, principal parking facilities
shall be provided as required in this Part.
2. When the intensity of use of any building, structure or premises, shall be increased through
addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity or other units of measurement
specified herein for required parking and loading facilities, parking and loading facilities shall be
provided for such increase in intensity of use in the amount by which the requirements for the
increase in intensity would exceed those for the existing use if the latter were subject to the
parking and loading provisions of this Chapter.
3. Whenever the existing use of a building, structure or land shall hereafter be changed to a new use,
parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required for such new use. However, if the
existing use of land or structure was established prior to the effective date of this Chapter,
additional parking or loading facilities are mandatory only in the amount by which the
requirements for the new use would exceed those for the existing use if the latter were subject to
the parking and loading provisions of this Chapter.
4. The non-residential parking facilities required shall be available to patrons throughout the hours of
operation of the particular business or use for which such facilities are provided.
5. Where lot access, access drives, driveways, parking lots, and loading facilities are permitted along
a street right-of-way at the front of the lot, and where sidewalks are installed (or will be installed),
then the access drive or driveway surfacing shall end at the backside or building-side of the
sidewalk and on the front-side or street side of the sidewalk. No access drive or driveway
surfacing shall extend over the sidewalk area. Sidewalk materials shall be continued across all
access drives and driveways.
6. The term “parking space” includes either covered garage space or uncovered, improved and
stabilized parking space located off the public right-of-way, except where on-street parking is
permitted to count toward required parking spaces as provided herein this Part.
7. Required parking shall not be deemed to be part of the open space of the lot on which it is located,
unless designated as overflow parking in accordance with this Part.
8. Required parking shall not encroach onto any required buffer yards as required in Part 4 of this
Chapter.
Section 1901. R-L and R-M Zoning District Lot Access and Parking
A. Where a lot proposed for development abuts an alley and where the majority of the existing principal
buildings on the same shared block face (between two [2] intersecting streets) along the same side of the
street take access from the alley and have parking to the rear of the lot, then new lot access and parking
areas shall be provided in a similar manner and location.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-2
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
1. Single-Family Detached, Single Family Semi-Detached, and Two FamilyDwellings
a. Single family detached, single family semi-detached, and two (2) family dwelling lot
access and off-street parking spaces shall consist of an improved and stabilized parking
area, driveway, garage, carport, or combination thereof and shall be located on the lot it is
intended to serve.
b. Off-street parking shall not be located between the principal building and the public street
right-of-way, except for that part of the front yard that is occupied by a driveway leading
to a garage or an improved and stabilized parking area (including turnaround).
c. At the street right-of-way (excluding alleys), a driveway providing access to a single car
garage or parking area shall be limited to ten (10) feet in width, and for a double car
garage or parking area, the width shall be limited to twenty (20) feet. In no case shall a
driveway be wider than twenty (20) feet at the right-of-way line. Parking on the driveway
shall be limited to vehicles registered as a passenger car or a truck having a gross weight
rating less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) pounds.
2. Uses other than Single-Family Detached, Single Family Semi-Detached, and Two Family
Dwellings
a. Required off-street parking for uses other than single-family detached, single family
semi-detached and two family dwellings, off-street parking (lots and areas), shall be
provided in the rear of the principal building/structure first and if not possible, then may
be located in the side yard behind the front façade of the principal building/structure.
b. Access drives shall be designed, sited, and constructed in accordance with Chapter 22 of
the Borough of Highspire Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
Section 1902. MN/C and CBD Zoning District Lot Access and Parking
A. Parking lot and structure access in the MN/C and CBD Zoning Districts:
1. For a lot proposed for development and abutting an alley, access to the lot shall not be taken from
the front of a property to a public street.
a. Lot access shall be provided at the rear of lots from the alley for those lots abutting
alleys.
b. No new curb cut for a driveway or access drive shall be provided along a public street for
lots abutting alleys, and required off-street parking (lots and areas) shall:
(1). be provided in the rear of the principal building;
(2). not be located between the principal building and the public street (excluding
alleys).
(3). not be provided along 2nd Street; and
(4). not be located on corner lots, on or adjacent to the intersection of two (2) streets.
B. Parking Garages and Structures in the MN/C and CBD Zoning Districts:
1. See Part 14 of this Chapter.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-3
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
C. Non-Residential Uses in the MN/C and CBD Zoning Districts
1. For all non-residential uses, located within a six hundred (600) foot radius of a public parking
facility owned and/or operated by Highspire Borough or its agent, may include the parking spaces
provided in said public parking facility as a part of the parking requirements.
Section 1903. Driveways and Access Drives
A. Driveways
1. Driveways shall meet the following standards:
a. No more than two (2) driveway connections per lot shall be permitted, and driveways
shall be no closer than one hundred (100) feet on the same lot.
b. On corner lots or where more than one (1) intersecting street (including alleys) abuts the
lot, a new curb cut or access for a driveway shall be provided on the street conveying the
lesser amount of existing or proposed daily traffic. This specifically includes alleys.
c. Driveways shall not be:
(1). less than forty (40) feet from the edge of the right-of-way of any street
intersection;
(2). within twenty (20) feet of an alley right-of-way;
(3). less than five (5) feet from a fire hydrant,
(4). less than two and one half (2 ½) feet from abutting lot lines, unless a shared
driveway is proposed.
These distances shall also include driveway flares.
d. A driveway shall not exceed a slope of eight (8) percent within twenty-five (25) feet of
the street right-of-way line, and not more than fifteen (15) percent overall.
e. At the street right-of-way (excluding alleys), a driveway providing access to a single car
garage or parking area shall be limited to ten (10) feet in width, and for a double car
garage or parking area, the width shall be limited to twenty (20) feet. In no case shall a
driveway be wider than twenty (20) feet at the right-of-way line. Parking on the driveway
shall be limited to vehicles registered as a passenger car or a truck having a gross weight
rating less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) pounds.
f. In no case shall there be unrestricted access from a lot along the length of a street or
alley.
g. A curb return entrance is illustrated in Figure 5.1. When curb return entrances are used,
the curb shall have a minimum five (5) foot radius, and no greater than fifteen (15) feet is
permitted on both sides of the driveway in addition to the twenty (20) driveway foot
width. However, any driveway entering into PennDOT right-of way shall be designed in
accordance with PA Code Title 67, Chapter 441.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-4
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
Figure 5.1. Typical Curb Return Entrance
Note: for driveways entering into PennDOT ROW, design shall be in
accordance with standards in PA Code Title 67, Chapter 441.Modified
from Source: AASHTO
(Source: Pennsylvania Standards for Residential Site Development,
2007)
h. When flared driveway entrances are used, a minimum two (2) foot flair shall be provided.
No flare shall cross an extended side property line. A typical flared entrance is illustrated
in Figure 5.2
Figure 5.2. Typical Flared Driveway Entrance
Modified from Source: AASHTO
(Source: Pennsylvania Standards for Residential Site Development,
2007)
i. Non-curbed driveway entrances shall have a minimum edge-of-pavement radius of five
(5) feet, and no greater than fifteen (15) feet is permitted on both sides of the driveway in
addition to the twenty (20) driveway foot width as illustrated in Figure 5.3
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-5
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
Figure 5.3 Typical Non-curbed Driveway Entrance
Modified from Source: AASHTO
(Source: Pennsylvania Standards for Residential Site Development,
2007)
j. Any driveway intersecting with a State-owned street or road shall require the obtainment
of a PennDOT Highway Occupancy Permit.
k. Driveways shall not interfere with normal traffic movement nor be constructed in a
manner to be inconsistent with the design, maintenance and drainage of the street. When
required to maintain drainage, a pipe no less than fifteen (15) inches in diameter shall be
installed.
l. A driveway location shall be delineated on all plans / permits, as applicable.
m. Additionally, driveways shall be located so as to provide adequate sight distance and
clear sight triangles at intersections with streets. Such sight distances and clear sight
triangles shall be as specified in the Chapter 22 of the Codified Ordinances of the
Borough of Highspire relating to subdivision and land development.
B. Access Drives
1. Access drives shall conform with Chapter 22 of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of
Highspire relating to subdivision and land development Chapter.
2. In no case shall there be unrestricted access from a lot along the length of a street or alley.
Section 1904. Parking Requirements
A. The following parking requirements shall be minimum standards:
Table 19-1.a
Parking Schedule
Residential Use Minimum Required Spaces
Apartment Conversions 2 per dwelling unit
Bed and Breakfast Homes and Inns
2 per dwelling unit, plus 1 for each guest/sleeping room
Other uses beyond the dwelling unit and guest/sleeping rooms,
and open to the public: Number of spaces normally required for
similar uses listed elsewhere within this schedule
Boarding House or Rooming House 2 per dwelling unit of owner/resident manager and other
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-6
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
Residential Use Minimum Required Spaces
permanent residents, plus 1 space for each sleeping/rooming unit
for let
Continuing Care Retirement Facility
or Long Term Care Nursing Home
or Personal Care Facility (individual
or in combination of the following:)
Personal care or nursing care centers: 1 space for each 4 beds plus
1 space per employee on largest shift.
Apartment units: 1.25 spaces per dwelling unit.
Cottage units (single family units): 1 space per dwelling unit plus
1 space per 5 units for guest parking.
Other uses not specified herein above: Number of spaces normally
required for similar uses listed elsewhere within this schedule
Family Care Facility
2 per dwelling unit, plus 1 for each 300 square feet of gross floor
area dedicated to the care use
Flag Lot Residence 2 per dwelling unit
Group Care 2 per dwelling unit, plus 1 for each 4 residents
Group Home 2 per dwelling unit, plus 1 for each 4 residents
Mobile Home Park
2 per dwelling unit, plus if on-street parking is not provided, 1/2
additional space per dwelling unit shall be provided in a common
visitor parking compound. Such visitor parking lots shall be sized,
arranged, and located so that the spaces are within three hundred
(300) feet walking distance to any unit served.
Multi-FamilyDwellings/Apartments
2 per dwelling unit, plus if on-street parking is not provided, ½
additional space per dwelling unit shall be provided in a common
visitor parking compound. Such visitor parking lots shall be sized,
arranged, and located so that the spaces are within three hundred
(300) feet walking distance to any unit served
Single Family Attached Dwelling
2 per dwelling unit, plus if on-street parking is not provided, ½
additional space per dwelling unit shall be provided in a common
visitor parking compound. Such visitor parking lots shall be sized,
arranged, and located so that the spaces are within three hundred
(300) feet walking distance to any unit served
Single-Family Detached Dwelling 2 per dwelling unit
Single Family Semi-Detached
Dwelling 2 per dwelling unit
Two-FamilyDetached Dwelling 2 per dwelling unit
Non-Residential Use Minimum Required Spaces
Adult Related Uses
1 per 200 square feet of net floor area, plus 1 per employee on the
peak shift
Agriculture Operation
2 per dwelling unit, plus 1 for each non-resident employee on the
peak shift
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-7
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
Non-Residential Use Minimum Required Spaces
Animal Hospital, Veterinary Office 2 per exam table, plus 1 per employee on the peak shift
Automobile, Boat, Heavy
Equipment, Mobile Home,
Recreational Vehicle and Similar
Motor Vehicle Rental/Sales,
Repair/Service, Washing and/or
Fuel/Gas Sales (individual or in
combination of the following:)
1 per employee on the peak shift plus:
Rental/Sales: 1 per 15 vehicles or units of motor vehicle
equipment
Repair/Service: 2 per service bay
Washing: 1 per 200 square feet of office floor area, plus 3
stacking spaces per wash bay)
Fuel/Gasoline Sales/Distribution: 1 per fuel pump which may
be provided at fuel pumps at a ratio of not more than 2
spaces per each pump (one [1] on each side), plus 1 for each
employee on the peak shift.
AutomobileWrecking, Junk and
Scrap Storage and Sales 1 per ½ acre, plus 1 per employee on the peak shift
Banks
1 per 400 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 per employee on
the peak shift
Billboard 1 per billboard
Boat Launching Facility, Boat
Storage, and Marina
1 per boat dock space / slip space, plus 1 per employee on the
peak shift, plus one-half (½) of the spaces normally required for
accessory uses listed elsewhere within this schedule
Business Services
1 per 200 square feet of net floor area, plus 1 per employee on the
peak shift
Campground or Camp
1 per campsite, plus 1 per employee on the peak shift, plus onehalf
(½) of the spaces normally required for accessory uses listed
elsewhere within this schedule
Cemetery 5, plus 1 per employee on the peak shift
Clinic, Medical
4 per patient examination room, plus 1 per employee on the peak
shift
Club, Clubhouse or Lodge, Private
1 per 200 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 per employee on
the peak shift.
Commercial Recreation, Indoor
1 per 200 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 per employee on
the peak shift.
Commercial Recreation, Outdoor
1 per 200 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 per employee on
the peak shift; or if completely outside of a structure 1 per each 3
users at maximum utilization, plus 1 per employee on the peak
shift
Communication Antennas, Towers
and Equipment Transmitting & 1 per lot
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-8
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
Non-Residential Use Minimum Required Spaces
Receiving Facilities
CommunityGarden no minimum required
Contractors’ Office or Storage Yard
1 per 750 square feet of office gross floor area, plus 1 per
employee on the peak shift
Convenience Store, General
1 per 100 square feet of net floor area, plus 1 per fuel pump, plus 1
per employee on the peak shift
Convenience Store, Neighborhood
1 per 200 square feet of net floor area, plus 1 per employee on the
peak shift
Craftsman/Artisan Studio
1 per 300 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 per employee on
the peak shift
Daycare, Commercial
1 per employee on the peak shift plus 1 per 6 client (adult or child)
enrolled
Dog Day Care
1 per each 15 animals based on maximum animal capacity, plus 1
per employee on the peak shift
Farmer’s Market and/or Flea Market
1 per 400 square feet of gross floor area (indoor and outdoor)
open to and accessible to the public, plus 1 per employee on the
peak shift
Financial Service, Other
1 per 400 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 per employee on
the peak shift
Fishing, Boating Lodges
1 per boat dock space / slip space, plus 1 per employee on the
peak shift, plus one-half (½) of the spaces normally required for
accessory uses listed elsewhere within this schedule
Food Service
1 per employee on the peak shift plus:
Delivery: 1 per vehicle stored on site
Direct Patron Food Sales/Consumption: 1 per 6 seats if
restaurant is provided or 1 per 200 square feet of gross floor
area open to and accessible to the public, whichever is
greater
Forestry 1 per employee on the peak shift
Funeral Home 25 for 1st parlor, plus 10 for each additional parlor
Greenhouse and Nursery
1 per 500 square feet of gross floor area (indoor and outdoor)
open to and accessible to the public, plus 1 per employee on the
peak shift
HalfwayHouse 1 per 2 beds, plus 1 per employee on the peak shift
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-9
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
Non-Residential Use Minimum Required Spaces
Home Improvement Center,
Lumber, and BuildingMaterials
Sales (Retail and/or Indoor)
1 per 500 square feet of gross floor area (indoor and outdoor)
open to and accessible to the public, plus 1 per employee on the
peak shift
Hospital 2 per 3 beds, plus 1 per employee on the peak shift
Hotel
1 per guest/sleeping room, plus 1 per employee on the peak shift,
plus one-half (½) of the spaces normally required for accessory
uses listed elsewhere within this schedule
Industrial Use, General
1 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area of the building up to
20,000 square feet, plus 1 for each 2,000 square feet gross floor
area of the building up between 20,000 square feet and 40,000
square feet, plus 1 for each 3,000 square feet gross floor area of
the building in excess of 40,000 square feet. In addition to the offstreet
parking requirements and when there are 10 or more loading
berths provided, trailer parking spaces shall be provided at 1 trailer
parking space for each 4 loading berths.
Industrial Use, Light
1 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area of the building up to
20,000 square feet, plus 1 for each 2,000 square feet gross floor
area of the building up between 20,000 square feet and 40,000
square feet, plus 1 for each 3,000 square feet gross floor area of
the building in excess of 40,000 square feet. In addition to the offstreet
parking requirements and when there are 10 or more loading
berths provided, trailer parking spaces shall be provided at 1 trailer
parking space for each 4 loading berths.
Kennel, Commercial
1 per each 15 animals based on maximum animal capacity, plus 1
per employee on the peak shift
Laundry & Dry Cleaning
Establishment (Industrial)
1 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area of the building up to
20,000 square feet, plus 1 for each 2,000 square feet gross floor
area of the building up between 20,000 square feet and 40,000
square feet, plus 1 for each 3,000 square feet gross floor area of
the building in excess of 40,000 square feet. In addition to the offstreet
parking requirements and when there are 10 or more loading
berths provided, trailer parking spaces shall be provided at 1 trailer
parking space for each 4 loading berths.
Laundry & Dry Cleaning
Establishment (Personal)
1 per 300 square feet of net floor area, plus 1 per employee on the
peak shift
Library
1 per 400 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 per employee on
the peak shift
Market Garden no minimum required
Massage Therapy 1 per table, plus 1 per employee on the peak shift
Mini-Storage Warehouses 1 per 25 storage units, plus 1 per employee on the peak shift
Motel
1 per guest/sleeping room, plus 1 per employee on the peak shift,
plus one-half (½) of the spaces normally required for accessory
uses listed elsewhere within this schedule
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-10
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
Non-Residential Use Minimum Required Spaces
Municipal Owned Uses
Number of spaces normally required for similar uses listed
elsewhere within this schedule
Museum
1 per 400 square feet of gross floor area (indoor and outdoor)
open to and accessible to the public, plus 1 per employee on the
peak shift
Natural Areas or Wildlife Refuges 1 per acre or portion thereof
Nightclubs
1 per 100 square feet of net floor area, plus 1 per employee on the
peak shift
Offices, Business Professional
1 per 300 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 per employee on
the peak shift
Offices, Medical
2 per patient examination room, plus 1 per employee on the peak
shift
Parking Lot 1 per employee on the peak shift
Parking Structure 1 per employee on the peak shift
Parks, Playgrounds and Other Non-
Commercial Recreational Uses. 3 per acre or portion thereof
Personal Services
1 per 300 square feet of net floor area, plus 1 per employee on the
peak shift
Place of Worship and Related Uses
1 per 3 seats based on maximum seating capacity, or 1 per 250
square feet of gross floor area, whichever is larger
Post Office
1 per 200 square feet of net floor area, plus 1 per employee on the
peak shift
Public/Private Utility Building or
Structure 1 per employee on the peak shift, plus 1 per vehicle stored on site
Research & Development,
Engineering or Testing Facility or
Lab 1 per 400 square feet of gross floor area
Restaurant (Fast Food) 1 per 2 seats, plus 1 for each 2 employees on the peak shift
Restaurant (Sit Down) 1 per 4 seats, plus 1 for each 2 employees on the peak shift
Retail Business
1 per 200 square feet of net floor area, plus 1 per employee on the
peak shift
Sawmill 1 per employee on the peak shift
Schools, Commercial 1 per 4 students, plus 1 per employee on the peak shift
Schools, Public or Private, Primary
1 per each 30 students enrolled, plus 1 per employee, plus 1 per
each 30 seats for auditorium, gymnasium, or multipurpose room
Schools, Public or Private,
Secondary
1 per each 5 students enrolled, plus 1 per employee, plus 1 per
each 30 seats for auditorium, gymnasium, or multipurpose room
Schools, Vocational 1 per 4 students, plus 1 per employee on the peak shift
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-11
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
Non-Residential Use Minimum Required Spaces
Taverns/Bars 1 per 4 seats, plus 1 for each 2 employees on the peak shift
Theater, Indoor
1 per 3 seats based on maximum seating capacity, or 1 per 250
square feet of gross floor area, whichever is larger
Transportation Terminal
1 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area of the building up to
20,000 square feet, plus 1 for each 2,000 square feet gross floor
area of the building up between 20,000 square feet and 40,000
square feet, plus 1 for each 3,000 square feet gross floor area of
the building in excess of 40,000 square feet. In addition to the offstreet
parking requirements and when there are 10 or more loading
berths provided, trailer parking spaces shall be provided at 1 trailer
parking space for each 4 loading berths.
Treatment Center 1 for each 3 patient/client, plus 1 per employee on the peak shift
Warehousing, Distribution, and
Wholesaling
1 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area of the building up to
20,000 square feet, plus 1 for each 2,000 square feet gross floor
area of the building up between 20,000 square feet and 40,000
square feet, plus 1 for each 3,000 square feet gross floor area of
the building in excess of 40,000 square feet. In addition to the offstreet
parking requirements and when there are 10 or more loading
berths provided, trailer parking spaces shall be provided at 1 trailer
parking space for each 4 loading berths.
Accessory Use Minimum Required Spaces
Accessory Apartment 2 per dwelling unit
Automated Banking Facility
2 when not associated with on-site principal bank or other
financial service, otherwise no minimum required
Daycare, Accessory 2 per dwelling unit as part of principal use
Daycare, Commercial
1 per employee on the peak shift plus 1 per 6 client (adult or child)
enrolled
Daycare, Family
2 per dwelling unit as part of principal use, plus 1 per non-resident
employee, plus 1 for patron use
Essential Services no minimum required
Home Occupation
2 per dwelling unit as part of principal use, plus 1 per non-resident
employee
No Impact Home Based Business 2 per dwelling unit as part of principal use
Outdoor Café/Dining no minimum required
B. ADA Handicapped Accessible Parking Requirements. The number of handicapped accessible parking
spaces required by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) shall be in accordance to the most recent
version of the ADA Standards for Accessible Design of the United States Department of Justice and
Chapter 5 relating to buildings.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-12
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
C. Computation of Spaces
1. When determination of the number of required parking spaces results in a requirement of a
fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half (½) may be disregarded, and fractions
over one-half (½) shall be interpreted as one (1) parking space.
D. Parking Requirements Not Specified
When the parking requirements are not specified herein for a structure or use for which an application for a
permit has been filed, the zoning officer shall make the determination of which parking requirement
standards shall apply in order to ensure that adequate parking spaces are provided to serve the needs of
proposed uses in conformance with the standards set forth herein and upon consideration of all factors
entering into the parking needs of each such use.
E. Mixed Uses
1. Except as otherwise provided herein this Part, for mixed uses, total requirements shall be the sum
of the requirements of the component uses computed separately.
Section 1905. Location and Design of Parking Spaces
A. Parking spaces for single family attached, multi-family dwelling/apartment, mixed and non-residential uses
shall be on the same lot and in the same zoning district as the principal use or open area conforming to the
following regulations, unless the applicant meets the requirements for shared parking provided in this Part.
B. Setback for parking areas shall be provided as follows:
1. All parking spaces and access drives shall be at least five (5) feet from any single family attached,
multi-family dwelling/apartment, mixed use and non-residential buildings located on the lot. The
five (5) foot corridor thus established between the parking area and building shall be for the
purpose of providing a pedestrian access walkway.
2. Parking spaces shall not be located within any required building setbacks; nor within any required
buffer yard area.
3. Except as set forth elsewhere in this Chapter, parking lots and areas for single family attached,
multi-family dwelling/apartment, mixed and non-residential uses permitted in residential zoning
districts shall:
a. be provided in the rear of the principal building;
b. not be located between the principal building and the public street (excluding alleys); and
c. not be located on corner lots, on or adjacent to the intersection of two (2) streets.
d. be provided with a planting strip at least five (5) feet wide between the edge of the street
right-of-way (including alleys) and any off-street parking area authorized in all applicable
yards which are adjacent to a public street and alley and landscaped in accordance with
Part 4 of this Chapter.
4. Except for single family detached, single family semi-detached, and two (2) family detached
dwellings, and for all lots abutting and with direct lot access onto an arterial or collector street, in
no case shall parking areas be designed to require or encourage motor vehicles to back into a street
(excluding alleys) in order to exit the parking area.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-13
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
5. Except for single family uses or in the case of valet parking, parking spaces and areas shall be
designed so that each motor vehicle may proceed to and from the parking space provided for it
without requiring the moving of any other motor vehicle.
C. In addition to all standards for parking facilities provided via Chapter 22 Subdivision and Land
Development, parking facilities shall also comply with the following:
1. Parking Area and Lots Landscaping and Trees
a. For all non-residential, multi-family dwelling/apartment, single family attached, and
mixed uses, a planting strip at least five (5) feet wide shall be provided between the edge
of the street right-of-way and any off-street parking area authorized in all applicable
yards which are adjacent to a public street and alley. Planting strips between the right-ofway
and the parking area shall be landscaped and maintained with ground cover,
shrubbery, trees or other landscape or decorative materials across the entire lot in order to
prohibit vehicular and pedestrian access, except at approved ingress and egress points.
Landscaping species at their mature heights shall not obstruct visibility for traffic
entering or leaving the lot or traveling on the public street/alley.
2. Surface Parking Areas
a. In parking areas or lots containing more than ten (10) new spaces, at least twenty (20)
percent of the interior parking area shall be landscaped with plantings including one (1)
shade tree, a minimum diameter of two and one half (2.5) inches measured at four and
one half (4.5) feet above the finished grade, for each five (5) spaces.
b. Interior landscaping shall be required for new parking areas or expansion of existing
parking areas containing more than four thousand (4,000) square feet or ten (10) parking
spaces, which ever is lesser.
c. One (1) internal landscape island shall be provided for every ten (10) parking spaces (or
twenty [20] double loaded spaces)..
d. No more than ten (10) parking spaces shall be provided in an unbroken row without the
provision of interior landscape islands.
e. At least one (1) shade tree, a minimum diameter of two and one half (2.5) inches
measured at four and one half (4.5) feet above the finished grade, shall be provided in
each interior landscape island. The remaining area of the required interior landscape
islands and/or interior landscape area shall be landscaped with shrubs or perennials,
either of which should not exceed two (2) feet in height, or with turf grass.
f. Unless otherwise approved by the Borough Engineer for promoting sustainable
stormwater management practices, all landscape islands and planting strip areas shall be
enclosed by appropriate curbing in compliance with Chapter 21 Streets and Sidewalks or
a similar device at least six (6) inches wide and six (6) inches in height above the paving
surface, acceptable to the Borough Engineer.
3. Additionally, parking lot landscaping, trees, plantings, and screening shall be:
a. Planted with adequate unpaved surface around each for water and air;
b. Free of insect pests and diseases; and
c. Perpetually maintained in a healthy condition by the property owner. Any required
planting that dies, is removed, or is severely damaged shall be replaced by the current
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-14
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
property owner as soon as is practical considering growing seasons, within a maximum of
one hundred fifty (150) days.
d. Parking lot screening shall be provided in accordance with Part 4 of this Chapter.
4. Lighting
a. Parking lots and structures shall be lit during evening, nighttime, and early morning
operating hours as applicable.
b. All standards shall be located on raised parking islands and not on the parking lot surface.
c. All on-site, outdoor lighting of off-street parking areas shall be designed to prevent glare
to adjacent properties and public rights-of-way by employing hooded, shielded, or
screened fixtures that confine glare to the site, rather than the area around it.
D. ADA Handicapped Accessible Parking Facilities. The design and location of all required ADA
handicapped accessible parking facilities shall be in accordance to the most recent version of the ADA
Standards for Accessible Design of the United States Department of Justice and Chapter 5 relating to
buildings. The applicant shall certify in writing or plan note that the application for development complies
with all relevant ADA requirements.
F. Motorized Vehicle Parking Facilities.
1. Size Standards.
a. Parallel parking shall be a minimum width of seven (7) feet and a minimum length of
twenty (22) feet.
b. Perpendicular parking shall be a minimum width of eight (8) feet six (6) inches, a
minimum length of eighteen (18) feet.
c. Parking space length and width can be increased from minimum sizes where appropriate
in accordance with location, use, and turn-over rate.
d. Encroachments such as columns and light poles may encroach into a module by one (1)
foot and affect up to thirty (30) percent of the parking spaces.
e. Parking Standards4:
Angle Vehicle
Projection
Aisle
Min.
Base
Modul
e1
Single
Loaded
Wall to
Interlock
Interlock
to
Interlock
Curb
to
Curb
Overhang
Interlock2
Reduction
Stall
Width
Projection2
Minimum
VP A W1 W2 W3 W4 W5 o i WP
45° 17’8” 12’8” 48’0” 30’4” 45’0” 42’0” 44’ 6” 1’9” 3’0” 12’0”
50° 18’3” 13’3” 49’9” 31’6” 47’0” 44’3” 45’11” 1’11” 2’9” 11’1”
55° 18’8” 13’8” 51’0” 32’4” 48’7” 46’2” 46’10” 2’1” 2’5” 10’5”
60° 19’0” 14’6” 52’6” 33’6” 50’4” 48’2” 48’2” 2’2” 2’2” 9’10”
65° 19’2” 15’5” 53’9” 34’7” 51’11” 50’1” 50’1” 2’3” 1’10” 9’5”
70° 19’3” 16’6” 55’0” 35’9” 53’7” 52’2” 52’2” 2’4” 1’5” 9’1”
75° 19’1” 17’10” 56’0” 36’11” 54’11” 53’10” 53’10” 2’5” 1’1” 8’10”
90° 18’0” 20’0” 60’0”3 42’0” 60’0” 60’0” 60’0” 2’6” 0’0” 8’6”
1 Module is defined as the combined dimension of two parked vehicles and the aisle between them.
2 Calculated for 8’6” stall.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-15
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
Angle Vehicle
Projection
Aisle
Min.
Base
Modul
e1
Single
Loaded
Wall to
Interlock
Interlock
to
Interlock
Curb
to
Curb
Overhang
Interlock2
Reduction
Stall
Width
Projection2
Minimum
VP A W1 W2 W3 W4 W5 o i WP
3 Base width may not be waived.
4 Parking dimensions for based on design vehicles of 6’7” x 17’0”.
2. General Standards.
a. Angled parking may be pull in or reverse (back-in).
b. Parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall meet the Americans with Disabilities
Act (ADA). Handicapped parking shall be provided for all nonresidential, multi-family,
and mixed use developments and shall be located closest to the accessible building
entrance(s).
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-16
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
c. On-street parking on at least one side of the street is encouraged on access drives and
proposed streets with speeds equal to or less than thirty (30) mph.
d. Where provided, on-street parking shall not be located within twenty five (25) feet of a
cartway intersection in order to provide safe sight distance and adequate turning radius
for large vehicles.
e. Off-street parking areas shall be oriented to, and within a reasonable walking distance of,
the buildings they are designed for and consistent with adjacent neighborhoods.
f. Parked vehicles adjacent to sidewalks and pedestrian walkways shall not overhang or
extend over the sidewalk or pedestrian walkways in a manner that restricts pedestrian
circulation. Where such overhang is not restricted by a wheel stop or other device,
sidewalks shall have a four (4) foot minimum clearance width from any obstacles.
g. Not less than a two (2) foot radius of curvature shall be permitted for horizontal curves in
parking areas.
h. All dead end parking lots shall be designed to provide sufficient back-up area for all end
stalls.
i. Painted lines, arrows, and dividers shall be provided and maintained to control parking,
and when necessary to direct vehicular circulation.
j. The typical cross section of any parking facility shall be prepared to meet the minimum
standards set forth in Section 1907 of this Chapter:
3. Parking Garages and Structures
a. Lighting and reflective materials / flat paint should be used inside the parking garage or
structure and within all pedestrian areas to increase the feeling of safety. Glossy or semigloss
paint is discouraged.
Minimum-
Maximum
Horizontal2
(Footcandles)
Minimum-
Maximum
Horizontal
Uniformity3
Minimum-
Maximum
Vertical4
(Footcandles)
Basic1 1 – 5 10:1 – 5:1 0.5 – 5
Ramps5
Day 2 – 5 10:1 – 5:1 1 – 5
Night 1 – 5 10:1 – 5:1 0.5 – 5
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-17
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
Minimum-
Maximum
Horizontal2
(Footcandles)
Minimum-
Maximum
Horizontal
Uniformity3
Minimum-
Maximum
Vertical4
(Footcandles)
Entrance/Exit Areas6
Day7 50 25
Night 1 – 5 10:1 – 5:1 0.5 – 5
Stairways 2 – 5 1 - 5
Table based on the Illuminating Engineering Society (IET)
1 For typical conditions
2 Minimum “maintained” Footcandles measured on the parking surface, without
any shadowing effect from parked vehicles or columns. This may require 3-5
Footcandle average.
3 The highest horizontal Illuminance area, divided by the lowest horizontal
Illuminance point or area should not be greater than the ratio shown.
4 Measured facing the drive aisle at 5 feet above the parking surface at the point
of the lowest horizontal Illuminance.
5 Applies only to clearway ramps (with no adjacent parking) but not sloping floor
designs.
6 A high Illuminance level for the first 65 feet inside the Structure is needed to
effect a transition from bright daylight to a lower interior level.
7 Daylight may be considered in the design calculations.
b. Lighting design shall address glare, light pollution (unnecessary light), light trespass
(bright visible sources or light spilling into adjacent properties), and reduction of
shadows.
c. Provision of signage at exits of the parking garages and structures shall be required.
d. Open-structure wall areas for natural ventilation or mechanical ventilation shall be
encouraged.
e. Interaction between vehicles and pedestrians should be provided in a safe manner.
f. Traffic flow by vehicles entering the parking garage or structure shall be mitigated by
either on site or external deceleration lanes based on the traffic impact study if required.
g. To the maximum extent practicable, parking garage and structure entries shall be
internalized in building groupings or oriented away from public street frontage.
h. Preferred access to below grade parking shall be either from the side or rear of buildings.
G. Non-Motorized Vehicle Parking Facilities.
1. Non- motorized vehicle parking facilities should be provided in accordance with the following
regulations:
a. Bicycle Parking Facilities: Bicycle parking facilities for non-residential and mixed land
uses shall be provided in accordance with the following regulations:
(1). Each bicycle space shall be equipped with a device to which a bicycle frame and
one (1) wheel can be attached using a chain or cable. There shall be adequate
separation between adjacent devices to allow bicycles to be attached or removed
without moving other bicycles. The devices shall also be suitable for use by
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-18
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
bicycles not equipped with kickstands, and the appearance of the device shall be
generally consistent with nearby urban design features.
(2). Bicycle parking spaces shall be convenient to the structure for which they arc
provided. They shall be visible from at least one (1) entrance to the structure.
(3). For every ten (10) vehicular spaces required, three (3) bicycle parking spaces
shall be provided, not to exceed a total of nine (9) required bicycle parking
spaces.
Section 1906. Parking Reductions or Alterations
A. Except for residential uses, this section is a means for applicants for non-residential and mixed uses to
meet the parking requirements by alternative means other than providing parking via paved off-street
parking spaces located on the same lot.
1. On-Street Parking
a. Where on-street parking is provided, the following on-street parking standards shall
apply:
(1). On-street parking may be provided along street rights-of-ways only when
parking on that street right-of-way has been approved by PennDOT, for all state
owned streets, or the Borough Council for Borough owned streets.
(2). Such on-street parking may be counted toward the required parking for
permitted uses as set forth in Section 1907.
(3). On-street parking areas may only be counted along the street rights-of-way
abutting the lot lines of the lot owned by the applicant or landowner, exclusive
of any driveway, access drive, or other curb cut, and exclusive of any existing
cartway and perpendicular street or access drive.
(4). A bona-fide on-street parking space, parallel to the curb line, shall measure at
least seven (7) feet in width and twenty-two (22) feet in length, exclusive of any
street cartway. Otherwise if angled parking is permitted along the street by the
Borough or PennDOT, then dimensions and number of on-street parking spaces
shall be acceptable to the Borough Engineer and/or PennDOT.
(5). All eligible on-street parking areas shall be graphically depicted and other
indicated upon any permits and/or plans required by the Borough. Such parking
areas shall not conflict with any turning movements off the cartway or obstruct
access to any street, access drive, driveway, sidewalk, crosswalk, other
accessway, or fire hydrant.
2. Shared Parking
a. Where shared parking is proposed to be utilized, the following standards shall apply:
(1). Users of shared parking facilities shall be required to show shared parking is
reasonably close in proximity to each use in accordance with the following
standards:
(a). Less than one hundred (100) feet for:
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-19
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
i. People with disabilities; deliveries and loading; emergency
services; fast food service type restaurant; and convenience
store.
(b). Less than six hundred (600) feet for:
i. Residents; grocery stores; business and professional services;
and medical/dental clinics; hospitals.
(c). Less than one thousand (1,000) feet for:
i. General retail sales and services; sit down service type
restaurant; taverns/bars; employees; private clubs, clubhouse or
lodges; places of worship; schools; municipal uses; parks.
(2). If parking is to be shared by uses located on two (2) or more lots, an agreement
in a form acceptable to the Borough must be presented assuring use of the
required parking spaces until or unless the required parking spaces are located
on the same lot as the use they serve. See subsection (b). herein below.
(3). The minimum amount of shared parking required to be calculated according to
the following:
(a). Calculate the required amount of parking required for each use as if it
were a separate use.
(b). To determine the peak parking requirements, multiply the minimum
parking required for each proposed use by the corresponding
percentage in the table below for each of the six (6) time periods:
Table 19-4
Shared Parking Calculations
Uses Monday - Friday Saturday and Sunday
8 am - 6
pm
6 pm -
Midnight
Midnight -
8 am
8 am - 6
pm
6 pm -
Midnight
Midnight -
8 am
Residential 60% 100% 100% 80% 100% 100%
Office 100% 10% 5% 5% 5% 5%
Retail Sales/Services 90% 80% 5% 100% 60% 5%
Hotel 70% 100% 100% 70% 100% 100%
Restaurant 70% 100% 10% 70% 100% 20%
Theatre/ 40% 80% 10% 80% 100% 10%
Entertainment (including
private clubs, clubhouses,
and lodges, ) 40% 100% 10% 80% 100% 50%
Public/Institutional/School
(Non-Place of Worship) 100% 40% 5% 10% 10% 5%
Places of Worship 20% 40% 5% 100% 50% 5%
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-20
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
(c). Calculate the column total for each of the six (6) time periods
(d). The column total (time period) with the highest value shall be the
minimum parking requirement.
b. Written Agreement between PropertyOwners to Share Parking
(1). Where an application for development for which shared parking is proposed
includes two (2) or more separately owned properties, and the Zoning Officer
has made a determination of the minimum number of required parking spaces
for each of the applicable properties and uses, the Zoning Officer shall require
that the owners of the properties enter into a legal agreement with the Borough
guaranteeing access to, use of, and management of designated shared parking
spaces. The agreement shall be in a recordable form approved by the Borough
Solicitor, included as a condition of the approval and enforceable by the
Borough.
(2). Where an application for a zoning permit for which shared parking is proposed
includes two (2) or more properties owned by the same property owner, and the
Zoning Officer has made a determination of the minimum number of required
parking spaces for the applicable properties and uses, the Zoning Officer shall
require that the owner of the properties enter into a legal agreement with the
Borough guaranteeing access to, use of, and management of designated shared
parking spaces. The agreement shall be in a recordable form acceptable to the
Borough, included as a condition of the approval and enforceable by the
Borough.
3. Overflow Parking
a. Overflow parking reservation, which shall include areas of required parking facilities that
may remain unpaved, but must be leveled and stabilized in a grass condition, but that also
may be constructed with other pervious surfaces acceptable to the Borough, so as to
provide for overflow parking for other, seasonal or event peak times, shall be permitted
subject to the following:
(1). The applicant shall submit a plan showing all required parking spaces, interior
drive aisles , maneuvering areas, access drives, and buffer yards, designed in
strict conformance with all other requirements of this Part, Part 4 and this
Chapter; and
(a) All those parking related improvements and facilities that are to be
constructed.
(b) All overflow parking reservation spaces which shall be delineated on
the plan and designated as “reserved for future use,” required to meet
the number of required parking spaces but otherwise not to be
constructed in full compliance with the requirements of the Chapter.
(2). Overflow parking reservation spaces shall not exceed twenty (20) percent or
more of the required parking spaces.
(3). All areas designated as overflow parking reservation shall not count toward any
open space, yard or buffer yard requirements.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-21
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
(4). The applicant shall enter into an agreement with the Borough agreeing to design
and construct all parking related improvements, including all related stormwater
management improvements, which have not been previously constructed within
six (6) months of notification from the Borough. Such agreement shall be in a
form acceptable to the Borough.
4. Compact Vehicle Parking
a. Where more than ten (10) parking spaces are required and provided in an off-street lot or
structure, a maximum of forty (40) percent of the required parking spaces may be
provided for compact vehicles. Each such compact parking space shall be not less than
eight (8) feet wide by seventeen (17) feet long. All compact parking spaces shall be
located in the same area of the off-street parking lot and be marked to indicate spaces
designated for compact parking.
Section 1907. Drainage, Surfacing, and Maintenance Standards
A. Any new or enlarged off-street parking area for multi-family dwelling/apartment, mixed use or nonresidential
uses shall be graded for proper drainage and shall be surfaced in accordance with one or both of
the following standards, so as to provide a durable and dustless surface, including one or both of the surface
and pavement treatments here in this subsection below ,to the extent necessary to prevent dust, erosion or
excessive water flow across streets or abutting property;
.
1. Impervious Surface
a. Crushed aggregate based course with a minimum thickness of six (6) inches, as specified
in the PennDOT Specifications, Form 408, and its latest revisions, or other PennDOT
approved equivalent. Pavement shall consist of a minimum of one and one-half (1-1/2)
inches of binder courses and one (1) inch wearing surface. Material shall be equal or
superior to PennDOT Specifications for Bituminous Surface Course ID-2 and shall be
applied in accordance with the PennDOT Specifications, Form 408, and its latest
revisions, or other PennDOT approved equivalent.
2. Permeable Pavement
a. Permeable pavement is encouraged but not required. Permeable pavement shall not be
located on heavy industrial sites, fuel/gasoline sales/distribution facilities, sites with
expansive soils or shallow depth to bedrock, areas draining to the permeable pavement
greater than five (5) acres, and areas with the water table less than two (2) feet below the
bottom of the pavement base. Permeable pavement includes paving units, porous asphalt
pavement, or porous concrete (using single-sized aggregate and low water content);
uniformly graded stone aggregate with void space; filter fabric lining the subsurface beds;
and uncompacted (or hand compacted) subgrade. Permeable pavement shall consider the
infiltration rate of the soil subgrade under the base. Constant supervision during
construction is encouraged as sediment must be kept from the aggregate base.
B. Parking facilities shall be so arranged as to provide for orderly and safe parking and short storage of motor
vehicles.
C. All parking spaces shall be marked with paint, provided with wheel stops/bumpers, or other methods so as
to indicate their location.
D Parking facilities shall be kept clean and free from rubbish and debris.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-22
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
Section 1908. Off-Street Parking Interconnections for Parking Lots with Non Residential, Mixed,
Multi-Family Dwelling/Apartment Uses
A. To the maximum extent practicable where non-residential, mixed, and multi-family dwelling/apartment offstreet
parking lots abut another non-residential, mixed, and multi-family dwelling/apartment off-street
parking lot, such parking facilities are strongly encouraged to be interconnected via internal vehicular
connections to one (1) another or connection via a rear alley. This section shall also apply developments
involving single attached dwellings on a common lot(s) abutting other single attached dwellings on the
same common lot(s).
B. To the maximum extent practicable, each non-residential, mixed, and multi-family dwelling/apartment offstreet
parking lot are strongly encouraged to provide cross-access easements for its parking areas and
access drives guaranteeing access to abutting non-residential, mixed, and multi-family dwelling/apartment
off-street parking lots. Interconnections shall be logically placed and easily identifiable to ensure
convenient traffic flow. This section shall also apply developments involving single attached dwellings on a
common lot(s) abutting other single attached dwellings on the same common lot(s).
Section 1909. Prohibited Uses of Off-Street Parking Facilities.
A. Off-street parking facilities are for the sole purposes of accommodating the passenger vehicles of persons
associated with the use that requires them. Parking facilities shall not be used for the following:
1. The sale, display or storage of automobiles or other merchandise;
2. Parking/storage of vehicles accessory to the use, except during hours when business operations are
suspended;
3. Performing services (including services to vehicles);
4. Loading / unloading purposes, except during hours when business operations are suspended;
5. Temporary storage units and trash/waste disposal (e.g. pallets, cardboard); or
6. Recreational vehicle parking/storage, except during regular business hours of operation..
Section 1910. Loading and Unloading Space.
A. Except as otherwise provided herein this Section, an off-street loading / unloading space shall be an area of
land, open or enclosed, other than a street, used primarily for the standing, loading or unloading of motor
trucks, tractors and trailers, and/or other service vehicles so as to avoid undue interference with the public
use of streets.
B. Access to the loading / unloading space on any lot shall be via a street at least twelve (12) feet in width for
one-way traffic or twenty-two (22) feet wide for two (2) way use, with a clearance of at least fourteen (14)
feet six (6) inches its entire length. In the MN/C and CBD Zoning Districts, between the hours of 9am and
4pm, alleys may be permitted for loading use.
C. The off-street loading/ unloading space shall be not less than ten (10) feet wide, and thirty five (35) feet in
length, and fourteen (14) feet six (6) inches in height, when covered. For warehouse buildings or buildings
accommodating tractor-trailers, the minimum off-street loading/ unloading space size shall be increased to
twelve (12) feet wide and seventy (70) feet long.
D. Off-street loading / unloading space shall be in addition to and not considered as meeting a part of the
requirements for off-street parking space.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-23
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
E. Off-street loading / unloading space shall not be used or designed, intended or constructed to be used in a
manner to obstruct or interfere with the free use of any street, sidewalk, designated fire lane, or adjacent
property.
F. Off-street loading / unloading spaces shall not be located so that vehicles entering or leaving the spaces
would conflict with parking spaces and require backing maneuvers in areas of customer or public
circulation.
G. The following off-street loading and unloading space requirements for specific uses shall be provided as
listed below:
Table 19-4
Off-Street Loading Requirements
Type of Use Gross Floor Area # of Spaces
Commercial (Retail/Service)
Wholesale
Industrial/Manufacturing
Hospitals
Laundry
Institutional
and Similar Uses
< 8,000 1
8,000 - 40,000 2
> 40,000 - 100,000 3
> 100,000 - 250,000 4
each additional 200,000 1
Office Buildings and Hotels
< 100,000 1
100,000 - 300,000 2
> 300,000 3
H. When determination of the number of required off-street loading/ unloading spaces results in a requirement
of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half (½) may be disregarded, and fractions over
one-half (½) shall be interpreted as one (1) off-street loading/ unloading space.
I. Where there are multiple uses within a development or on the same lot, shared loading / unloading spaces
shall be used among as many uses as practical. Loading / unloading spaces shall be adjacent to the use or
building served except that in a group of buildings in the same use on the same lot, one (1) building may be
designated to receive and dispatch goods, provided the total applicable floor area in all buildings on the lot
is aggregated in determining the total required loading spaces.
J. In all zoning districts except for the I zoning district, off-street loading/unloading spaces shall not be
permitted between the principal building and the public street (excluding alleys) or within any required
front setback area.
K. Off-street loading/unloading facilities shall be located on the side of the building not facing an abutting
residential zoning district or existing residential use in the MN/C zoning district.
L. No off-street loading/ unloading spaces shall be within any building setback and/ or buffer yard area.
M. Off-street loading/unloading facilities shall comply with all buffering and screening requirements set forth
in Part 4 of this Chapter.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-24
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
N. For all off-street loading/unloading areas, a planting strip at least five (5) feet wide shall be provided
between the edge of the street right-of-way and any off-street loading/unloading area authorized in all
applicable yards which are adjacent to a public street and alley. Planting strips between the right-of-way
and the loading/unloading area shall be landscaped and maintained with ground cover, shrubbery, trees or
other landscape or decorative materials across the entire lot in order to prohibit vehicular and pedestrian
access, except at approved ingress and egress points. Landscaping species at their mature heights shall not
obstruct visibility for traffic entering or leaving the lot or traveling on the public street/alley.
O. Surfacing. All off-street loading/unloading facilities shall be constructed and maintained with the same
paved concrete or bituminous surface material required for access drives in Chapter 22 of the Codified
Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire relating to subdivision and land development and/or any
applicable Borough construction and materials specifications.
P. All on-site, outdoor lighting of off-street loading/unloading areas shall be designed to prevent glare to
adjoining properties and public right-of-way by employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that
confine glare to the site, rather than the area around it.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-1
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
PART 19
LOT ACCESS, PARKING, AND LOADING REGULATIONS
Section 1900. General Provisions
A. The lot access, parking, and loading provisions of this Chapter shall apply as follows:
1. For all buildings and structures erected and all uses of land established after the effective date of
this Chapter, accessory parking and loading, and where applicable, principal parking facilities
shall be provided as required in this Part.
2. When the intensity of use of any building, structure or premises, shall be increased through
addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity or other units of measurement
specified herein for required parking and loading facilities, parking and loading facilities shall be
provided for such increase in intensity of use in the amount by which the requirements for the
increase in intensity would exceed those for the existing use if the latter were subject to the
parking and loading provisions of this Chapter.
3. Whenever the existing use of a building, structure or land shall hereafter be changed to a new use,
parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required for such new use. However, if the
existing use of land or structure was established prior to the effective date of this Chapter,
additional parking or loading facilities are mandatory only in the amount by which the
requirements for the new use would exceed those for the existing use if the latter were subject to
the parking and loading provisions of this Chapter.
4. The non-residential parking facilities required shall be available to patrons throughout the hours of
operation of the particular business or use for which such facilities are provided.
5. Where lot access, access drives, driveways, parking lots, and loading facilities are permitted along
a street right-of-way at the front of the lot, and where sidewalks are installed (or will be installed),
then the access drive or driveway surfacing shall end at the backside or building-side of the
sidewalk and on the front-side or street side of the sidewalk. No access drive or driveway
surfacing shall extend over the sidewalk area. Sidewalk materials shall be continued across all
access drives and driveways.
6. The term “parking space” includes either covered garage space or uncovered, improved and
stabilized parking space located off the public right-of-way, except where on-street parking is
permitted to count toward required parking spaces as provided herein this Part.
7. Required parking shall not be deemed to be part of the open space of the lot on which it is located,
unless designated as overflow parking in accordance with this Part.
8. Required parking shall not encroach onto any required buffer yards as required in Part 4 of this
Chapter.
Section 1901. R-L and R-M Zoning District Lot Access and Parking
A. Where a lot proposed for development abuts an alley and where the majority of the existing principal
buildings on the same shared block face (between two [2] intersecting streets) along the same side of the
street take access from the alley and have parking to the rear of the lot, then new lot access and parking
areas shall be provided in a similar manner and location.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-2
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
1. Single-Family Detached, Single Family Semi-Detached, and Two FamilyDwellings
a. Single family detached, single family semi-detached, and two (2) family dwelling lot
access and off-street parking spaces shall consist of an improved and stabilized parking
area, driveway, garage, carport, or combination thereof and shall be located on the lot it is
intended to serve.
b. Off-street parking shall not be located between the principal building and the public street
right-of-way, except for that part of the front yard that is occupied by a driveway leading
to a garage or an improved and stabilized parking area (including turnaround).
c. At the street right-of-way (excluding alleys), a driveway providing access to a single car
garage or parking area shall be limited to ten (10) feet in width, and for a double car
garage or parking area, the width shall be limited to twenty (20) feet. In no case shall a
driveway be wider than twenty (20) feet at the right-of-way line. Parking on the driveway
shall be limited to vehicles registered as a passenger car or a truck having a gross weight
rating less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) pounds.
2. Uses other than Single-Family Detached, Single Family Semi-Detached, and Two Family
Dwellings
a. Required off-street parking for uses other than single-family detached, single family
semi-detached and two family dwellings, off-street parking (lots and areas), shall be
provided in the rear of the principal building/structure first and if not possible, then may
be located in the side yard behind the front façade of the principal building/structure.
b. Access drives shall be designed, sited, and constructed in accordance with Chapter 22 of
the Borough of Highspire Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
Section 1902. MN/C and CBD Zoning District Lot Access and Parking
A. Parking lot and structure access in the MN/C and CBD Zoning Districts:
1. For a lot proposed for development and abutting an alley, access to the lot shall not be taken from
the front of a property to a public street.
a. Lot access shall be provided at the rear of lots from the alley for those lots abutting
alleys.
b. No new curb cut for a driveway or access drive shall be provided along a public street for
lots abutting alleys, and required off-street parking (lots and areas) shall:
(1). be provided in the rear of the principal building;
(2). not be located between the principal building and the public street (excluding
alleys).
(3). not be provided along 2nd Street; and
(4). not be located on corner lots, on or adjacent to the intersection of two (2) streets.
B. Parking Garages and Structures in the MN/C and CBD Zoning Districts:
1. See Part 14 of this Chapter.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-3
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
C. Non-Residential Uses in the MN/C and CBD Zoning Districts
1. For all non-residential uses, located within a six hundred (600) foot radius of a public parking
facility owned and/or operated by Highspire Borough or its agent, may include the parking spaces
provided in said public parking facility as a part of the parking requirements.
Section 1903. Driveways and Access Drives
A. Driveways
1. Driveways shall meet the following standards:
a. No more than two (2) driveway connections per lot shall be permitted, and driveways
shall be no closer than one hundred (100) feet on the same lot.
b. On corner lots or where more than one (1) intersecting street (including alleys) abuts the
lot, a new curb cut or access for a driveway shall be provided on the street conveying the
lesser amount of existing or proposed daily traffic. This specifically includes alleys.
c. Driveways shall not be:
(1). less than forty (40) feet from the edge of the right-of-way of any street
intersection;
(2). within twenty (20) feet of an alley right-of-way;
(3). less than five (5) feet from a fire hydrant,
(4). less than two and one half (2 ½) feet from abutting lot lines, unless a shared
driveway is proposed.
These distances shall also include driveway flares.
d. A driveway shall not exceed a slope of eight (8) percent within twenty-five (25) feet of
the street right-of-way line, and not more than fifteen (15) percent overall.
e. At the street right-of-way (excluding alleys), a driveway providing access to a single car
garage or parking area shall be limited to ten (10) feet in width, and for a double car
garage or parking area, the width shall be limited to twenty (20) feet. In no case shall a
driveway be wider than twenty (20) feet at the right-of-way line. Parking on the driveway
shall be limited to vehicles registered as a passenger car or a truck having a gross weight
rating less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) pounds.
f. In no case shall there be unrestricted access from a lot along the length of a street or
alley.
g. A curb return entrance is illustrated in Figure 5.1. When curb return entrances are used,
the curb shall have a minimum five (5) foot radius, and no greater than fifteen (15) feet is
permitted on both sides of the driveway in addition to the twenty (20) driveway foot
width. However, any driveway entering into PennDOT right-of way shall be designed in
accordance with PA Code Title 67, Chapter 441.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-4
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
Figure 5.1. Typical Curb Return Entrance
Note: for driveways entering into PennDOT ROW, design shall be in
accordance with standards in PA Code Title 67, Chapter 441.Modified
from Source: AASHTO
(Source: Pennsylvania Standards for Residential Site Development,
2007)
h. When flared driveway entrances are used, a minimum two (2) foot flair shall be provided.
No flare shall cross an extended side property line. A typical flared entrance is illustrated
in Figure 5.2
Figure 5.2. Typical Flared Driveway Entrance
Modified from Source: AASHTO
(Source: Pennsylvania Standards for Residential Site Development,
2007)
i. Non-curbed driveway entrances shall have a minimum edge-of-pavement radius of five
(5) feet, and no greater than fifteen (15) feet is permitted on both sides of the driveway in
addition to the twenty (20) driveway foot width as illustrated in Figure 5.3
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-5
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
Figure 5.3 Typical Non-curbed Driveway Entrance
Modified from Source: AASHTO
(Source: Pennsylvania Standards for Residential Site Development,
2007)
j. Any driveway intersecting with a State-owned street or road shall require the obtainment
of a PennDOT Highway Occupancy Permit.
k. Driveways shall not interfere with normal traffic movement nor be constructed in a
manner to be inconsistent with the design, maintenance and drainage of the street. When
required to maintain drainage, a pipe no less than fifteen (15) inches in diameter shall be
installed.
l. A driveway location shall be delineated on all plans / permits, as applicable.
m. Additionally, driveways shall be located so as to provide adequate sight distance and
clear sight triangles at intersections with streets. Such sight distances and clear sight
triangles shall be as specified in the Chapter 22 of the Codified Ordinances of the
Borough of Highspire relating to subdivision and land development.
B. Access Drives
1. Access drives shall conform with Chapter 22 of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of
Highspire relating to subdivision and land development Chapter.
2. In no case shall there be unrestricted access from a lot along the length of a street or alley.
Section 1904. Parking Requirements
A. The following parking requirements shall be minimum standards:
Table 19-1.a
Parking Schedule
Residential Use Minimum Required Spaces
Apartment Conversions 2 per dwelling unit
Bed and Breakfast Homes and Inns
2 per dwelling unit, plus 1 for each guest/sleeping room
Other uses beyond the dwelling unit and guest/sleeping rooms,
and open to the public: Number of spaces normally required for
similar uses listed elsewhere within this schedule
Boarding House or Rooming House 2 per dwelling unit of owner/resident manager and other
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-6
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
Residential Use Minimum Required Spaces
permanent residents, plus 1 space for each sleeping/rooming unit
for let
Continuing Care Retirement Facility
or Long Term Care Nursing Home
or Personal Care Facility (individual
or in combination of the following:)
Personal care or nursing care centers: 1 space for each 4 beds plus
1 space per employee on largest shift.
Apartment units: 1.25 spaces per dwelling unit.
Cottage units (single family units): 1 space per dwelling unit plus
1 space per 5 units for guest parking.
Other uses not specified herein above: Number of spaces normally
required for similar uses listed elsewhere within this schedule
Family Care Facility
2 per dwelling unit, plus 1 for each 300 square feet of gross floor
area dedicated to the care use
Flag Lot Residence 2 per dwelling unit
Group Care 2 per dwelling unit, plus 1 for each 4 residents
Group Home 2 per dwelling unit, plus 1 for each 4 residents
Mobile Home Park
2 per dwelling unit, plus if on-street parking is not provided, 1/2
additional space per dwelling unit shall be provided in a common
visitor parking compound. Such visitor parking lots shall be sized,
arranged, and located so that the spaces are within three hundred
(300) feet walking distance to any unit served.
Multi-FamilyDwellings/Apartments
2 per dwelling unit, plus if on-street parking is not provided, ½
additional space per dwelling unit shall be provided in a common
visitor parking compound. Such visitor parking lots shall be sized,
arranged, and located so that the spaces are within three hundred
(300) feet walking distance to any unit served
Single Family Attached Dwelling
2 per dwelling unit, plus if on-street parking is not provided, ½
additional space per dwelling unit shall be provided in a common
visitor parking compound. Such visitor parking lots shall be sized,
arranged, and located so that the spaces are within three hundred
(300) feet walking distance to any unit served
Single-Family Detached Dwelling 2 per dwelling unit
Single Family Semi-Detached
Dwelling 2 per dwelling unit
Two-FamilyDetached Dwelling 2 per dwelling unit
Non-Residential Use Minimum Required Spaces
Adult Related Uses
1 per 200 square feet of net floor area, plus 1 per employee on the
peak shift
Agriculture Operation
2 per dwelling unit, plus 1 for each non-resident employee on the
peak shift
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-7
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
Non-Residential Use Minimum Required Spaces
Animal Hospital, Veterinary Office 2 per exam table, plus 1 per employee on the peak shift
Automobile, Boat, Heavy
Equipment, Mobile Home,
Recreational Vehicle and Similar
Motor Vehicle Rental/Sales,
Repair/Service, Washing and/or
Fuel/Gas Sales (individual or in
combination of the following:)
1 per employee on the peak shift plus:
Rental/Sales: 1 per 15 vehicles or units of motor vehicle
equipment
Repair/Service: 2 per service bay
Washing: 1 per 200 square feet of office floor area, plus 3
stacking spaces per wash bay)
Fuel/Gasoline Sales/Distribution: 1 per fuel pump which may
be provided at fuel pumps at a ratio of not more than 2
spaces per each pump (one [1] on each side), plus 1 for each
employee on the peak shift.
AutomobileWrecking, Junk and
Scrap Storage and Sales 1 per ½ acre, plus 1 per employee on the peak shift
Banks
1 per 400 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 per employee on
the peak shift
Billboard 1 per billboard
Boat Launching Facility, Boat
Storage, and Marina
1 per boat dock space / slip space, plus 1 per employee on the
peak shift, plus one-half (½) of the spaces normally required for
accessory uses listed elsewhere within this schedule
Business Services
1 per 200 square feet of net floor area, plus 1 per employee on the
peak shift
Campground or Camp
1 per campsite, plus 1 per employee on the peak shift, plus onehalf
(½) of the spaces normally required for accessory uses listed
elsewhere within this schedule
Cemetery 5, plus 1 per employee on the peak shift
Clinic, Medical
4 per patient examination room, plus 1 per employee on the peak
shift
Club, Clubhouse or Lodge, Private
1 per 200 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 per employee on
the peak shift.
Commercial Recreation, Indoor
1 per 200 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 per employee on
the peak shift.
Commercial Recreation, Outdoor
1 per 200 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 per employee on
the peak shift; or if completely outside of a structure 1 per each 3
users at maximum utilization, plus 1 per employee on the peak
shift
Communication Antennas, Towers
and Equipment Transmitting & 1 per lot
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-8
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
Non-Residential Use Minimum Required Spaces
Receiving Facilities
CommunityGarden no minimum required
Contractors’ Office or Storage Yard
1 per 750 square feet of office gross floor area, plus 1 per
employee on the peak shift
Convenience Store, General
1 per 100 square feet of net floor area, plus 1 per fuel pump, plus 1
per employee on the peak shift
Convenience Store, Neighborhood
1 per 200 square feet of net floor area, plus 1 per employee on the
peak shift
Craftsman/Artisan Studio
1 per 300 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 per employee on
the peak shift
Daycare, Commercial
1 per employee on the peak shift plus 1 per 6 client (adult or child)
enrolled
Dog Day Care
1 per each 15 animals based on maximum animal capacity, plus 1
per employee on the peak shift
Farmer’s Market and/or Flea Market
1 per 400 square feet of gross floor area (indoor and outdoor)
open to and accessible to the public, plus 1 per employee on the
peak shift
Financial Service, Other
1 per 400 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 per employee on
the peak shift
Fishing, Boating Lodges
1 per boat dock space / slip space, plus 1 per employee on the
peak shift, plus one-half (½) of the spaces normally required for
accessory uses listed elsewhere within this schedule
Food Service
1 per employee on the peak shift plus:
Delivery: 1 per vehicle stored on site
Direct Patron Food Sales/Consumption: 1 per 6 seats if
restaurant is provided or 1 per 200 square feet of gross floor
area open to and accessible to the public, whichever is
greater
Forestry 1 per employee on the peak shift
Funeral Home 25 for 1st parlor, plus 10 for each additional parlor
Greenhouse and Nursery
1 per 500 square feet of gross floor area (indoor and outdoor)
open to and accessible to the public, plus 1 per employee on the
peak shift
HalfwayHouse 1 per 2 beds, plus 1 per employee on the peak shift
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-9
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
Non-Residential Use Minimum Required Spaces
Home Improvement Center,
Lumber, and BuildingMaterials
Sales (Retail and/or Indoor)
1 per 500 square feet of gross floor area (indoor and outdoor)
open to and accessible to the public, plus 1 per employee on the
peak shift
Hospital 2 per 3 beds, plus 1 per employee on the peak shift
Hotel
1 per guest/sleeping room, plus 1 per employee on the peak shift,
plus one-half (½) of the spaces normally required for accessory
uses listed elsewhere within this schedule
Industrial Use, General
1 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area of the building up to
20,000 square feet, plus 1 for each 2,000 square feet gross floor
area of the building up between 20,000 square feet and 40,000
square feet, plus 1 for each 3,000 square feet gross floor area of
the building in excess of 40,000 square feet. In addition to the offstreet
parking requirements and when there are 10 or more loading
berths provided, trailer parking spaces shall be provided at 1 trailer
parking space for each 4 loading berths.
Industrial Use, Light
1 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area of the building up to
20,000 square feet, plus 1 for each 2,000 square feet gross floor
area of the building up between 20,000 square feet and 40,000
square feet, plus 1 for each 3,000 square feet gross floor area of
the building in excess of 40,000 square feet. In addition to the offstreet
parking requirements and when there are 10 or more loading
berths provided, trailer parking spaces shall be provided at 1 trailer
parking space for each 4 loading berths.
Kennel, Commercial
1 per each 15 animals based on maximum animal capacity, plus 1
per employee on the peak shift
Laundry & Dry Cleaning
Establishment (Industrial)
1 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area of the building up to
20,000 square feet, plus 1 for each 2,000 square feet gross floor
area of the building up between 20,000 square feet and 40,000
square feet, plus 1 for each 3,000 square feet gross floor area of
the building in excess of 40,000 square feet. In addition to the offstreet
parking requirements and when there are 10 or more loading
berths provided, trailer parking spaces shall be provided at 1 trailer
parking space for each 4 loading berths.
Laundry & Dry Cleaning
Establishment (Personal)
1 per 300 square feet of net floor area, plus 1 per employee on the
peak shift
Library
1 per 400 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 per employee on
the peak shift
Market Garden no minimum required
Massage Therapy 1 per table, plus 1 per employee on the peak shift
Mini-Storage Warehouses 1 per 25 storage units, plus 1 per employee on the peak shift
Motel
1 per guest/sleeping room, plus 1 per employee on the peak shift,
plus one-half (½) of the spaces normally required for accessory
uses listed elsewhere within this schedule
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-10
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
Non-Residential Use Minimum Required Spaces
Municipal Owned Uses
Number of spaces normally required for similar uses listed
elsewhere within this schedule
Museum
1 per 400 square feet of gross floor area (indoor and outdoor)
open to and accessible to the public, plus 1 per employee on the
peak shift
Natural Areas or Wildlife Refuges 1 per acre or portion thereof
Nightclubs
1 per 100 square feet of net floor area, plus 1 per employee on the
peak shift
Offices, Business Professional
1 per 300 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 per employee on
the peak shift
Offices, Medical
2 per patient examination room, plus 1 per employee on the peak
shift
Parking Lot 1 per employee on the peak shift
Parking Structure 1 per employee on the peak shift
Parks, Playgrounds and Other Non-
Commercial Recreational Uses. 3 per acre or portion thereof
Personal Services
1 per 300 square feet of net floor area, plus 1 per employee on the
peak shift
Place of Worship and Related Uses
1 per 3 seats based on maximum seating capacity, or 1 per 250
square feet of gross floor area, whichever is larger
Post Office
1 per 200 square feet of net floor area, plus 1 per employee on the
peak shift
Public/Private Utility Building or
Structure 1 per employee on the peak shift, plus 1 per vehicle stored on site
Research & Development,
Engineering or Testing Facility or
Lab 1 per 400 square feet of gross floor area
Restaurant (Fast Food) 1 per 2 seats, plus 1 for each 2 employees on the peak shift
Restaurant (Sit Down) 1 per 4 seats, plus 1 for each 2 employees on the peak shift
Retail Business
1 per 200 square feet of net floor area, plus 1 per employee on the
peak shift
Sawmill 1 per employee on the peak shift
Schools, Commercial 1 per 4 students, plus 1 per employee on the peak shift
Schools, Public or Private, Primary
1 per each 30 students enrolled, plus 1 per employee, plus 1 per
each 30 seats for auditorium, gymnasium, or multipurpose room
Schools, Public or Private,
Secondary
1 per each 5 students enrolled, plus 1 per employee, plus 1 per
each 30 seats for auditorium, gymnasium, or multipurpose room
Schools, Vocational 1 per 4 students, plus 1 per employee on the peak shift
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-11
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
Non-Residential Use Minimum Required Spaces
Taverns/Bars 1 per 4 seats, plus 1 for each 2 employees on the peak shift
Theater, Indoor
1 per 3 seats based on maximum seating capacity, or 1 per 250
square feet of gross floor area, whichever is larger
Transportation Terminal
1 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area of the building up to
20,000 square feet, plus 1 for each 2,000 square feet gross floor
area of the building up between 20,000 square feet and 40,000
square feet, plus 1 for each 3,000 square feet gross floor area of
the building in excess of 40,000 square feet. In addition to the offstreet
parking requirements and when there are 10 or more loading
berths provided, trailer parking spaces shall be provided at 1 trailer
parking space for each 4 loading berths.
Treatment Center 1 for each 3 patient/client, plus 1 per employee on the peak shift
Warehousing, Distribution, and
Wholesaling
1 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area of the building up to
20,000 square feet, plus 1 for each 2,000 square feet gross floor
area of the building up between 20,000 square feet and 40,000
square feet, plus 1 for each 3,000 square feet gross floor area of
the building in excess of 40,000 square feet. In addition to the offstreet
parking requirements and when there are 10 or more loading
berths provided, trailer parking spaces shall be provided at 1 trailer
parking space for each 4 loading berths.
Accessory Use Minimum Required Spaces
Accessory Apartment 2 per dwelling unit
Automated Banking Facility
2 when not associated with on-site principal bank or other
financial service, otherwise no minimum required
Daycare, Accessory 2 per dwelling unit as part of principal use
Daycare, Commercial
1 per employee on the peak shift plus 1 per 6 client (adult or child)
enrolled
Daycare, Family
2 per dwelling unit as part of principal use, plus 1 per non-resident
employee, plus 1 for patron use
Essential Services no minimum required
Home Occupation
2 per dwelling unit as part of principal use, plus 1 per non-resident
employee
No Impact Home Based Business 2 per dwelling unit as part of principal use
Outdoor Café/Dining no minimum required
B. ADA Handicapped Accessible Parking Requirements. The number of handicapped accessible parking
spaces required by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) shall be in accordance to the most recent
version of the ADA Standards for Accessible Design of the United States Department of Justice and
Chapter 5 relating to buildings.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-12
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
C. Computation of Spaces
1. When determination of the number of required parking spaces results in a requirement of a
fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half (½) may be disregarded, and fractions
over one-half (½) shall be interpreted as one (1) parking space.
D. Parking Requirements Not Specified
When the parking requirements are not specified herein for a structure or use for which an application for a
permit has been filed, the zoning officer shall make the determination of which parking requirement
standards shall apply in order to ensure that adequate parking spaces are provided to serve the needs of
proposed uses in conformance with the standards set forth herein and upon consideration of all factors
entering into the parking needs of each such use.
E. Mixed Uses
1. Except as otherwise provided herein this Part, for mixed uses, total requirements shall be the sum
of the requirements of the component uses computed separately.
Section 1905. Location and Design of Parking Spaces
A. Parking spaces for single family attached, multi-family dwelling/apartment, mixed and non-residential uses
shall be on the same lot and in the same zoning district as the principal use or open area conforming to the
following regulations, unless the applicant meets the requirements for shared parking provided in this Part.
B. Setback for parking areas shall be provided as follows:
1. All parking spaces and access drives shall be at least five (5) feet from any single family attached,
multi-family dwelling/apartment, mixed use and non-residential buildings located on the lot. The
five (5) foot corridor thus established between the parking area and building shall be for the
purpose of providing a pedestrian access walkway.
2. Parking spaces shall not be located within any required building setbacks; nor within any required
buffer yard area.
3. Except as set forth elsewhere in this Chapter, parking lots and areas for single family attached,
multi-family dwelling/apartment, mixed and non-residential uses permitted in residential zoning
districts shall:
a. be provided in the rear of the principal building;
b. not be located between the principal building and the public street (excluding alleys); and
c. not be located on corner lots, on or adjacent to the intersection of two (2) streets.
d. be provided with a planting strip at least five (5) feet wide between the edge of the street
right-of-way (including alleys) and any off-street parking area authorized in all applicable
yards which are adjacent to a public street and alley and landscaped in accordance with
Part 4 of this Chapter.
4. Except for single family detached, single family semi-detached, and two (2) family detached
dwellings, and for all lots abutting and with direct lot access onto an arterial or collector street, in
no case shall parking areas be designed to require or encourage motor vehicles to back into a street
(excluding alleys) in order to exit the parking area.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-13
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
5. Except for single family uses or in the case of valet parking, parking spaces and areas shall be
designed so that each motor vehicle may proceed to and from the parking space provided for it
without requiring the moving of any other motor vehicle.
C. In addition to all standards for parking facilities provided via Chapter 22 Subdivision and Land
Development, parking facilities shall also comply with the following:
1. Parking Area and Lots Landscaping and Trees
a. For all non-residential, multi-family dwelling/apartment, single family attached, and
mixed uses, a planting strip at least five (5) feet wide shall be provided between the edge
of the street right-of-way and any off-street parking area authorized in all applicable
yards which are adjacent to a public street and alley. Planting strips between the right-ofway
and the parking area shall be landscaped and maintained with ground cover,
shrubbery, trees or other landscape or decorative materials across the entire lot in order to
prohibit vehicular and pedestrian access, except at approved ingress and egress points.
Landscaping species at their mature heights shall not obstruct visibility for traffic
entering or leaving the lot or traveling on the public street/alley.
2. Surface Parking Areas
a. In parking areas or lots containing more than ten (10) new spaces, at least twenty (20)
percent of the interior parking area shall be landscaped with plantings including one (1)
shade tree, a minimum diameter of two and one half (2.5) inches measured at four and
one half (4.5) feet above the finished grade, for each five (5) spaces.
b. Interior landscaping shall be required for new parking areas or expansion of existing
parking areas containing more than four thousand (4,000) square feet or ten (10) parking
spaces, which ever is lesser.
c. One (1) internal landscape island shall be provided for every ten (10) parking spaces (or
twenty [20] double loaded spaces)..
d. No more than ten (10) parking spaces shall be provided in an unbroken row without the
provision of interior landscape islands.
e. At least one (1) shade tree, a minimum diameter of two and one half (2.5) inches
measured at four and one half (4.5) feet above the finished grade, shall be provided in
each interior landscape island. The remaining area of the required interior landscape
islands and/or interior landscape area shall be landscaped with shrubs or perennials,
either of which should not exceed two (2) feet in height, or with turf grass.
f. Unless otherwise approved by the Borough Engineer for promoting sustainable
stormwater management practices, all landscape islands and planting strip areas shall be
enclosed by appropriate curbing in compliance with Chapter 21 Streets and Sidewalks or
a similar device at least six (6) inches wide and six (6) inches in height above the paving
surface, acceptable to the Borough Engineer.
3. Additionally, parking lot landscaping, trees, plantings, and screening shall be:
a. Planted with adequate unpaved surface around each for water and air;
b. Free of insect pests and diseases; and
c. Perpetually maintained in a healthy condition by the property owner. Any required
planting that dies, is removed, or is severely damaged shall be replaced by the current
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-14
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
property owner as soon as is practical considering growing seasons, within a maximum of
one hundred fifty (150) days.
d. Parking lot screening shall be provided in accordance with Part 4 of this Chapter.
4. Lighting
a. Parking lots and structures shall be lit during evening, nighttime, and early morning
operating hours as applicable.
b. All standards shall be located on raised parking islands and not on the parking lot surface.
c. All on-site, outdoor lighting of off-street parking areas shall be designed to prevent glare
to adjacent properties and public rights-of-way by employing hooded, shielded, or
screened fixtures that confine glare to the site, rather than the area around it.
D. ADA Handicapped Accessible Parking Facilities. The design and location of all required ADA
handicapped accessible parking facilities shall be in accordance to the most recent version of the ADA
Standards for Accessible Design of the United States Department of Justice and Chapter 5 relating to
buildings. The applicant shall certify in writing or plan note that the application for development complies
with all relevant ADA requirements.
F. Motorized Vehicle Parking Facilities.
1. Size Standards.
a. Parallel parking shall be a minimum width of seven (7) feet and a minimum length of
twenty (22) feet.
b. Perpendicular parking shall be a minimum width of eight (8) feet six (6) inches, a
minimum length of eighteen (18) feet.
c. Parking space length and width can be increased from minimum sizes where appropriate
in accordance with location, use, and turn-over rate.
d. Encroachments such as columns and light poles may encroach into a module by one (1)
foot and affect up to thirty (30) percent of the parking spaces.
e. Parking Standards4:
Angle Vehicle
Projection
Aisle
Min.
Base
Modul
e1
Single
Loaded
Wall to
Interlock
Interlock
to
Interlock
Curb
to
Curb
Overhang
Interlock2
Reduction
Stall
Width
Projection2
Minimum
VP A W1 W2 W3 W4 W5 o i WP
45° 17’8” 12’8” 48’0” 30’4” 45’0” 42’0” 44’ 6” 1’9” 3’0” 12’0”
50° 18’3” 13’3” 49’9” 31’6” 47’0” 44’3” 45’11” 1’11” 2’9” 11’1”
55° 18’8” 13’8” 51’0” 32’4” 48’7” 46’2” 46’10” 2’1” 2’5” 10’5”
60° 19’0” 14’6” 52’6” 33’6” 50’4” 48’2” 48’2” 2’2” 2’2” 9’10”
65° 19’2” 15’5” 53’9” 34’7” 51’11” 50’1” 50’1” 2’3” 1’10” 9’5”
70° 19’3” 16’6” 55’0” 35’9” 53’7” 52’2” 52’2” 2’4” 1’5” 9’1”
75° 19’1” 17’10” 56’0” 36’11” 54’11” 53’10” 53’10” 2’5” 1’1” 8’10”
90° 18’0” 20’0” 60’0”3 42’0” 60’0” 60’0” 60’0” 2’6” 0’0” 8’6”
1 Module is defined as the combined dimension of two parked vehicles and the aisle between them.
2 Calculated for 8’6” stall.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-15
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
Angle Vehicle
Projection
Aisle
Min.
Base
Modul
e1
Single
Loaded
Wall to
Interlock
Interlock
to
Interlock
Curb
to
Curb
Overhang
Interlock2
Reduction
Stall
Width
Projection2
Minimum
VP A W1 W2 W3 W4 W5 o i WP
3 Base width may not be waived.
4 Parking dimensions for based on design vehicles of 6’7” x 17’0”.
2. General Standards.
a. Angled parking may be pull in or reverse (back-in).
b. Parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall meet the Americans with Disabilities
Act (ADA). Handicapped parking shall be provided for all nonresidential, multi-family,
and mixed use developments and shall be located closest to the accessible building
entrance(s).
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-16
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
c. On-street parking on at least one side of the street is encouraged on access drives and
proposed streets with speeds equal to or less than thirty (30) mph.
d. Where provided, on-street parking shall not be located within twenty five (25) feet of a
cartway intersection in order to provide safe sight distance and adequate turning radius
for large vehicles.
e. Off-street parking areas shall be oriented to, and within a reasonable walking distance of,
the buildings they are designed for and consistent with adjacent neighborhoods.
f. Parked vehicles adjacent to sidewalks and pedestrian walkways shall not overhang or
extend over the sidewalk or pedestrian walkways in a manner that restricts pedestrian
circulation. Where such overhang is not restricted by a wheel stop or other device,
sidewalks shall have a four (4) foot minimum clearance width from any obstacles.
g. Not less than a two (2) foot radius of curvature shall be permitted for horizontal curves in
parking areas.
h. All dead end parking lots shall be designed to provide sufficient back-up area for all end
stalls.
i. Painted lines, arrows, and dividers shall be provided and maintained to control parking,
and when necessary to direct vehicular circulation.
j. The typical cross section of any parking facility shall be prepared to meet the minimum
standards set forth in Section 1907 of this Chapter:
3. Parking Garages and Structures
a. Lighting and reflective materials / flat paint should be used inside the parking garage or
structure and within all pedestrian areas to increase the feeling of safety. Glossy or semigloss
paint is discouraged.
Minimum-
Maximum
Horizontal2
(Footcandles)
Minimum-
Maximum
Horizontal
Uniformity3
Minimum-
Maximum
Vertical4
(Footcandles)
Basic1 1 – 5 10:1 – 5:1 0.5 – 5
Ramps5
Day 2 – 5 10:1 – 5:1 1 – 5
Night 1 – 5 10:1 – 5:1 0.5 – 5
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-17
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
Minimum-
Maximum
Horizontal2
(Footcandles)
Minimum-
Maximum
Horizontal
Uniformity3
Minimum-
Maximum
Vertical4
(Footcandles)
Entrance/Exit Areas6
Day7 50 25
Night 1 – 5 10:1 – 5:1 0.5 – 5
Stairways 2 – 5 1 - 5
Table based on the Illuminating Engineering Society (IET)
1 For typical conditions
2 Minimum “maintained” Footcandles measured on the parking surface, without
any shadowing effect from parked vehicles or columns. This may require 3-5
Footcandle average.
3 The highest horizontal Illuminance area, divided by the lowest horizontal
Illuminance point or area should not be greater than the ratio shown.
4 Measured facing the drive aisle at 5 feet above the parking surface at the point
of the lowest horizontal Illuminance.
5 Applies only to clearway ramps (with no adjacent parking) but not sloping floor
designs.
6 A high Illuminance level for the first 65 feet inside the Structure is needed to
effect a transition from bright daylight to a lower interior level.
7 Daylight may be considered in the design calculations.
b. Lighting design shall address glare, light pollution (unnecessary light), light trespass
(bright visible sources or light spilling into adjacent properties), and reduction of
shadows.
c. Provision of signage at exits of the parking garages and structures shall be required.
d. Open-structure wall areas for natural ventilation or mechanical ventilation shall be
encouraged.
e. Interaction between vehicles and pedestrians should be provided in a safe manner.
f. Traffic flow by vehicles entering the parking garage or structure shall be mitigated by
either on site or external deceleration lanes based on the traffic impact study if required.
g. To the maximum extent practicable, parking garage and structure entries shall be
internalized in building groupings or oriented away from public street frontage.
h. Preferred access to below grade parking shall be either from the side or rear of buildings.
G. Non-Motorized Vehicle Parking Facilities.
1. Non- motorized vehicle parking facilities should be provided in accordance with the following
regulations:
a. Bicycle Parking Facilities: Bicycle parking facilities for non-residential and mixed land
uses shall be provided in accordance with the following regulations:
(1). Each bicycle space shall be equipped with a device to which a bicycle frame and
one (1) wheel can be attached using a chain or cable. There shall be adequate
separation between adjacent devices to allow bicycles to be attached or removed
without moving other bicycles. The devices shall also be suitable for use by
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-18
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
bicycles not equipped with kickstands, and the appearance of the device shall be
generally consistent with nearby urban design features.
(2). Bicycle parking spaces shall be convenient to the structure for which they arc
provided. They shall be visible from at least one (1) entrance to the structure.
(3). For every ten (10) vehicular spaces required, three (3) bicycle parking spaces
shall be provided, not to exceed a total of nine (9) required bicycle parking
spaces.
Section 1906. Parking Reductions or Alterations
A. Except for residential uses, this section is a means for applicants for non-residential and mixed uses to
meet the parking requirements by alternative means other than providing parking via paved off-street
parking spaces located on the same lot.
1. On-Street Parking
a. Where on-street parking is provided, the following on-street parking standards shall
apply:
(1). On-street parking may be provided along street rights-of-ways only when
parking on that street right-of-way has been approved by PennDOT, for all state
owned streets, or the Borough Council for Borough owned streets.
(2). Such on-street parking may be counted toward the required parking for
permitted uses as set forth in Section 1907.
(3). On-street parking areas may only be counted along the street rights-of-way
abutting the lot lines of the lot owned by the applicant or landowner, exclusive
of any driveway, access drive, or other curb cut, and exclusive of any existing
cartway and perpendicular street or access drive.
(4). A bona-fide on-street parking space, parallel to the curb line, shall measure at
least seven (7) feet in width and twenty-two (22) feet in length, exclusive of any
street cartway. Otherwise if angled parking is permitted along the street by the
Borough or PennDOT, then dimensions and number of on-street parking spaces
shall be acceptable to the Borough Engineer and/or PennDOT.
(5). All eligible on-street parking areas shall be graphically depicted and other
indicated upon any permits and/or plans required by the Borough. Such parking
areas shall not conflict with any turning movements off the cartway or obstruct
access to any street, access drive, driveway, sidewalk, crosswalk, other
accessway, or fire hydrant.
2. Shared Parking
a. Where shared parking is proposed to be utilized, the following standards shall apply:
(1). Users of shared parking facilities shall be required to show shared parking is
reasonably close in proximity to each use in accordance with the following
standards:
(a). Less than one hundred (100) feet for:
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-19
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
i. People with disabilities; deliveries and loading; emergency
services; fast food service type restaurant; and convenience
store.
(b). Less than six hundred (600) feet for:
i. Residents; grocery stores; business and professional services;
and medical/dental clinics; hospitals.
(c). Less than one thousand (1,000) feet for:
i. General retail sales and services; sit down service type
restaurant; taverns/bars; employees; private clubs, clubhouse or
lodges; places of worship; schools; municipal uses; parks.
(2). If parking is to be shared by uses located on two (2) or more lots, an agreement
in a form acceptable to the Borough must be presented assuring use of the
required parking spaces until or unless the required parking spaces are located
on the same lot as the use they serve. See subsection (b). herein below.
(3). The minimum amount of shared parking required to be calculated according to
the following:
(a). Calculate the required amount of parking required for each use as if it
were a separate use.
(b). To determine the peak parking requirements, multiply the minimum
parking required for each proposed use by the corresponding
percentage in the table below for each of the six (6) time periods:
Table 19-4
Shared Parking Calculations
Uses Monday - Friday Saturday and Sunday
8 am - 6
pm
6 pm -
Midnight
Midnight -
8 am
8 am - 6
pm
6 pm -
Midnight
Midnight -
8 am
Residential 60% 100% 100% 80% 100% 100%
Office 100% 10% 5% 5% 5% 5%
Retail Sales/Services 90% 80% 5% 100% 60% 5%
Hotel 70% 100% 100% 70% 100% 100%
Restaurant 70% 100% 10% 70% 100% 20%
Theatre/ 40% 80% 10% 80% 100% 10%
Entertainment (including
private clubs, clubhouses,
and lodges, ) 40% 100% 10% 80% 100% 50%
Public/Institutional/School
(Non-Place of Worship) 100% 40% 5% 10% 10% 5%
Places of Worship 20% 40% 5% 100% 50% 5%
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-20
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
(c). Calculate the column total for each of the six (6) time periods
(d). The column total (time period) with the highest value shall be the
minimum parking requirement.
b. Written Agreement between PropertyOwners to Share Parking
(1). Where an application for development for which shared parking is proposed
includes two (2) or more separately owned properties, and the Zoning Officer
has made a determination of the minimum number of required parking spaces
for each of the applicable properties and uses, the Zoning Officer shall require
that the owners of the properties enter into a legal agreement with the Borough
guaranteeing access to, use of, and management of designated shared parking
spaces. The agreement shall be in a recordable form approved by the Borough
Solicitor, included as a condition of the approval and enforceable by the
Borough.
(2). Where an application for a zoning permit for which shared parking is proposed
includes two (2) or more properties owned by the same property owner, and the
Zoning Officer has made a determination of the minimum number of required
parking spaces for the applicable properties and uses, the Zoning Officer shall
require that the owner of the properties enter into a legal agreement with the
Borough guaranteeing access to, use of, and management of designated shared
parking spaces. The agreement shall be in a recordable form acceptable to the
Borough, included as a condition of the approval and enforceable by the
Borough.
3. Overflow Parking
a. Overflow parking reservation, which shall include areas of required parking facilities that
may remain unpaved, but must be leveled and stabilized in a grass condition, but that also
may be constructed with other pervious surfaces acceptable to the Borough, so as to
provide for overflow parking for other, seasonal or event peak times, shall be permitted
subject to the following:
(1). The applicant shall submit a plan showing all required parking spaces, interior
drive aisles , maneuvering areas, access drives, and buffer yards, designed in
strict conformance with all other requirements of this Part, Part 4 and this
Chapter; and
(a) All those parking related improvements and facilities that are to be
constructed.
(b) All overflow parking reservation spaces which shall be delineated on
the plan and designated as “reserved for future use,” required to meet
the number of required parking spaces but otherwise not to be
constructed in full compliance with the requirements of the Chapter.
(2). Overflow parking reservation spaces shall not exceed twenty (20) percent or
more of the required parking spaces.
(3). All areas designated as overflow parking reservation shall not count toward any
open space, yard or buffer yard requirements.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-21
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
(4). The applicant shall enter into an agreement with the Borough agreeing to design
and construct all parking related improvements, including all related stormwater
management improvements, which have not been previously constructed within
six (6) months of notification from the Borough. Such agreement shall be in a
form acceptable to the Borough.
4. Compact Vehicle Parking
a. Where more than ten (10) parking spaces are required and provided in an off-street lot or
structure, a maximum of forty (40) percent of the required parking spaces may be
provided for compact vehicles. Each such compact parking space shall be not less than
eight (8) feet wide by seventeen (17) feet long. All compact parking spaces shall be
located in the same area of the off-street parking lot and be marked to indicate spaces
designated for compact parking.
Section 1907. Drainage, Surfacing, and Maintenance Standards
A. Any new or enlarged off-street parking area for multi-family dwelling/apartment, mixed use or nonresidential
uses shall be graded for proper drainage and shall be surfaced in accordance with one or both of
the following standards, so as to provide a durable and dustless surface, including one or both of the surface
and pavement treatments here in this subsection below ,to the extent necessary to prevent dust, erosion or
excessive water flow across streets or abutting property;
.
1. Impervious Surface
a. Crushed aggregate based course with a minimum thickness of six (6) inches, as specified
in the PennDOT Specifications, Form 408, and its latest revisions, or other PennDOT
approved equivalent. Pavement shall consist of a minimum of one and one-half (1-1/2)
inches of binder courses and one (1) inch wearing surface. Material shall be equal or
superior to PennDOT Specifications for Bituminous Surface Course ID-2 and shall be
applied in accordance with the PennDOT Specifications, Form 408, and its latest
revisions, or other PennDOT approved equivalent.
2. Permeable Pavement
a. Permeable pavement is encouraged but not required. Permeable pavement shall not be
located on heavy industrial sites, fuel/gasoline sales/distribution facilities, sites with
expansive soils or shallow depth to bedrock, areas draining to the permeable pavement
greater than five (5) acres, and areas with the water table less than two (2) feet below the
bottom of the pavement base. Permeable pavement includes paving units, porous asphalt
pavement, or porous concrete (using single-sized aggregate and low water content);
uniformly graded stone aggregate with void space; filter fabric lining the subsurface beds;
and uncompacted (or hand compacted) subgrade. Permeable pavement shall consider the
infiltration rate of the soil subgrade under the base. Constant supervision during
construction is encouraged as sediment must be kept from the aggregate base.
B. Parking facilities shall be so arranged as to provide for orderly and safe parking and short storage of motor
vehicles.
C. All parking spaces shall be marked with paint, provided with wheel stops/bumpers, or other methods so as
to indicate their location.
D Parking facilities shall be kept clean and free from rubbish and debris.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-22
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
Section 1908. Off-Street Parking Interconnections for Parking Lots with Non Residential, Mixed,
Multi-Family Dwelling/Apartment Uses
A. To the maximum extent practicable where non-residential, mixed, and multi-family dwelling/apartment offstreet
parking lots abut another non-residential, mixed, and multi-family dwelling/apartment off-street
parking lot, such parking facilities are strongly encouraged to be interconnected via internal vehicular
connections to one (1) another or connection via a rear alley. This section shall also apply developments
involving single attached dwellings on a common lot(s) abutting other single attached dwellings on the
same common lot(s).
B. To the maximum extent practicable, each non-residential, mixed, and multi-family dwelling/apartment offstreet
parking lot are strongly encouraged to provide cross-access easements for its parking areas and
access drives guaranteeing access to abutting non-residential, mixed, and multi-family dwelling/apartment
off-street parking lots. Interconnections shall be logically placed and easily identifiable to ensure
convenient traffic flow. This section shall also apply developments involving single attached dwellings on a
common lot(s) abutting other single attached dwellings on the same common lot(s).
Section 1909. Prohibited Uses of Off-Street Parking Facilities.
A. Off-street parking facilities are for the sole purposes of accommodating the passenger vehicles of persons
associated with the use that requires them. Parking facilities shall not be used for the following:
1. The sale, display or storage of automobiles or other merchandise;
2. Parking/storage of vehicles accessory to the use, except during hours when business operations are
suspended;
3. Performing services (including services to vehicles);
4. Loading / unloading purposes, except during hours when business operations are suspended;
5. Temporary storage units and trash/waste disposal (e.g. pallets, cardboard); or
6. Recreational vehicle parking/storage, except during regular business hours of operation..
Section 1910. Loading and Unloading Space.
A. Except as otherwise provided herein this Section, an off-street loading / unloading space shall be an area of
land, open or enclosed, other than a street, used primarily for the standing, loading or unloading of motor
trucks, tractors and trailers, and/or other service vehicles so as to avoid undue interference with the public
use of streets.
B. Access to the loading / unloading space on any lot shall be via a street at least twelve (12) feet in width for
one-way traffic or twenty-two (22) feet wide for two (2) way use, with a clearance of at least fourteen (14)
feet six (6) inches its entire length. In the MN/C and CBD Zoning Districts, between the hours of 9am and
4pm, alleys may be permitted for loading use.
C. The off-street loading/ unloading space shall be not less than ten (10) feet wide, and thirty five (35) feet in
length, and fourteen (14) feet six (6) inches in height, when covered. For warehouse buildings or buildings
accommodating tractor-trailers, the minimum off-street loading/ unloading space size shall be increased to
twelve (12) feet wide and seventy (70) feet long.
D. Off-street loading / unloading space shall be in addition to and not considered as meeting a part of the
requirements for off-street parking space.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-23
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
E. Off-street loading / unloading space shall not be used or designed, intended or constructed to be used in a
manner to obstruct or interfere with the free use of any street, sidewalk, designated fire lane, or adjacent
property.
F. Off-street loading / unloading spaces shall not be located so that vehicles entering or leaving the spaces
would conflict with parking spaces and require backing maneuvers in areas of customer or public
circulation.
G. The following off-street loading and unloading space requirements for specific uses shall be provided as
listed below:
Table 19-4
Off-Street Loading Requirements
Type of Use Gross Floor Area # of Spaces
Commercial (Retail/Service)
Wholesale
Industrial/Manufacturing
Hospitals
Laundry
Institutional
and Similar Uses
< 8,000 1
8,000 - 40,000 2
> 40,000 - 100,000 3
> 100,000 - 250,000 4
each additional 200,000 1
Office Buildings and Hotels
< 100,000 1
100,000 - 300,000 2
> 300,000 3
H. When determination of the number of required off-street loading/ unloading spaces results in a requirement
of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half (½) may be disregarded, and fractions over
one-half (½) shall be interpreted as one (1) off-street loading/ unloading space.
I. Where there are multiple uses within a development or on the same lot, shared loading / unloading spaces
shall be used among as many uses as practical. Loading / unloading spaces shall be adjacent to the use or
building served except that in a group of buildings in the same use on the same lot, one (1) building may be
designated to receive and dispatch goods, provided the total applicable floor area in all buildings on the lot
is aggregated in determining the total required loading spaces.
J. In all zoning districts except for the I zoning district, off-street loading/unloading spaces shall not be
permitted between the principal building and the public street (excluding alleys) or within any required
front setback area.
K. Off-street loading/unloading facilities shall be located on the side of the building not facing an abutting
residential zoning district or existing residential use in the MN/C zoning district.
L. No off-street loading/ unloading spaces shall be within any building setback and/ or buffer yard area.
M. Off-street loading/unloading facilities shall comply with all buffering and screening requirements set forth
in Part 4 of this Chapter.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (27, PART 19)
19-24
Lot Access, Parking, and Loading Regulations
N. For all off-street loading/unloading areas, a planting strip at least five (5) feet wide shall be provided
between the edge of the street right-of-way and any off-street loading/unloading area authorized in all
applicable yards which are adjacent to a public street and alley. Planting strips between the right-of-way
and the loading/unloading area shall be landscaped and maintained with ground cover, shrubbery, trees or
other landscape or decorative materials across the entire lot in order to prohibit vehicular and pedestrian
access, except at approved ingress and egress points. Landscaping species at their mature heights shall not
obstruct visibility for traffic entering or leaving the lot or traveling on the public street/alley.
O. Surfacing. All off-street loading/unloading facilities shall be constructed and maintained with the same
paved concrete or bituminous surface material required for access drives in Chapter 22 of the Codified
Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire relating to subdivision and land development and/or any
applicable Borough construction and materials specifications.
P. All on-site, outdoor lighting of off-street loading/unloading areas shall be designed to prevent glare to
adjoining properties and public right-of-way by employing hooded, shielded, or screened fixtures that
confine glare to the site, rather than the area around it.
THE BOROUGH OF
HIGHSPIRE,
DAUPHIN COUNTY, PA
SUBDIVISION AND LAND
DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
CHAPTER 22
OF THE CODIFIED ORDINANCES
OF THE BOROUGH OF HIGHSPIRE,
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009
Amended: November 15, 2011
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY BLANK
THE BOROUGH OF HIGHSPIRE, DAUPHIN COUNTY, PA
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
CHAPTER 22 OF THE CODIFIED ORDINANCES
OF THE BOROUGH OF HIGHSPIRE
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009
Amended: November 15, 2011
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
PART 2. LANGUAGE AND DEFINITIONS
PART 3. ADMINISTRATION
PART 4. PLAN PROCESSING PROCEDURES
PART 5. INFORMATION TO BE INCLUDED ON OR WITH PLANS
PART 6. ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF
IMPROVEMENTS
PART 7. SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS, TESTS, & STUDIES
PART 8. DESIGN STANDARDS
APPENDICES.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 1)
PART 1- 1
General Provisions
PART 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 100 TITLE
A. This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance of the Borough of Highspire”.
SECTION 101 PURPOSE AND INTENT
A. This Chapter has been designed and adopted to provide uniform standards and procedures for
the regulation of subdivision and land development within the Borough of Highspire, Dauphin
County, Pa. The purpose of such regulations is to provide for the harmonious development in
the Borough by:
1. Assuring sites are suitable for building purposes and human habitation;
2. Assisting in the orderly, efficient, and integrated development of land;
3. Protecting existing neighborhoods and other areas and important character defining
development types, features, and patterns of said neighborhoods and areas;
4. Promoting innovative design and enhancing a strong sense of community;
5. Coordinating existing and proposed streets and other proposed public improvements;
6. Assuring that adequate easements and rights-of-way are provided for drainage facilities,
public utilities, streets, and other public improvements;
7. Assuring coordination of intra, and inter-municipal public improvement plans and
programs;
8. Assuring the efficient and orderly extension of community facilities and services at
minimum cost and maximum convenience;
9. Regulating the subdivision and land development of land within any flood hazard area or
floodplain district in order to promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the
Borough of Highspire;
10. Requiring that each lot in flood prone areas includes a safe building site with adequate
access, and that public facilities which serve such uses be designed and installed to
minimize flood damage;
11. Providing for the management of stormwater in coordination with Chapter 9 of the
Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire relating to stormwater management;
12. Assuring that reservations, if any, by the developer of any area designated for use as
public grounds shall be suitable in size and location for their designated uses;
13. Guiding the future growth and development through provisions encouraging adaptive
reuse, replacement, infill, redevelopment, and new development in the Borough of
Highspire;
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 1)
PART 1- 2
General Provisions
14. Assuring the greater health, safety, convenience and welfare to the citizens of Borough of
Highspire;
15. Ensuring the protection of water resources and drainageways;
16. Ensuring the efficient movement of traffic;
17. Ensuring the equitable administration, processing, and enforcement of all subdivision and
land development plans by providing uniform standards and procedures;
18. Assuring that documents prepared as part of a land ownership transfer fully and
accurately describe the parcel of land being subdivided and the new parcel(s) thus
created, as well as lots being developed;
19. Implementing the most recent version of the Highspire Borough Comprehensive Plan
20. Effecting any additional purposes provided for in Articles I and V of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (MPC).
SECTION 102 STATUTORY AUTHORITY
A. This Chapter is enacted and ordained under the grant of powers contained in the MPC.
1. The Borough Council of Highspire shall have the authority to approve or disapprove all
preliminary and final subdivision or land development plan applications, including
modifications, as required herein.
2. The Borough of Highspire Planning Commission is hereby designated as the agency,
which shall review and make recommendations to the Borough Council on all
subdivision and land development plan applications, including modifications, as required
herein.
3. Preliminary and final subdivision and land development plan applications within the
Borough of Highspire shall be forwarded upon receipt, with the appropriate review fee, to
the Dauphin County Planning Commission for review and report. The Borough Council
of Highspire shall not approve such applications until the County review report is
received or until the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date, the application was
forwarded to the County Planning Commission.
SECTION 103 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS
A. No subdivision or land development of any lot, tract, or parcel of land located in the Borough of
Highspire shall be effected; no street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main, or other facilities
in connection therewith shall be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated for public use or
travel, or for the common use of occupants of buildings thereon unless and until a final
subdivision or land development plan has been approved by the Borough Council and recorded
in the manner prescribed herein. Furthermore, no property shall be developed, no building shall
be erected and no site improvements shall be completed except in strict accordance with the
provisions of this Ordinance..
B. No lot in a subdivision may be sold; no permit to erect or alter any building upon land in a
subdivision or land development may be issued; and no building may be erected or altered in a
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 1)
PART 1- 3
General Provisions
subdivision or land development, unless and until a final subdivision or land development plan
has been approved by the Borough Council and recorded, and until the improvements required
in connection therewith have been either constructed or guaranteed in a manner prescribed
herein.
C. Unit or condominium subdivision of real property is included within the meaning of subdivision
and land development as defined herein, and must comply with these regulations. Such
compliance shall include, but not be limited to, the filing of preliminary and final plan, payment
of established fees and charges, location of each structure and clear definition of each unit,
public easements, common areas, improvements, and all easements appurtenant to each unit.
D. All subdivision and land development plans are subject to all applicable zoning regulations set
forth in Chapter 27 of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire relating to zoning.
E. Pending Applications.
1. Per Article V, as revised of the MPC, the provisions of this Chapter shall not affect an
application for approval of a subdivision and/or land development plan which is pending
action at the time of the effective date of this Chapter, in which case applicant shall be
entitled to a decision in accordance with the governing ordinances as they stood at the
time when the application for such plan was duly filed. Additionally, this Chapter shall
not affect any suit or prosecution, pending or to be instituted, to enforce any provision of
the Highspire Borough, as amended, or any applicable predecessor regulations on an act
done, contract executed, or liability incurred prior to the effective date of this Chapter.
F. Previously Approved Plans.
1. If an applicant has received approval of a preliminary or final plan prior to the effective
date of this Chapter, no provision of this Chapter shall be applied to adversely affect the
right of the applicant to commence and complete any aspect of the approved preliminary
or final plan in accordance with the terms of such approval within five (5) years of the
date of such application, nor shall any provision of this Chapter be construed to waive the
obligations imposed upon an applicant to complete a previously approved preliminary or
final plan, including the installation of all improvements, in strict compliance with the
requirements of such approval. When approval of a final plan has been preceded by
approval of a preliminary plan, the five (5) years shall be counted from the date of
preliminary plan approval. If there is any doubt as to the terms of approval, the terms
shall be construed in light of the provisions of the governing ordinances as they stood at
the time when the application for such approval was duly filed.
G. Existing Improvements.
1. If existing improvements, including stormwater management facilities, on the subject
tract do not meet the requirements of this Chapter, then such improvements must be
designed and upgraded to meet the requirements of this Chapter in conjunction with an
application for development.
SECTION 104 CHAPTER AMENDMENTS
A. Purpose
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 1)
PART 1- 4
General Provisions
For the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare, amendments to this
Chapter may, from time to time, be proposed.
B. Procedure
All proposals for amendments shall be made in accordance with the following procedure:
1. Proposal.
Amendments to this Chapter may, from time to time, be proposed by the Highspire
Borough Council on its own motion, or by the Highspire Borough Planning Commission.
In addition, any landowner may propose an amendment to this Chapter, in which event
the Highspire Borough Council, at its sole option, may initiate procedures for amendment
by referring the proposed amendment to the Highspire Borough Planning Commission.
2. Review by Highspire Borough Planning Commission.
a. In the case of an amendment other than that proposed by the Highspire Borough
Planning Commission, the Highspire Borough Council shall submit each such
amendment to the Highspire Borough Planning Commission for recommendations
at least forty-five (45) days prior to the date of the public hearing on the proposed
amendment. The Highspire Borough Council shall also submit the proposed
amendment to the Dauphin County Planning Commission for recommendations at
least forty-five (45) days prior to the date of the public hearing.
3. Action by Highspire Borough Council.
a. Amendments shall be approved or disapproved by the Highspire Borough Council
after a public hearing held pursuant to public notice, as defined in the MPC in
accordance with the procedural requirements of Section 505 and 506 of the MPC.
4. Notification of Borough Action.
a. Within thirty (30) days of said approval, the Highspire Borough Council shall
forward a certified copy of any amendment to this Chapter the Dauphin County
Planning Commission.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 1)
PART 1- 5
General Provisions
SECTION 105 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
A. Enforcement.
1. It shall be the duty of the Highspire Borough Council (or its designee) to enforce this
Chapter and to bring any violations of these regulations to the attention of the Borough
Solicitor. Formal enforcement proceedings may be initiated by the Borough Council (or
its designee) in the name of the Borough after authorization by the Highspire Borough
Council.
B. Penalties.
1. Preventive Remedies.
a. In addition to other remedies, the Borough may institute and maintain appropriate
actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate violations, to prevent
unlawful construction, to recover damages, and to prevent illegal occupancy of a
building, structure, or premises. The description by metes and bounds in the
instrument of transfer or other documents used in the process of selling or
transferring shall not exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or from
the remedies herein provided.
2. The Borough may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval necessary to further
improve or develop any real property which has been developed or which has resulted
from a subdivision or development of real property in violation of this Chapter. This
authority to deny such a permit or approval shall apply to any of the following applicants:
a. The owner/owners of record at the time of violation;
b. The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at any time of such violation without
regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive knowledge of
the violation;
c. The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent to the time of
violation without regard as to whether such current owner had actual or
constructive knowledge of the action; or
d. The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired the property
subsequent to the time of violation without regard as to whether such vendee or
lessee had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
3. As an additional condition for issuance of an approval to any such owner, current owner,
vendee or lessee for the development of any such real property, the Borough may require
compliance with the conditions that would have been applicable to the property at the
time the applicant acquired an interest in such real property.
4. Enforcement Remedies.
a. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the provisions of
this Chapter shall, upon being found liable thereof in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by the Borough, pay a judgment of not more then five
hundred dollars ($500) plus all court costs including reasonable attorneys fees
incurred by the Borough as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be
imposed, levied or be payable until the date of the determination of a violation by
the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 1)
PART 1- 6
General Provisions
the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the rules of civil procedures.
Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the
District Justice determining that there has been a violation further determines that
there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating the
Chapter to have been believed that there was no such violation, in which event
there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth (5th
b. The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay, upon cause
shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a final adjudication of the violation
and judgment.
) day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice and
thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
c. Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed or interpreted to grant to any
person or entity other than the Borough the right to commence any action for
enforcement pursuant to this Section.
SECTION 106 MUNICIPALITY LIABILITY.
A. The granting of a permit or approval of a plan for any proposed subdivision or land
development to be located within any designated floodplain district shall not constitute a
representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind or nature by the Borough of Highspire, or an
official or employee, thereof, of the safety of any structure, building, use or other proposed plan
from cause whatsoever, and shall create no liability upon or a course of action against such
public official or employee for any damage that may be pursuant thereto.
SECTION 107 INTERPRETATION
A. In interpreting and applying this Chapter, its provisions shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for promotion of health, safety, morals and general welfare of the Borough of
Highspire. This Chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, annul, supersede, or cancel
any easements, covenants, restrictions, or reservations contained in deeds or other agreements,
but if this Chapter imposes more stringent restrictions than are elsewhere established, the
provisions of this Chapter shall prevail. Wherever and whenever the requirements of this
Chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted laws, rules,
regulations, chapters, or ordinances, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards
shall govern.
SECTION 108 SEVERABILITY.
A. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that if a court of competent jurisdiction declares
any provisions of this Chapter to be invalid or ineffective in whole or in part, the effect of such
decision shall be limited to those provisions which are expressly stated in the decision to be
invalid or ineffective, and all other provisions of this Chapter shall continue to be separately and
fully effective.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 1)
PART 1- 7
General Provisions
SECTION 109 REPEALER.
A. The pre-existing Chapter 22 of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire, also
known as the Borough of Highspire Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (SALDO),
as amended, is hereby expressly repealed; provided, further that nothing in this Chapter shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any court, or any rights acquired or
liability incurred, or any approval granted or any cause or causes of action arising prior to the
enactment of this Chapter. All chapters and ordinances or parts of chapters and ordinances and
all resolutions or parts of resolutions which are inconsistent herewith by virtue of references or
incorporation of requirements contained in the pre-existing Chapter 22 of the Codified
Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire as amended shall, as nearly as possible, be construed to
reference this Chapter.
SECTION 110 EFFECTIVE DATE.
A. This Chapter shall take effect on 4th day of November, 2009 as enacted and ordained by the
Borough Council of the Borough of Highspire on the 15th day of December, 2009.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 12, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 2)
PART – 2-1
Language and Definitions
PART 2 - LANGUAGE AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION 200 GENERAL RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
A. The language and words set forth in this Part are defined in order to facilitate the interpretation
of the Chapter for administrative purposes and in the carrying out of duties by appropriate
officers. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall, for the purpose of this
Chapter, have the meaning herein indicated.
1. Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
2. The singular includes the plural.
3. The word “person” includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated
association, or any other similar entity.
4. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. The feminine gender includes
the neuter and masculine. The neuter gender includes the feminine and masculine.
5. The terms “shall”, “will”, and “must” are always mandatory.
6. The words “should” or “may” are permissive.
7. The word “used” and “occupied” as applied to any land, structure, or building shall be
construed to include the words, “intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied”.
8. The word “erected” shall be inclusive of the words “constructed, altered or moved.”
9. For those words used in this Chapter but not defined herein, the definitions found in
various chapters of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire specifically
including but not limited to Chapter 27 relating to zoning, Chapter 9 relating to grading
and stormwater, Chapter 21 relating to streets and sidewalks, Chapter 25 relating to shade
trees, and Chapter 5 relating to buildings, shall apply.
10. For those words used in this Chapter but not defined herein or any the definitions found
in various chapters of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire, the most
recent edition of Webster’s Unabridged Dictionary, shall apply.
B. Illustrations and Tables.
1. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this Chapter and
any caption, illustration or table, the text shall control. No caption, illustration or table
shall be construed to limit the scope or intent of the text of this Chapter.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 12, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 2)
PART – 2-2
Language and Definitions
SECTION 201 DEFINITIONS
A. For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ABUT or ABUTTING: Areas of contiguous lots that share a common property or lot line, or being
separated by a common border including easements, but excluding lots entirely separated by a public
right-of-way for a street or alley. See also Adjoin or Adjoining.
ACCESSORY: Additional, something extra or complementary, or subordinate to.
ACCESS DRIVE: A public or private drive, other than a driveway, providing vehicular access to and
between parking areas for more than two (2) parking spaces within a Land Development; or any drive
servicing three (3) or more units of occupancy on a single Lot.
ACT 247: Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.O. 805, No. 247, as
amended and reenacted, also called the “MPC” or “Municipalities Planning Code.
ADAPTIVE REUSE: The development of a new use for an older structure or building or for a structure or
building originally designed for a special or specific purpose.
ADJACENT: Two (2) or more abutting or adjoining lots or two (2) or more lots separated only by a
public right-of-way for a street or alley or another lot.
ADJOIN or ADJOINING: See also ABUT or ABUTTING.
AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC (ADT): Computed by application of a day of the week by month factor to
an average twenty-four (24) hour traffic count. Such information is available in the latest volume of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT) Traffic Data Collection and Factor Development
Report.
APPLICANT: A landowner and/or developer, as hereinafter defined, including his heirs, successors and
assigns, who filed an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT: Every application, whether preliminary or final, required to be
filed and approved prior to start of construction or development, including, but not limited to, an
application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or plan, or for the approval of a
development plan. This shall include adaptive reuse, replacement, infill, and redevelopment.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Activities, facilities, designs, measures or procedures
used to manage stormwater impacts from Regulated Activities, to meet State Water Quality
Requirements, to promote groundwater recharge and to otherwise meet the purposes of this Ordinance.
Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one (1) of two (2) broad categories or measures: "nonstructural"
or "structural". "Non-structural" BMPs are measures referred to as operational and/or
behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff
whereas "structural" BMPs are measures that consist of a physical device or practice that is installed to
capture and treat stormwater runoff. "Structural" BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of
practices and devices, from large-scale wet ponds and constructed wetlands, to small-scale underground
treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips, low impact design, bioretention, wet ponds,
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 12, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 2)
PART – 2-3
Language and Definitions
permeable paving, grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and
manufactured devices. "Structural" stormwater BMPs are permanent appurtenances to the project site.
BLOCK: Land surrounded on all sides by streets (measured at the right-of-way) or other transportation or
utility rights-of-way, or by physical barriers such as bodies of water or public open spaces.
BOROUGH: Borough of Highspire, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania
BOROUGH COUNCIL: The Highspire Borough Council, also may be referenced as the Borough
Council of the Borough of Highspire. See also governing body.
BOROUGH ENGINEER: See also municipal engineer.
BOROUGH SOLICITOR: See also municipal solicitor.
BUFFER: An open area of land located between two (2) uses, that is intended to mitigate negative
impacts, such as visual and noise, of the more intense use on the less intense/dense use and/or zoning
district on the less intense/dense use and/or zoning district.
BUFFER YARD: An open area of land located between two (2) uses, that is intended to mitigate negative
impacts, such as visual and noise, of the more intense/intense/dense use and/or zoning district on the less
intense/dense use and/or zoning district, whose dimensions normally exceed, but may include where
specified, the required building setback or yard requirements, and which is generally planted and may
include required screening, and within which no building, structure, or otherwise shall be permitted
except those used as part of required screening, or other features as provided in this Chapter. .
BUILDING: Any enclosed or open structure, other than a boundary wall or fence, occupying more than
four (4) square feet in area and/or having a roof supported by columns or walls, intended for the shelter,
housing or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods or materials of any kind.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY: A detached, subordinate building or structure, the use of which is
customarily incidental and subordinate to that of the principal building or structure or otherwise principal
use of the lot, which is located on the same lot as that occupied by the principal building or structure or
otherwise principal use of the lot.
BUILDING LINE: A line parallel to the front, side, and/or rear lot line touching that part of the structure
closest to said lot line.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building or structure that is enclosed within exterior walls or firewalls, and
is built, erected and framed of component structural parts. The principal building is also designed for
housing, shelter, enclosure and support of individuals, animals or property of any kind, and is a main
structure on a given lot.
CAPACITY: The maximum number of vehicles that can be expected to pass over a given section of
roadway or on a specific lane.
CARTWAY: The portion of a street right-of-way, paved or unpaved, customarily used by motorized and
non-motorized vehicles in the regular course of travel over the street, but not including unimproved
shoulders, and curbs, sidewalks or swales.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 12, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 2)
PART – 2-4
Language and Definitions
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE: An area of unobstructed vision at street intersections defined by lines of
sight between points at a given distance from the intersection of the street centerlines.
COMMON OPEN SPACE: A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water, or a combination of land and
the water, within the development site, designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of the
development, not including Streets, off-Street parking areas, and areas set aside for public facilities.
COMMONWEALTH: Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
COMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY; A utility operated by a municipality or a company, regulated by the
Public Utility Commission (PUC), which supplies potable, domestic water for use by more than one (1)
household, business or institution.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The official public document prepared in accordance with the MPC,
consisting of maps, charts and textual material that constitutes decisions about the physical and social
development of the Borough of Highspire, as amended from time to time.
CONDOMINIUM: A form of ownership of real property, as defined in the Pennsylvania Uniform
Condominium Act of 1980, which includes a multiple unit land development in which there is a system of
separate ownership of individual units of occupancy and undivided interest of land and common facilities.
CONTIGUOUS: Next to, abutting, or touching and having a boundary, or portion thereof, that is
coterminous. To physically touch or border upon, or to share a common property line, but not overlap.
COUNTY: Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
DEDICATION: The deliberate appropriation of land by its owner for general public use.
DEED: A written instrument whereby an estate in real property is conveyed.
DENSITY, GROSS: The number of dwelling units or units of occupancy per gross lot Area acre (i.e., the
total area within the deeded property lines without exception).
DENSITY, NET: The number of dwelling units or units of occupancy per net lot area acre (i.e. the total
area within the deeded property lines exclusive of existing street rights-of-way).
DETENTION BASIN: An impoundment structure designed to manage stormwater runoff by temporarily
storing the runoff and releasing it at a predetermined rate. .
DEVELOPER: Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with the permission of such
landowner, including a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation as well
as an individual, for whom development plans are being or have been made.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN: The provisions for development, including, a subdivision plat or plan and/or a
land development plat or plan, all covenants and restrictions relating to use, location and bulk of buildings
and other structures, intensity of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities,
common open apace and public facilities. The phrase “provisions of the development plan” when used in
this Chapter shall mean the written and graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT: A right granted by a landowner to a grantee, allowing the use of private land
for stormwater management, drainage, or conveyance purposes.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 12, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 2)
PART – 2-5
Language and Definitions
DRIPLINE: A line marking the outer edges of the branches of the tree.
DRIVEWAY: A private drive, other than an access drive, providing vehicular access between a street or
access drive and a parking area for not more than two (2 residential units of occupancy.
EASEMENT: A strip of land granted for limited use of property by the landowner for a public or quasipublic
or private purpose, and within which the owner of the property shall not have the right to make use
of the land in a manner that violates the right of the grantee.
ELEVATION: The vertical alignment of a surface, as it exists or as it is made by cut and/or fill.
ENGINEER: A qualified, professional engineer licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
ENVIRONMENTAL COVENANT: A servitude arising under an environmental response project which
imposes activity and use limitation. (On December 18, 2007, Governor Ridge signed the Uniform
Environmental Covenants Act (UECA) into law as Act 68 of 2007. Section 6517(a)(l) of UECA requires
the use of Environmental Covenants whenever engineering controls or institutional controls are necessary
to demonstrate attainment of an Act 2 remediation standard for any cleanup conducted under any
applicable Pennsylvania environmental law. The covenant provides a tool to ensure that the conditions
allowing for a risk-based cleanup will continue in the future.)
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREA: An area not suitable for development that includes
floodplains, floodplain soils, steep slopes, wetlands, and riparian areas.
EXISTING WOODED AREA: A biological community dominated by trees and other woody plants
covering a land area of one-quarter (¼) acre or more. Existing wooded areas includes areas that have at
least twenty-five (25) trees per one-quarter (¼) acre with at least fifty (50) percent of those trees having a
two-(2) inch or greater caliper at four and one half (4.5) feet above the ground and larger.
FLOODPLAIN: (1) a relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream, or watercourse which is
subject to partial or complete inundation; (2) an area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of
runoff or surface waters from any surface.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than one (1) foot.
FLOOR ELEVATION: The elevation of the lowest level of a particular building, including the basement.
FOOTCANDLE: A unit of light intensity stated in lumens per square foot and measurable with an
illuminance meter or light meter.
FRONTAGE: The side of the lot abutting a street right-of-way (excluding alleys).
FULLY SHIELDED: A light constructed in such a manner that all light emitted by the fixture, either
directly from the lamp or a diffusing element, or indirectly by reflection or refraction from any part of the
luminaire, is projected below the horizontal.
FUTURE ACCESS STRIP: A right-of-way reserved for the future improvement of a street.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 12, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 2)
PART – 2-6
Language and Definitions
GEOLOGIST: A qualified professional geologist registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
GLARE: The sensation produced by lighting that causes an annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual
performance and visibility to the eye.
GOVERNING BODY: The council in cities and boroughs, the board of commissioners in townships of
the first class, the board of supervisors in townships of the second class, or any other similar body with
the final decision-making, budgeting and appointing authority of a general purpose unit of government.
See also Borough Council.
HISTORIC FEATURE: Any district, site, building structure, or object that meets one or more of the
following criteria:
1. Is listed or may be determined to be eligible to be listed on the National Register of
Historic Places either individually or as a contributing resource.
2. Is listed on any Dauphin County historic resources survey, in the most recent Highspire
Borough Comprehensive Plan, or on any officially adopted Borough or County inventory
of historic resources and is determined by a qualified historic preservation professional to
retain the historic characteristics that qualified it for said list.
3. Is determined by a qualified historic preservation professional to be historically or
architecturally significant.
HORIZON YEAR: The anticipated opening year of a development, assuming full buildout and
occupancy.
ILLUMINANCE: The quantity of light measured in footcandles or lux.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA): A surface that prevents the infiltration of water into
the ground. Impervious surfaces (or areas) shall include, but are not limited to: roofs, additional indoor
living spaces, patios, garages, storage sheds and similar structures, and any new streets and sidewalks.
Decks, parking areas, and driveway areas are not counted as impervious areas if they do not prevent
infiltration. Any surface area proposed to initially be gravel or crushed stone shall be assumed to be
impervious, unless designed as an infiltration BMP. This term shall also include impervious surface.
IMPROVEMENT: Physical changes to the land, including installations and changes required to render
land suitable for the use intended, including, but not limited to, grading, paving, buildings, streets, curbs,
gutters, streetlights and signs, water mains, hydrants, sanitary sewer mains, including laterals to the street
right-of-way lines, storm drainage lines, stormwater management facilities, sidewalks, walkways,
recreational facilities, open space improvements, shade trees, landscaping, buffering, and screening, and
all other additions to the tract which are required by ordinance or regulation, or are deemed necessary to
result in a complete subdivision or land development in the fullest sense of the term.
IMPROVEMENT, PUBLIC: Improvements for which the Borough, Borough Authority, or its designee
may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may effect an
Improvement for which Borough, Borough Authority, or its designee responsibility is established.
INDIGENOUS SPECIES: Plants which have not been introduced by man and thrive in an area where it
is considered native.
INFILL: Development of land within the Borough accessible to infrastructure that is generally
surrounded by development and has been bypassed, remained vacant, and/or is underused.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 12, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 2)
PART – 2-7
Language and Definitions
INFLUENCE AREA: An area that contains eighty (80) percent or more of the trips that will be attracted
to a development site.
INVASIVE SPECIES: Plants which grow quickly and aggressively, spreading, and displacing other
plants. Invasives typically are introduced into a region far from their native habitat.
LAND DEVELOPMENT: The development of property as specified below:
1. The improvement of one (1) lot or two (2) or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of
land for any purpose involving:
a. A group of two (2) or more residential or non-residential buildings, whether
proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single non-residential building on a lot or
lots, regardless of the number of occupants or tenure.
b. The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively,
between or among two (2) or more existing or prospective occupants by means of,
or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
2. Subdivision of land.
3. “Land Development” shall not include:
a. The conversion of any existing single family dwelling into not more than three (3)
residential units, unless such units are intended to be a condominium.
b. The addition of an accessory building(s) on a lot or lots subordinate to an existing
principal building.
c. The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines of an
enterprise that would be considered an amusement park. For purposes of this sub
clause, an amusement park is defined as a tract or area used principally as a
location for permanent amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall not
apply to newly acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial plans for the
expanded area have been approved.
LANDOWNER: The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including the holder of an option or
contract to purchase, whether or not such option or contract is subject to any condition, a lessee, if he is
authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having a proprietary
interest in land.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT: A qualified professional landscape architect registered by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
LANDSCAPING: Acting with the purpose of meeting specific criteria regarding uses of outside or
exterior space, including ground cover, screening, buffering, and shade trees.
LEVEL OF SERVICE: A measure of the effect of traffic on the capacity of a road.
LIGHT TRESPASS: Light emitted by a lighting installation which extends beyond the boundaries of the
property on which the installation is sited.
LIGHTING:
1. Diffused: That form of lighting wherein the light passes from the source through a
translucent cover or shade.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 12, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 2)
PART – 2-8
Language and Definitions
2. Direct or Flood: That form of lighting wherein the source is visible and the light is
distributed directly from it to the object to be illuminated.
3. Indirect: That form of lighting wherein the light source is entirely hidden, the light being
projected to a suitable reflector from which it is reflected to the object to be illuminated.
LOT: A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or otherwise as permitted by law and
to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
LOT, CORNER: A lot at the junction of and abutting on two (2) or more intersecting streets (excluding
alleys) or at the point of abrupt change of a single street, where the interior angle is less than one hundred
thirty-five (135) degrees or the radius of the street line is less than ten (10) feet. A corner lot shall have
two (2) front lot lines and one (1) side lot line, and one (1) rear lot line. The rear lot line for a corner lot
shall coincide with the lot line abutting any alley, otherwise it shall be the lot line opposite the lot line
along the street of address.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE or THROUGH LOT: An interior lot that abuts two (2) or more parallel or
non-intersecting streets (excluding alleys) generally at the front and rear lot lines.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot whose side lot lines do not abut upon any street (excluding alleys); a lot other
than a corner lot. Lots abutting and bounded by one street, two (2) alleys, and one other lot shall be
considered interior lots.
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE: An interior through or double frontage lot that is not accessible from one
of the parallel or non-intersecting streets upon which it abuts and fronts.
LOT ACCESS: A way or means of approach to provide vehicular access to a property.
LOT AREA. The area contained within the property lines of the individual parcel of land, excluding
space within the street right-of-way. The lot area includes the area of any utility easement or stormwater
management facility.
LOT COVERAGE: That portion or percentage of the lot area covered by impervious materials.
LOT FRONTAGE: That portion of a lot abutting on the street right-of-way (excluding alleys) and
regarded as the front of the lot.
LOT LINE: A property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate ownership, except that where
any portion of the lot extends into the abutting street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed the ultimate
right-of-way line.
LOT LINE MARKER: A metal plate, pin, permanent stone or concrete monument used to identify lot
line intersections.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the plan of which was recorded, or a parcel of
land, the deed of which was recorded in the office of the Dauphin County Recorder of Deeds prior to the
adoption of this Chapter.
LUMINANCE: The physical and measurable quantity of light that corresponds to the brightness of a
surface (e.g., a lamp, luminaire, reflecting material) in a specific area and measurable with a luminance
meter or light meter.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 12, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 2)
PART – 2-9
Language and Definitions
LUX: A unit of light intensity stated in lumens per square meter. There is approximately ten point seven
(10.7) Lux per footcandle.
MODIFICATION: A process for alleviating specific requirements imposed by this Chapter, as described
in Part 3.
MONUMENT: A concrete or stone monument used to identify street line intersections.
MULTIMODAL: Accommodating various modes of power assisted surface transportation including but
not limited to bicycles, non-motorized scooters, etc.
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER: A qualified, professional engineer licensed to practice in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the Borough Engineer. See also borough engineer.
MUNICIPAL SOLICITOR: The licensed attorney designated by the Highspire Borough Council to
furnish legal assistance for the administration of this Chapter. See also borough solicitor.
NATIVE PLANT: A plant which grew in a defined region prior to European settlement. Indigenous
species and naturalized non-native plants may be included as a native plant if it has been brought into the
region and has become established into the wild and is not considered invasive or displaces native plants.
Naturally occurring hybrids and cultivars (cultivated varieties) of native genetic parent species which may
or may not have been present prior to European settlement are considered native plants.
NEW DEVELOPMENT: A project involving the construction, reconstruction, redevelopment, infill,
replacement, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure, or any use or
extension of land. New developments have the potential of increasing the requirements for capital and
public improvements, requiring either approval of a plan pursuant to this Chapter, the issuance of a
building permit, or connection to the public water or sanitary sewer system.
NON-NATIVE / INTRODUCED PLANT: Any plant species that has been introduced by humans and
now grows independently of cultivation. A subset of non-native / introduced species are the invasive
species.
NON-SITE TRAFFIC: Vehicle trips passing within the study area as defined in the traffic impact study
that do not enter or exit the site and are generally the result of through traffic and traffic generated by
other developments.
OFF-SITE: Any premises not located within the area of the property to be subdivided or developed,
whether or not in the common ownership of the Applicant for Subdivision or Land Development
approval.
OFFICIAL MAP: A map adopted by ordinance pursuant to Article IV of the MPC and recorded in the
office of the Dauphin County Recorder of Deeds.
PARCEL: See Lot.
PEAK HOUR: The hour during which the heaviest volume of traffic occurs on a road.
PEDESTRIAN WAY: A right-of-way, publicly or privately owned, intended for human movement by
walking.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 12, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 2)
PART – 2-10
Language and Definitions
PENNSYLVANIA MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE (MPC): Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.O. 805, No. 247, as amended and reenacted. This act enables
municipalities to Plan for, and regulate community development with Subdivision and Land Development
ordinances. The code also contains guidelines and standards for subdivision and land development
ordinance content in Article V. For the purpose of this Chapter, the Code may be referred to as “Act 247”
and is intended to include the current code and any further amendments ‘thereto.
PERVIOUS AREA (PERVIOUS SURFACE): Any area not defined as impervious. This term shall also
include pervious material.
PHASES: As defined under the MPC, Article V, as stages or sections of development.
PLAN: A drawing, together with supplementary data, that describes a subdivision or land development.
1. AS-BUILT PLAN: Engineering documents drawn to scale showing the constructed
dimensions and materials of a structure or other land improvement. An as-built drawing
differs from design drawings and construction drawings, which are design-oriented
documents prepared prior to construction rather than a depiction of what has been
constructed.
2. FINAL PLAN: A complete and exact subdivision and/or land development plan,
including all supplementary data, designed in accordance with the requirements of
Sections 405 and 503.
3. LOT ADD-ON PLAN: A complete and exact subdivision plan, the sole purpose of
which is to increase the lot area of an existing lot or tract, designed in accordance with
the requirements of Sections 407 and 504.
4. LOT CONSOLIDATION PLAN: A plan for the consolidation of two (2) or more
existing lots or tracts to create fewer lots or tract with revised lot lines, designed in
accordance with the requirements of Sections 407 and 504.
5. MINOR PLAN: A final plan which has an expedited process when designed in
accordance with the requirements of Sections 408 and 505
6. MODIFIED FINAL PLAN: A final plan modified to reflect a change to the site or its
surroundings that occurs after the preliminary plan approval as per Section 405.A.3.
7. PRELIMINARY PLAN: A subdivision and/or land development plan which is designed
in accordance with the requirements of Sections 404 and 502, and is prepared for
consideration prior to submission of a final plan.
8. PRELIMINARY/FINAL PLAN: A final plan which includes both preliminary and final
plan requirements and is designed in accordance with Section 406 and 503.
9. RECORD PLAN: A final plan that contains the original endorsement of the Borough,
which is recorded with the Dauphin County Recorder of Deeds.
10. REVISED SUBDIVISION AND/OR LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN: Any revised
plan due to survey corrections prepared in accordance with the requirements of Sections
407 and 504.
11. SKETCH PLAN: An informal plan, not necessarily to exact scale, indicating salient
existing features of a tract and its surroundings, with the general layout of proposal
prepared in accordance with the requirements of Sections 403 and 501.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The Highspire Borough Planning Commission.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 12, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 2)
PART – 2-11
Language and Definitions
PLANNING COMMISSION, COUNTY: The Dauphin County Planning Commission.
PLAT: The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether preliminary or final. For the
purpose of this Chapter, the terms “plat” and “plan” have the same meaning.
PUBLIC HEARING: A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice, intended to inform and obtain
public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this Chapter and/or theMPC.
PUBLIC MEETING: A forum held pursuant to notice under the act of July 3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84),
known as the ‘Sunshine Act”.
PUBLIC NOTICE: A notice published once each week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Borough. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the
particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be more than
thirty (30) days and the second publication shall not be less than seven (7) days from the date of the
hearing.
REDEVELOPMENT: Public and/or private investment made to re-create the fabric of an area or
neighborhood by renovating previously developed land. Replacing, remodeling, or reusing existing
buildings and structures accommodating new development within the context of existing streets.
REPLACEMENT: Remodeling or reusing an existing building or structure for new development.
RETENTION BASIN: A reservoir designed to retain stormwater runoff with its primary release of water
being through the infiltration of said water into the ground.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription or
condemnation and intended to be occupied or occupied by a road, street, crosswalk, railroad, electric
transmission lines, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary, storm sewer, and other similar uses, whether
public or private.
RUNOFF: Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
SCREENING: The provision of a barrier to visibility, air borne particles, glare and noise between
adjacent properties, uses, and/or zoning districts composed of a mixture of landscaping, trees, berms,
shrubs, fences, walls and/or other similar type materials, that is intended to mitigate negative impacts,
such as visual and noise, of the more intense/dense use and/or zoning district on the less intense/dense use
and/or zoning district.
SETBACK: The required horizontal distance between a required setback line and an abutting lot line or
street right-of-way line, as applicable.
1. SETBACK, FRONT: The distance between the street right-of-way line and the required
front setback line. Corner lots shall have two (2) front setbacks.
2. SETBACK, REAR: The distance between the rear lot line and the required rear setback
line. Corner lots shall have one rear setback.
3. SETBACK, SIDE: The distance between the side lot line and the required side
setback line.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 12, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 2)
PART – 2-12
Language and Definitions
SETBACK LINE: The line within a property defining the required distance between a use, structure,
and/or building and the abutting right-of-way line, or otherwise, front, rear, and side lot lines that
establishes the area in which said use, structure, or building must be established, erected, and/or placed. In
the case of lot where a front and/or rear lot line does not coincide with a recorded right-of-way, the
building setback line shall be measured from the associated recorded right-of-way.
SEWAGE: A substance that contains the waste products or excrement or other discharge from the bodies
of human beings or animals and noxious or deleterious substances being harmful or inimical to the public
health, or to animal or aquatic life, or to the use of water for domestic water supply or for recreation. The
term includes any substance which constitutes pollution under The Clean Streams Law.
SEWAGE FACILITIES: A system of sewage collection, conveyance, treatment, and disposal which will
prevent the discharge of untreated or inadequately treated sewage or other waste into waters of this
Commonwealth or otherwise provide for the safe and sanitary treatment and disposal of sewage or other
waste as recognized by the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP).
1. PUBLIC SEWAGE SYSTEM: A publicly owned system of piping, tanks, or other
facilities serving two or more lots, which uses a method of sewage collection,
conveyance, treatment, and disposal other than renovation is a soil absorption area, or
retention in a retaining tank.
SHARED TRIPS: Vehicle trips entering and exiting the site that were using the facility on the adjacent
streets and therefore did not generate new trips on the road.
SIGHT DISTANCE: The length of road visible to the driver of a vehicle at any given point in the road
when viewing is unobstructed by traffic.
SIGNIFICANT TREE: Non-invasive trees with eighteen (18) inch minimum caliper measured five (5)
feet above grade located outside an existing wooded area.
SITE: The existing lot of record proposed for land development, including subdivision.
SLOPE: The face of an embankment or cut section; any ground whose surface makes an angle with the
plane of the horizon. Slopes are usually expressed in a percentage based upon vertical difference in feet
per one hundred (100) feet of horizontal distance.
STEEP SLOPE: Land with a fifteen (15) feet or greater change in elevation one hundred (100) feet or
less in horizontal distance or, in other terms, fifteen (15) percent or greater on the average. The following
formula is the acceptable method of determining average slope:
S = 0.0023 I x L
A
S = Average percent slope of site
I = Contour interval in feet
L = Sum of the length of contours in feet
A = Land area in areas of parcel being considered
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 12, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 2)
PART – 2-13
Language and Definitions
STORM SEWER: A system of pipes and/or open channels that convey intercepted runoff and
stormwater from other sources, but excludes domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER: Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting from precipitation, snow, or ice
melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES: Any structure, natural or man-made, that, due to its
condition, design, or construction; conveys, stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical
stormwater management facilities include, but are not limited to: detention basins, wet ponds, open
channels, storm sewers, pipes and infiltration facilities.
STREAM: A body of water flowing in a channel within a defined bed and banks.
STREET: A strip of land, including the entire right-of-way, publicly or privately owned, serving
primarily as a means of motorized and non-motorized vehicular and pedestrian travel, and furnishing
access to Abutting properties. This term shall include the terms avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
freeway, parkway, lane, alley, viaduct or any other way used for similar purposes. Streets shall conform
to one of the following categories:
1. ALLEY: A service road that is generally parallel to a primary local, collector, or arterial
street, and which is generally abuts and provides access to the rear of lots. Alleys are on
the same level as a local street, and are used in cases of narrow lot frontages. Alleys shall
be designed to discourage through traffic. Alleys may be designed as one-lane streets. For
purposes of this Chapter, alleys shall include the following:
Name
Bank Avenue or Alley
Bessemer Avenue or Alley
Cedar Avenue or Alley
Center Avenue or Alley
Charles Avenue or Alley
Cherry Avenue or Alley
Chestnut Avenue or Alley
Church Avenue or Alley
Concord Avenue or Alley
Eastern Avenue or Alley
George Avenue or Alley
Hancock Avenue or Alley
Hickory Avenue or Alley
Hill Avenue or Alley
Iron Avenue or Alley
Legion Avenue or Alley
Logan Avenue or Alley
Lusk Avenue or Alley
Maple Avenue or Alley
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 12, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 2)
PART – 2-14
Language and Definitions
Name
Martin Avenue or Alley
Mary Avenue or Alley
Moyer Avenue or Alley
Nora Avenue or Alley
Penn Avenue or Alley
Poplar Avenue or Alley
Rhoda Avenue or Alley
Steel Avenue or Alley
Stoner Avenue or Alley
Wetzel Avenue or Alley
Whiteside Avenue or Alley
Any other public street / alley with a less than or
equal to twenty (20) foot wide right-of-way.
2. ARTERIAL: An interregional road in the street hierarchy system that carries vehicle
traffic to and from the region as well as any through traffic. This street should be a
controlled access street (designed to the capacity analysis of the intersection (LOS) Level
of Service). For purposes of this Chapter, arterial streets shall include the following:
Name
2nd Street (SR 0230)
Eisenhower Boulevard
3. COLLECTOR: A street that provide connections with local and arterial streets. This
street may serve a traffic corridor connecting communities, neighborhoods, and other
business areas on an intra-County or Borough basis. For purposes of this Chapter,
collector streets shall include the following:
Name
Lumber Street
Rosedale Avenue
White House Lane
4. CUL-DE-SAC: A street with a single means of ingress and egress and having a
turnaround. The design of the turnaround may vary.
5. LOCAL: This classification provides direct access to adjacent land and includes
connections to individual residences and business properties, and to higher classes of
highway systems. For purposes of this Chapter, local streets shall include all roads and
streets not otherwise identified as arterial streets, collector streets, or alleys.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 12, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 2)
PART – 2-15
Language and Definitions
STREET LINE: The dividing line between the street and the lot, also known as right-of-way line.
STRUCTURE: Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or in land or water,
whether or not affixed to the land.
SUBDIVISION: The division or re-division of a single lot, tract or parcel of land by any means into two
(2) or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devises,
transfer of ownership, or building, or lot development.
SUBJECT TRACT: The site proposed for land development, including Subdivision.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED: Where, in the judgment of the Municipal Engineer, at least ninety
(90) percent (based on the cost of the required improvements for which financial security was posted) of
those improvements required as a condition for final approval have been completed in accordance with
the approved plan, so that the project will be able to be used, occupied or operated for its intended use.
SUPERELEVATION: The distance in height (elevation) between the inside and outside edge of a banked
cartway.
SURVEYOR: An qualified professional surveyor registered with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as
authorized to measure the boundaries of tracts of land, establish locations, and perform the requirements
of a survey.
SWALE: A low-lying stretch of land that gathers or carries surface water runoff. TIE BAR: The symbol
on a survey, plan, or plat shown as “Z” indicating common ownership of two (2) adjacent lots or tracts.
TOPOGRAPHY: The relief features or surface configurations of an area of land.
TRACT: The term “tract” is used interchangeably with the term “lot,” particularly in the context or
subdivision, where a “tract” is subdivided into several lots, parcels, units, plots, condominiums, tracts or
interests.
TREE LAWN AREA: A “grassy” or “planting” strip of land within a public right-of-way along the front
property line, located between a detached sidewalk and the curb (or edge of pavement if no curb) which
may include signage, shade/street trees, and curbs, gutters, or swales.
TREE PROTECTION ZONE: An area that is radial to the trunk of a tree in which no construction
activity shall occur. The tree protection zone shall be the distance from the trunk to the dripline (a line
marking the outer edges of the branches of the tree).
TRIP: A single or one-directional motorized and/or non-motorized vehicle movement.
UNIT OF OCCUPANCY: An allocation of space within a building or structure that is independent of
other such space and that constitutes a separate use. This shall include both fee simple ownership and
leaseholds.
WATERCOURSE: A channel or conveyance of surface water, such as a stream or creek, having defined
bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow. WATERSHED: Region
or area drained by a river, watercourse, or other surface water, whether natural or artificial. WETLANDS:
Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 12, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 2)
PART – 2-16
Language and Definitions
sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically
adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. (The
term includes but is not limited to wetland areas listed in the State Water Plan, the United States Forest
Service Wetlands Inventory of Pennsylvania, the Pennsylvania Coastal Zone Management Plan and a
wetland area designated by a river basin commission. This definition is used by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency [USEPA] and the United States Army Corps of Engineers
[USACOE].)
YARD: An unoccupied and unobstructed open space of land between the permitted structures and the
adjoining lot line.
YARD, FRONT: The yard area extending across the full width of the lot contained between the building
line of the principal building or structure and the front lot line or street line (excluding alleys), and the
principal structure, measured perpendicular to the building line of said structure at the closest point to the
front lot line. Corner lots shall have two (2) front yards. Corner lots shall have one rear yard, extending
from the applicable front yard to the side lot line as well as from the rear lot line to the side yard.
YARD, REAR: The yard area extending across the full width of the lot contained between the building
line of the principal structure and the rear lot line, which may include street lines created by alleys,
measured perpendicular to the building line of said structure at the closest point to the rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE: The yard area(s) extending from the front yard to the rear yard contained between the
building line of the principal structure and any side lot line(s), measured perpendicular to the building line
of said structure at the closest point to the nearest side lot line. Corner lots shall have one side yard.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 3)
PART – 3-1
Administration
PART 3 - ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 300 MODIFICATIONS
The Chapter requirements are minimum standards for the protection and promotion of the public health,
safety, and welfare. The regulations preserve public order and establish interactions among citizens,
developers, business owners, and officials in a way that prevents a conflict of rights. The regulations
ensure the uninterrupted enjoyment of rights by all of the citizens, developers, business owners, and
officials by guiding adaptive reuse, infill, replacement, redevelopment, and new development and growth
and to permit the Borough to minimize such problems as may presently exist or which may be foreseen.
Modifications should only be granted; to encourage flexibility and ingenuity in the layout and design of
subdivisions and land developments when meeting the intent and purpose of the Chapter, when literal
compliance would be unreasonable, cause undue hardship, or when an alternative standard is
demonstrated to provide equal or better results and if the modification would not be contrary to the public
interest.
A. Purpose.
1. The provisions of these regulations are intended as a minimum standard for the protection
of the public health, safety and general welfare. If the literal compliance with any
mandatory provision of these regulations is demonstrated by the applicant to be
unreasonable and to cause undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to
the particular property, and if the applicant demonstrates that an alternative proposal will
provide equal or better results, the Highspire Borough Council, after review and
recommendation by the Highspire Borough Planning Commission, may grant a
modification from such mandatory provision so that substantial justice may be done and
the public interest secured while permitting the reasonable utilization of the property.
However, the granting of a modification shall not have the effect of making null and void
the purpose and/or intent of this Chapter.
B. Procedure.
All requests for modifications shall be made in accordance with the following procedure:
1. Application Requirements.
a. All requests for modifications shall be made in writing and shall accompany and
be a part of the application for development for a subdivision or land development
plan. The request shall state in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or
hardship on which the request is based, or the alternative standard proposed to
provide equal or better results, the provision(s) of this Chapter which are requested
to be modified, and the minimum modification necessary. The request shall be
accompanied by a plan prepared at least to the minimum standards of a sketch plan
(see Section 501).
1) If a modification request is not submitted with an application for subdivision
or land development, then the processing procedures outlined in Section 402
shall apply.
b. Should a revision to a submitted plan require a modification that was not apparent
at the time of initial plan submission, the request for a Modification shall be
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 3)
PART – 3-2
Administration
submitted in accordance with Section 300.B.1 above, at the time of resubmission
of the plans.
2. Review by Highspire Borough Planning Commission .
At a scheduled public meeting, the Highspire Borough Planning Commission shall
review the modification request and provide comments to the Highspire Borough
Council.
3. Action by Highspire Borough Council.
At a scheduled public meeting, the Highspire Borough Council shall review the
comments submitted by the Highspire Borough Planning Commission, and the request to
determine if the literal compliance with any mandatory provision of the Chapter is
demonstrated by the applicant to exact undue hardship or to be unreasonable, or that an
alternative standard has been demonstrated to provide equal or better results, provided
that such modification will not be contrary to the public interest and that the purpose and
intent of this Chapter is observed. The applicant shall demonstrate that the alternative
proposal represents the minimum modification necessary. If the Highspire Borough
Council determines that the applicant has met his burden, it may grant a modification
from the literal compliance with the terms of this Chapter.
C. Display on Plans.
1. Where modifications have been requested and subsequently granted, all subdivision or
land development plans must display all granted modifications prior to their approval.
D. Authority to Impose Conditions.
1. In granting a modification, the Highspire Borough Council or Highspire Borough
Planning Commission, as applicable, may impose such conditions, as will, in its
judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards and requirements of this
Chapter.
E. Time Extension Modifications.
1. In instances where the applicant requires additional time to resolve outstanding
conditions of approval, a written request with the associated fee shall be submitted for
consideration of review for the last Highspire Borough Council meeting, as applicable,
prior to the deadline for plan recordation. The written request must include an
explanation necessary to justify the time extension.
F. Waiver of Preliminary Plan Modifications.
1. In instances where the applicant submits preliminary/final or final plan and is approved
for a waiver of preliminary plan processing, a written notification shall be provided to the
Dauphin County Planning Commission as part of their application so that the County
reviews the plan as a preliminary/final or final plan and creates recording papers.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 3)
PART – 3-3
Administration
SECTION 301 CHALLENGES AND APPEALS
A. Right to Appeal.
1. Any person aggrieved by a finding, decision, or recommendation of the Highspire
Borough Council or Highspire Borough Planning Commission with respect to the
approval or disapproval of a plan or request for modification may appeal as provided for
in the MPC and other relevant statues and rules.
B. Mediation Option.
1. As an alternative to an adjudicatory appeal proceeding, any party entitled to appeal a
decision of the Highspire Borough Council or Highspire Borough Planning Commission
may request the utilization of mediation as an aid in resolving the dispute. Participation in
mediation shall be wholly voluntary by the parties, and shall be conducted as prescribed
in the MPC.
SECTION 302 RECORDS
A. The Borough shall keep an accurate, public record of its findings, decisions and
recommendations relevant to all applications filed with it for review or approval.
SECTION 303 FEES
A. Review Fee.
1. Each subdivision or land development plan application shall be accompanied by the
required review fee as established and adopted by resolution by the Highspire Borough
Council. Fees shall be payable to the Borough at the time of application (unless otherwise
noted herein) and plan processing, approval, and recording shall not be completed until
all required fees are paid. There shall be no refund or credit of fees or a portion of any fee
should the applicant withdraw the plan during the review process of fail to receive plan
approval.
B. Professional Service Fees.
1. In addition to the required review fee, it is anticipated that additional expenses will be
incurred by the Borough in processing the preliminary and/or final plans which are
submitted or which may be required to be submitted under this Chapter, for engineering,
legal or other professional consultant expenses. If the fees are not sufficient to cover
these expenses incurred in the review of said plans, the Borough shall notify the person
submitting the plans for review of the additional expense and shall request payment of the
same. All payment requested by the Borough for engineering, legal or other professional
consultant expense shall be the actual cost of the services incurred by the Borough. These
services shall be billed at the normal established rate for engineering, legal, or other
professional consultant services provided to the Borough.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 3)
PART – 3-4
Administration
C. Professional Service Fee Disputes.
1. An applicant must notify the Borough within ten (10) days of the date billed if the fee is
disputed. Once notified of the dispute, the Borough cannot delay or disapprove an
application based on differences over fees. If, within twenty (20) days of the date of
billing the applicant and Borough cannot agree on the amount of expenses that are
reasonable and necessary, a procedure shall be followed whereby another engineer, legal,
or professional consultant is mutually appointed to establish the cost. The applicant must
immediately pay the entire amount determined by the mutually appointed engineer, legal,
or professional consultant.
When the applicant and Borough cannot agree upon appointment of an engineer, legal, or
professional consultant, either party can apply to the court of common pleas who will
appoint one. The court appointed engineer, legal, or professional consultant will
determine the amount of reasonable and necessary expenses. If that amount is equal to or
greater than the original amount billed, the fee of the court appointed engineer, legal, or
professional consultant shall be paid by the applicant. If the determined fee is less than
the amount billed by one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more, the fee of the court
appointed engineer, legal, or professional consultant shall be paid by the Borough;
differences less than one thousand dollars ($1,000) are to be shared equally by the
applicant and Borough.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 4)
PART 4-1
Plan Processing Procedures
PART 4 - PLAN PROCESSING PROCEDURES
SECTION 400 GENERAL
A. This Part sets forth the application requirements for obtaining approval of subdivision and land
developments. The form of the various plans referred to in this Part and information required to
be forwarded with such plans shall be as specified in Part 5 of this Chapter.
SECTION 401 COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING ORDINANCE AND APPLICABLE ZONING
DECISIONS
A. Whenever Chapter 27 of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire relating to
zoning provides that the use proposed by the applicant for subdivision or land development
approval shall constitute a use by special exception or conditional use, or when a variance from
the terms of the zoning ordinance is required to develop in accordance with the plan, the
applicant shall obtain such special exception, variance or conditional use approval from the
Highspire Borough Zoning Hearing Board or Borough Council, as applicable, prior to the
submission of the preliminary plan, or final plan as applicable. The plan shall be designed and
developed in accordance with any conditions which have been imposed upon the grant of such
special exception, variance or conditional use by the Zoning Hearing Board or Borough
Council, as applicable. The plan shall note the date of the hearing where approval was granted,
along with all conditions of approval, and all such specific related section references of the
zoning ordinance.
SECTION 402 APPLICATION AND PROCESSING REQUIREMENTS
A. All applicants and their related applications shall follow and comply with these application and
processing requirements (except sketch plans as provided hereafter).
1. Formal Application/Submission Deadlines.
a. All subdivision and/or land development applications shall be made by the
developer/applicant filing an application form, to be supplied by the Borough,
together with the appropriate plans, studies, reports, supporting data, and required
filing fee, with the Borough. Applications may be filed with the Borough on any
business day; however, the Highspire Borough Planning Commission may review
a plan at a regular meeting only if the plan was submitted at least twenty four (24)
days prior to that regular meeting and deemed acceptable by the Borough for filing
and initial consideration at the next regular Planning Commission which shall be
the official date of filing of the application.
2. Application Requirements. All plan applications shall include the following:
a. Ten (10) copies of the plan(s). All plans shall be either black on white or blue on
white paper prints and prepared in conformance with the provisions of Part 5 of
this Chapter.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 4)
PART 4-2
Plan Processing Procedures
b. Two (2) copies of all reports, notifications, and certifications which are required by
Parts 4, 5, and/or 7 of this Chapter.
c. Two (2) copies of the application form as provided in the Appendix.
d. Filing and review escrow fees in the amounts as specified on the fee schedule
adopted by resolution of the Borough Council and available at the Borough Office.
e. Documentation that the plans (including the required electronic media formatted
copy) and all applicable review and filing fees have been paid and properly filed
with the Dauphin County Planning Commission, Dauphin County Conservation
District, as well as any and all other approving agencies (municipal, school district,
county, state, and federal agencies, emergency management entities, water and
sewer authorities, utilities, etc.), when required.
3. Initial Application.
a. The Borough shall have seven (7) days from the date of submission of an
application to check the plans and documents to determine if on their face they are
in proper form and contain all information required by this Chapter. If defective,
the application shall be returned to the applicant with a statement explaining the
reason(s) of rejection, within twelve (12) days following the date of submission by
the applicant; otherwise, it shall be deemed accepted for filing and initial
consideration at the next regular Highspire Borough Planning Commission which
shall be the official date of filing of the application. The acceptance for filing shall
not, however, constitute a waiver of any deficiencies or irregularities in the content
and layout of the plan, reports, and/or other required information. Under this
Section, the applicant may appeal a decision by the Borough to the Borough
Council.
4. Amendments or Corrections to an Application.
a. The Borough shall have seven (7) days from the date of submission of an amended
or corrected application or plan to determine whether such amended or corrected
application results in a substantial amendment to the plan or if the application or
plan filed changed so as to be considered a new plan. If the Borough determines
that the amended or corrected application constitutes a substantial amendment, the
applicant shall be informed of the determination within twelve (12) days from the
date of the submission of the amended or corrected application and the Borough
shall further inform the applicant that the Borough shall consider the ninety (90)
day review procedure to have been restarted as of the date of the filing of the
substantial amendment. If the Borough determines that the amended or corrected
application constitutes a new plan, the Borough shall so inform the applicant that a
new application and new fees are required. Under this Section, the applicant may
appeal a decision by the Borough to the Borough Council.
5. Plan Review Process.
a. Review by the Borough Staff and Consultants
1) The Borough Zoning/Codes Officer and any Borough personnel as directed
by the Borough Council shall review the application documents to
determine if they are in compliance with this Chapter, Chapter 27 of the
Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire relating to zoning, the
most recent version of the Highspire Borough Comprehensive Plan, the
Borough's planning objectives, and accepted planning standards. These
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 4)
PART 4-3
Plan Processing Procedures
personnel shall provide comments and recommendations to the Borough and
the applicant, when directed by the Borough Council.
2) The Borough Engineer, and/or other legal and professional consultants
designated by the Borough Council shall review the application documents
to determine compliance with this Chapter, and any other applicable
Borough ordinances, plans, specifications, standards and good engineering,
planning, and legal practices. The Borough Engineer, and/or other legal and
professional consultants shall prepare a written report of his findings and
recommendations which shall be presented to the Borough and the
applicant, when directed by the Borough Council.
b. Review by the Dauphin County Planning Commission
1) After the applicant has submitted the plan (including the required electronic
media formatted copy) and supporting documentation along with paying all
applicable review and filing fees with the Dauphin County Planning
Commission, the County Planning Commission shall review the plan and
data and shall return a written review report to the Borough and the
applicant within thirty (30) days of its receipt of the same or forfeit its right
to review. The Borough Planning Commission shall not take action on the
application until the County review report is received or until the expiration
of thirty (30) days from the date the application was forwarded to the
County, whichever comes first.
c. Review by Other Borough/County Entities/Agencies
1) The following entities shall have the opportunity to review the plan
application documents (when applicable) and offer comments:
a) Fire company
b) Borough Authority (sewer)
c) Water company
d) Steelton/Highspire School District
e) Other municipalities when part of an Intermunicipal Agreement
f) Dauphin County Emergency Management Agency/
911Communications
g) Gas, electric, cable, phone utilities providers
h) Other service and utility providers
d. Highspire Borough Planning Commission Review Process.
1) The Planning Commission will review the application with the
applicant/developer and/or his agent review at the next regular meeting only
if the plan was submitted at least twenty four (24) days prior to that regular
meeting and deemed acceptable for filing. The meeting shall be the official
date of filing of the application. The Planning Commission will review the
application to determine if it meets the standards set forth in the Borough’s
ordinances, plans, standards, and specifications. The application shall then
be submitted by the Planning Commission, together with its analysis and
recommendations, including those of the Borough staff and Borough
Engineer and/or legal and other professional consultants, to the Borough
Council.
2) The Planning Commission shall recommend whether the plan should be
approved, approved with conditions, or disapproved. (Additionally, the
Planning Commission may table to make revision to the plan.) The Planning
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 4)
PART 4-4
Plan Processing Procedures
Commission shall notify the Borough Council of its official
recommendation in writing (excluding tabling the plan). If the plan is
recommended for disapproval, the Planning Commission shall specify in
writing the defects found in the application and describe the requirements
which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite the provisions of the
Chapter relied upon. All such applicable information shall be included in the
written notification.
a) When a plan is tabled by the Planning Commission for the applicant
to comply with the review comments generated by the Planning
Commission, Borough staff, Borough Engineer and/or legal and other
professional consultants, County Planning Commission, and any
other review entity(s), the applicant shall provide a written response
to all the comments and the revised plan to the Borough at least ten
(10) days prior to the next Planning Commission meeting at which
the plan is to be considered.
b) When a plan is recommended by the Borough Planning Commission
for action, the Borough shall provide the Planning Commission
meeting minutes or a written report recommending approval
(conditional or otherwise) or disapproval of the plan and the reasons
therefore; citing the provisions of the statute or ordinance relied upon,
to the applicant and/or agent.
e. Borough Council Review Process
1) Generally, following review and recommendation by the Borough Planning
Commission, the Borough Council will place the plan on its agenda for
review and action.
2) All applications for approval of a plan shall be acted upon by the Borough
Council at a regular scheduled meeting. The Borough Council shall render
its decision and communicate it to the applicant not later than ninety (90)
days following the date of the regular meeting of the Planning Commission
next following the date the application is filed, provided that should the said
next regular meeting occur more than thirty (30) days following the filing of
the application, the said ninety (90) day period shall be measured from the
thirtieth (30th) day following the day the application has been filed.
3) Notification of Borough Council Action. The decision of the Borough
Council shall be in writing and shall be communicated to the applicant
personally or mailed to him at his last known address not later than fifteen
(15) days following the decision.
a) When the application is not approved in terms as filed, the decision
shall specify the defects found in the application and describe the
requirements which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite the
provisions of the Chapter relied upon.
b) Failure of the Borough Council to render a decision and communicate
it to the applicant within the time and in the manner required herein,
unless a greater period of time has been authorized by the MPC, shall
be deemed an approval of the application in terms as presented,
unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time or
change in the prescribed manner or presentation of communication of
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 4)
PART 4-5
Plan Processing Procedures
the decision; in which case, failure to meet the extended time or
change in manner of presentation of communication shall have like
effect.
f. Compliance with the Borough Council Action.
1) If the Borough Council conditions its plan approval upon receipt of
additional information, changes and/or notifications, such data shall be
submitted and/or alterations noted on two (2) copies of the plan to be
submitted to the Borough for approval. Such data shall be submitted to the
Borough Council within ninety (90) days of their conditional approval,
unless the Borough Council grants a modification by extending the effective
time period.
g. Borough Council Approval and Certification.
1) The Borough Council will acknowledge the satisfactory compliance with all
conditions, if any, of the plan approval at a regularly scheduled public
meeting. After receipt of plan approval and compliance with all conditions
of approval, a plan shall be presented to the Borough for acknowledgement
through a formal approval certification statement on the plan as provided in
the Appendix. Two (2) copies (one for the Borough and one for the
applicant) of the plan shall be provided for the Borough Council to sign the
approval certificate.
h. Public Hearing.
1) The Borough Council and/or Borough Planning Commission may hold a
public hearing, pursuant to public notice, prior to recommendation, and/or
action on any plan.
SECTION 403 SKETCH PLAN AND PRE-APPLICATION MEETING
A. Historically, subdivision and land development plans have been submitted and processed in
steps, i.e. preliminary plan followed by final plan. Highspire Borough believes that certain plans
should be processed on an expedited basis without going through all of the traditional steps.
Highspire Borough places great value on the open exchange of ideas between the applicant and
Borough before the applicant invests considerable time and funds in the preparation and
submittal of the applicant’s subdivision and/or land development plan. The applicant is
encouraged, but not required, to initiate the subdivision and land development process by
initiating a meeting with the Borough and related staff, and completing the sketch plan process.
The sketch plan shall be prepared in accordance with Part 5 of this Chapter and is a permissive
and not a mandatory submission. The submission of the sketch plan would enable the Borough
to openly discuss the applicants’ plans and project and to make recommendations for the
applicant to consider in preparing the formal submission using such examples as Appendix G.
An applicant who elects to take advantage of the sketch plan process, will, at the applicant’s
option, have the right to proceed to a preliminary/final plan and forego the preliminary plan
phase/processing requirements. The sketch plan process is encouraged in all situations, but is
not mandatory and will not prevent the applicant from submitting a modification request
regarding preliminary plan processing requirements as part of its submission. The Borough has
prepared the following flow chart as a summary of the plan processing procedures. The flow
charts do not, nor shall be construed to, override or supersede the processing requirements set
forth in this Chapter but are provided as an additional aid to the applicant
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 4)
PART 4-6
Plan Processing Procedures
Sketch Plan
(Section 403)
Preliminary Plan
(Section 404)
Consolidation Plan /
Revised Subdivision Plan /
Lot Add On Plan
(Section 407)
Minor Plan
(Section 408)
Final Plan
[may be phased]
(Section 405)
Modified Final Plan
(Section 405.A.3.a)
Waiver / Modification
Of Plan Processing
Combined
Preliminary/Final Plan
(Section 406)
B. Submission, Meeting, and Consultant Review.
1. The applicant shall submit ten (10) copies of the sketch plan, along with any required
supplemental data, fees and an application form, to the Borough at least fifteen (15) days
prior to the next regularly scheduled Highspire Borough Planning Commission meeting.
Prior to the Borough Planning Commission meeting, the applicant should schedule a
review meeting with the Borough staff which shall include the Zoning/Codes Officer,
Borough Engineer, and may include other legal and professional consultants and/or
related Borough/County entity representatives, at the applicant’s sole cost and expense.
The applicant may request that the Borough planning, engineering, and/or legal
consultant(s) perform a written review of the sketch plan, at the applicant’s sole cost and
expense. In such case, the written review shall be provided to the applicant with copies to
Borough staff and the Highspire Borough Planning Commission.
C. Review by Highspire Borough Planning Commission.
1. The Highspire Borough Planning Commission shall review the sketch plan submission
and as applicable, consultant reviews and advise the applicant how the proposed
subdivision or land development may conform or fail to conform to the requirements and
objectives of this Chapter and other applicable plans and ordinances. The Highspire
Borough Planning Commission may then submit its written comments and
recommendations to the applicant. The applicant shall incorporate the comments or
concerns of the Planning Commission and staff and make every effort to address these
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 4)
PART 4-7
Plan Processing Procedures
items in subsequent plan submissions. Said comments shall not be deemed to be an
approval of any application or to vest any rights in the applicant.
D. Review by Highspire Borough Council.
1. The applicant may, but need not, request further review of the sketch plan submission by
the Highspire Borough Council at a regularly scheduled meeting. The Highspire Borough
Council may provide written comments to the applicant. Said comments shall not be
deemed to be an approval of any application or to vest any rights in the applicant.
E. Completion of the Sketch Plan Process
1. After completion of the sketch plan process, the applicant is allowed to do one of the
following:
a. Preliminary Plan submission: : Plan must be titled “Preliminary Plan” and must be
processed per Section 404 and 502 and then followed by the final plan submission
and must be titled “Final Plan” and processed per Section 405 and 503..
b. Lot Consolidation Plan / Revised Subdivision Plan / Lot Add-On Plan submission:
Plan must be titled “Final Plan – Lot Consolidated Plan”; “Final Plan - Revised
Subdivision Plan”; or “Final Plan - Lot Add-On Plan”; and must be processed per
Section 407 and 504.
c. Minor Plan submission: Plan must be titled “Final Plan – Minor Plan” and must be
processed per Section 408 and 505..
d. Combined Preliminary /Final Plan submission: Plan must be titled
Preliminary/Final. Plans must be processed per Sections 406 and 503.
SECTION 404 PRELIMINARY PLAN
A. Purpose:
1. The purpose of the preliminary plan is to require formal preliminary approval in order to,
vest the plan from changes in Borough ordinances, phase development, and provide
additional time to complete conditions of approval.
B. Plan Requirements:
1. Plan must be titled Preliminary Plan.
2. All preliminary plans shall be prepared in conformance with the provisions of Section
502 and any other applicable requirements of law.
C. Preliminary Plan Application.
1. With the exceptions noted in Section 406, 407, and 408 of this Chapter, a preliminary
plan is required for all applications.
D. Approval of a Preliminary Plan application.
1. Approval of a preliminary plan application shall constitute approval of the proposed
subdivision and/or land development as to the general character and intensity of
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 4)
PART 4-8
Plan Processing Procedures
development and the general design and arrangement of streets, lots, structures, and other
planned facilities, but shall not constitute final plan approval. This preliminary approval
binds the developer to the general scheme of the plan as approved. Approval of the
preliminary plan does not authorize the recording, sale, or transfer of lots.
E. The preliminary plan approval will be effective for a five (5) year period from the date of
approval of the preliminary plan and no subsequent change or amendment in the zoning,
subdivision, or other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied to affect adversely the right
of the applicant to commence and to complete any aspect of the approved plan in accordance
with the terms of such approval within five (5) years from such approval. The final plan for the
entire project must be made within five (5) years of the preliminary plan approval unless the
Borough Council grants a waiver by extending the effective time period of the approval. An
extension of time may be requested by the applicant in writing and approved by the Borough
Council in accordance with Section 508(4) of the MPC. Request for extension shall be
submitted to the Borough thirty (30) days prior to any prevailing expiration date. Extensions
may be granted for no more than three (3), one (1) year periods.
F. In the case of a preliminary plan calling for installation of improvements beyond the five (5)
year period, a schedule shall be filed by the applicant with the preliminary plan delineating all
proposed sections as well as deadlines within which applications for final plat approval of each
section are intended to be filed. Such schedule shall be updated annually by the applicant on or
before the anniversary of the preliminary plan approval, until final plan approval of the final
section has been granted and any modification in the aforesaid schedule shall be subject to
approval of the Borough Council in its discretion.
G. Each section in any residential subdivision or land development, except for the last section,
shall contain a minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the total number of dwelling units as
shown on the preliminary plan, unless a lesser percentage is approved by the Borough Council
in its discretion. Provided the applicant has not defaulted with regards to or violated any of the
conditions of the preliminary plan approval, including compliance with applicant’s aforesaid
schedule of submission of final plans for the various sections, then the aforesaid protection
afforded by substantially completing the improvements shown on the final plan within five (5)
years shall apply and for any section or sections, beyond the initial section, in which the
required improvements have not been substantially completed within said five (5) year period
the aforesaid protection shall apply for an additional term or terms of three (3) years from the
date of final plan approval for each section.
H. Failure of applicant to adhere to the aforesaid schedule of submission of the final plan for the
various sections shall subject any such section to any and all changes in this Chapter, zoning
and other governing ordinance enacted by the Borough Council subsequent to the date of the
initial preliminary plan submission.
I. Improvement Construction from Preliminary Plan.
1. In accordance with the option as set forth in Section 509 of the MPC authorizing an
applicant to complete construction of the subdivision/land development improvements
prior to approval and recording of a final plan and, hence, avoiding the requirements for
the deposit with the Borough of financial security to cover the costs of such
improvements an applicant electing to do so shall meet the following requirements;
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 4)
PART 4-9
Plan Processing Procedures
a. Requirements.
1) The applicant shall indicate in writing the intent to construct the
improvements prior to final plan approval to the Highspire Borough Council
as part of the preliminary plan application process.
2) Plans must also receive approval when applicable from all authorities
having jurisdiction including by way of example but not limited to,
Highway Occupancy Permit (HOP), Erosion and Sedimentation (E&S)
Control Approval, etc.
3) The applicant may, after receipt of acknowledgment from the Highspire
Borough Council of the satisfactory completion of all conditions of
preliminary plan approval, proceed to construct the improvements required
by this Chapter and shown on the approved preliminary plan.
4) The applicant shall complete and enter into the appropriate developer’s
agreement. The applicant shall indicate the timetable for the construction of
the improvements including a schedule and plan of the proposed phasing of
sections of the plan.
5) An as-built plan will be required to be recorded as the final plan after
constructing improvements from each phase of a preliminary plan.
2. Limitations.
Construction and completion of the improvements shall not constitute permission to sell
lots or occupy proposed buildings shown on the plan. Such permission shall occur
concurrently with, or after the recordation of the final plan.
SECTION 405 FINAL PLAN
A. General.
1. Final Plan Submission.
Applications for final plan approval can be submitted only after the following, when
required, have been completed:
a. The applicant has satisfied any conditions of preliminary approval which the
Highspire Borough Council’s preliminary plan approval has required to be
completed prior to the submission of a final plan.
b. When a preliminary plan is not required (See Sections 406, 407, and 408).
c. When a preliminary plan has been approved with conditions to be resolved during
the final plan review process and the applicant has not chosen to construct and
complete the subdivision/land development improvements pursuant to Section
404.I.
2. Final Plan Submitted in Phases:
a. The Final Plan may be submitted in phases, each phase covering a reasonable
portion of the entire proposed subdivision or land development as shown on the
approved preliminary plan; provided that each phase, except for the last, shall
contain a minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the total number of dwelling
units as depicted on the approved preliminary plan unless the Highspire Borough
Council specifically approves a lesser percentage for one or more phases.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 4)
PART 4-10
Plan Processing Procedures
3. Modified Final Plan:
a. The Highspire Borough Council may accept a final plan modified to reflect a
change to the site or its surroundings that occurs after the preliminary plan review.
The Highspire Borough Council shall determine whether a modified final plan will
be accepted or whether a new preliminary plan shall be submitted.
B. Purpose.
1. The purpose of the final plan is to record the subdivision and or land development
according to state law, insure formal approval by the Highspire Borough Council before
plans are recorded, and to provide sufficient information so that the Highspire Borough
Council can assure construction according to the requirements of this Chapter.
C. Plan Requirements:
1. Plan must be titled Final Plan.
2. All final plans shall be prepared in conformance with the provisions of Section 503 and
any other applicable requirements of law.
3. In addition to the application requirements of Section 503, final plans which require
access to a highway under the jurisdiction of the PA Department of Transportation
(PennDOT), shall include two (2) copies of the plans prepared to support the application
for a HOP.
D. Final Plan Applications
1. When a final plan is preceded by preliminary plan approval, the final plan and all
required supplemental data shall be submitted within twelve (12) months after approval
of the preliminary plan. An extension of time may be granted by the Borough Council
upon written request. Otherwise, the plan submitted shall be considered as a new
preliminary plan.
2. The final plan may be submitted in sections, each section covering a reasonable portion
of the entire proposed subdivision as shown on the approved preliminary plan; provided
that each section, except for the last section, shall contain a minimum of twenty-five (25)
percent of the total number of units of occupancy as depicted on the approved
preliminary plan.
3. The final plan shall incorporate all changes and modifications required by the Borough in
the preliminary plan, and shall conform to the approved preliminary plan.
a. The Borough may accept a final plan modified to reflect a change to the site or its
surroundings that occurs after the preliminary plan review. The Borough Council,
with a recommendation from the Borough Planning Commission, shall determine
whether a modified final plan will be accepted or whether a new preliminary plan
shall be submitted.
E. Final Plan Certification.
1. After the Borough Council's approval of the final plan and the required changes, if any,
are made, the applicant shall proceed to prepare two (2) sets of final plans, which shall be
transparent reproductions of the original plan with black line on stable plastic base film
(mylar or equal) and two (2) sets of paper copies of the approved version of the final
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 4)
PART 4-11
Plan Processing Procedures
plan. One (1) paper copy of the plan shall be kept in the Borough files and one (1) paper
copy of the plan shall be kept in the Dauphin County Planning Commission’s files.
2. Upon compliance with all conditions of plan approval to the satisfaction of the Borough
and compliance with Part 5 of this Chapter, two (2) transparent and two (2) paper copies
of the final plan shall be certified in the following manner:
a. Both sets of final plans shall be presented to the Highspire Borough Planning
Commission and the Borough Council for the signature of the respective Chairman
and President or their designees. Final plans will not be signed by the Borough
Council prior to certification by the Highspire Borough Planning Commission or if
submitted more than ninety (90) days from the Borough Council's final approval
action unless the Borough Council grants a modification by extending the effective
time period of the approval.
b. After obtaining the required Borough signatures, both sets of copies of the
approved version of the final plan shall be presented to the Dauphin County
Planning Commission for signature.
F. Final Plan Recordation.
1. Upon approval and certification of a final plan and payment of any and all outstanding
fees, the applicant shall record the plan in the office of the Dauphin County Recorder of
Deeds.
a. Recording Number Required:
1) A recording number and a complete set of plans with all signatures, stamps
and seals must be provided to the Borough before the:
a) Applicant proceeds with any sale of lots or the construction of any
improvement except as provided for in Section 404.I of this Chapter.
It should be noted that lots may be placed under agreement of sale
prior to plan recording but not conveyed.
b) Borough issues any permits.
b. Reporting to GIS:
1) A compact disc in CAD or GIS format of the approved final plan including
parcel boundaries, roads, water, sewer, utility, and building locations shall
be provided to Dauphin County at the time of plan recording.
2. Should the applicant fail to record the final plan within ninety (90) days of the Borough
Council's final plan approval, the Borough Council's action on the plan shall be null and
void unless the Borough Council grants a modification by extending the effective time
period of the approval.
G. Effect of Recording of Final Plan.
1. Recording the final plan, after approval of the Borough Council, shall have the effect of
an irrevocable offer to dedicate all streets and other areas designated for public use,
unless reserved by the landowner as provided in Part 5 of this Chapter. However, the
approval of the Borough Council shall not impose any duty upon the Commonwealth,
County, or Borough concerning acceptance, maintenance, or improvement of any such
dedicated areas or portion of same until the proper authorities of the Commonwealth,
County, or Borough actually accept same by ordinance or resolution, or by entry, use, or
improvement.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 4)
PART 4-12
Plan Processing Procedures
H. The landowner may place a notation on the final plan to the effect that there is no offer of
dedication to the public of certain designated areas, in which event the title to such area shall
remain with the owner, and neither the Commonwealth, County, Borough, nor any applicable
authorities shall assume any right to accept ownership of such land or right-of-way.
SECTION 406 PRELIMINARY/FINAL PLAN.
A. Purpose.
Historically, subdivision and land development plans have been submitted and processed in
steps, i.e. preliminary plan followed by final plan. Highspire Borough believes that certain
plans should be processed on an expedited basis without going through all of the traditional
steps. An applicant who elects to take advantage of the sketch plan process, will, at the
applicant’s option, have the right to proceed to a preliminary/final plan and forego the
preliminary plan phase/processing requirements.
B. Plan Requirements.
All preliminary/final plans shall be prepared in conformance with any other applicable
requirements of law. Only the plan sheets relating to the final plan are recorded. The entire set
of plans is not recorded. Plans shall only be permitted when all of the following criteria are
satisfied:
1. Plan must be titled Preliminary/Final Plan.
2. Plans must be prepared per Section 503.
C. Preliminary/Final Plan Certification and Recordation.
1. All preliminary/final plan applications shall comply with the procedures from Section
405 E. – H.
SECTION 407 LOT CONSOLIDATION PLAN / REVISED SUBDIVISION PLAN / LOT
ADD-ON PLAN
A. The following plans shall be processed as a single submission and handled as a final plan:
1. Lot Consolidation Plan:
a. The consolidation of two (2) or more existing tracts to create one (1) lot with
revised lot lines if it is in conformance with the criteria specified in Section 504.
2. Revised Subdivision Plan:
a. Any replatting of recorded plans due to survey corrections or revision due to
survey corrections of approved final plans, which have not yet been recorded can
be made if it is in conformance with the criteria specified in Section 504.
3. Lot Add-On Plan:
a. The proposal to alter the location of lot lines between existing lots of separate
ownership or under the same ownership with separate deeds for the sole purpose of
increasing lot size if it is in conformance with the criteria specified in Section 504.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 4)
PART 4-13
Plan Processing Procedures
B. Plan Criteria:
1. Plans shall only be permitted when all of the following criteria are satisfied:
a. The resultant lots meet all requirements of the applicable zoning district.
b. The resultant lots shall retain adequate access to accommodate potential
development in accordance with the current zoning district regulations.
c. Drainage easements or rights-of way are not altered.
d. Access to the affected parcels is not altered or modified.
e. Street alignments are not changed.
C. Plan Requirements:
1. Where the above conditions are satisfactorily proven to exist, a plan shall be prepared in
conformance with the provisions of Section 504 and any other applicable requirements of
law.
D. Lot Consolidation Plan / Revised Subdivision Plan / Lot Add-On Plan Certification and
Recordation.
1. All lot consolidation plan / revised subdivision plan / lot add-on plan applications shall
comply with the procedures from Section 405 E. – H.
2. Additionally, deeds related to such plans shall also comply with the following:
a. A copy of the deeds to be recorded for the subject tract or receiving and conveying
tracts shall be submitted prior to recording of the plan.
b. Recordation of such plan does not serve to join the receiving tract with the acreage
to be conveyed. To reflect the descriptions as provided on the recorded plan, deeds
must be recorded for the receiving and conveying tracts.
E. Future Development.
1. Any development of the lots created through this process must follow standard plan
processing procedures as specified in this Chapter.
SECTION 408 MINOR PLAN
A. Plan Purpose.
1. Subdivision of one lot into not more than two (2) lots, including the parent tract, either
initially or cumulatively from the effective date of this Chapter, for single family
residential detached development in any residential or the MN/C zoning district or,
2. Construction of an accessory residential dwelling unit on a subject tract when not
utilizing an existing structure; or
3. Renovation / conversion / expansion of an existing or former residential building with a
total building footprint, either initially or cumulatively from the effective date of this
Chapter for a mixed use land development of not more than:
a. two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet in the CBD zoning district; and
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 4)
PART 4-14
Plan Processing Procedures
b. five thousand (5,000) square feet in the MN/C zoning district.
B. Plan Criteria.
Plans shall only be permitted when all of the following criteria are satisfied:
1. The resultant lots are designed in accordance with the provisions of the applicable zoning
district.
2. All lots shall front on an existing public street, and street alignments are not changed.
3. All lots shall retain and/or provide for adequate vehicular access to accommodate
potential development in accordance which does not interfere with the normal movement
of traffic in accordance with the current zoning district regulations.
4. No new point discharge of runoff will result from the proposal.
C. Plan Requirements.
1. The applicant shall demonstrate by submission of existing contour and storm water
management report and a grading plan that post development peak stormwater flows
from the site do not exceed the pre development peak flows from the site and leave the
site in the same manner as in pre-development condition.
2. Where the above conditions are satisfactorily proven to exist, a plan shall be prepared in
conformance with the provisions of Section 505 and any other applicable requirements of
law.
D. Minor Plan Certification and Recordation.
1. All minor plan applications shall comply with the procedures from Section 405 E. – H.
2. Additionally, deeds related to such plans shall also comply with the following:
a. A copy of the deeds to be recorded for the subject tract or receiving and conveying
tracts shall be submitted prior to recording of the plan.
b. Recordation of such plan does not serve to join the receiving tract with the acreage
to be conveyed. To reflect the descriptions as provided on the recorded plan, deeds
must be recorded for the receiving and conveying tracts.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 5)
PART 5 - 1
Information to be Included on or with Plans
PART 5 - INFORMATION TO BE INCLUDED ON OR WITH PLANS
SECTION 500 GENERAL
All plans shall be prepared by a qualified professional engineer, surveyor, and/or a landscape architect
licensed and/or registered to practice in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as applicable. The plans
shall show, be accompanied by, and be prepared in accordance, with this Part and shall provide sufficient
design information to demonstrate conformance with the requirements of Part 8 of this Chapter.
SECTION 501 SKETCH PLAN
A. Drafting Standards.
1. Scale: The plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a standard scale of not less one inch
equals ten feet (1” = 10’) to not more one inch equals two hundred feet (1” = 200’).
2. Sheets: If the Plan is prepared in two (2) or more drawing sheets, a key map showing the
location of the sheets and a match line shall be placed on each sheet. If more than one (1)
sheet is necessary, each sheet shall be the same size and numbered to show the
relationship to the total number of sheets in the plan (e.g., Sheet 1 of 5).
3. Presentation: Plans shall be presented in a clear, legible, coherent, and organized
manner.
B. Plan Information.
1. Location and Identification.
a. Sketch plans shall be clearly marked with the following note, “Sketch Plan – Not
to be Recorded.”
b. The name and address of the owner(s) of the tract (or authorized agent), the
developer, and the firm that prepared the plan.
c. The file or project number assigned by the firm that prepared the plan, the plan
date, and the date(s) of all plan revisions.
d. A north arrow, a graphic scale and a written scale.
e. A location map, drawn to a scale of a minimum of one inch equals one thousand
feet (1”=1,000’) relating the subdivision and/or development to at least two (2)
intersections of street centerlines. The approximate distance to the intersection of
the centerlines of the nearest improved street intersection shall be identified.
f. If the tract of land is located within two hundred (200) feet of a Borough or zoning
district boundary line(s), the location of such boundary shall be shown and labeled
accordingly.
g. The source of title (including the deed, lot, and plan of record number) to the
subject tract.
h. The (tax) parcel identification number(s) for the subject tract.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 5)
PART 5 - 2
Information to be Included on or with Plans
2. Existing Features.
a. Existing contours. Dauphin County Geographic Information System (GIS)
topography may be accepted.
b. The following items when located within the subject tract:
1) The name and approximate location and approximate dimensions of existing
rights-of-way and/or easements relating to streets, cartways, access drives,
driveways, alleys, sidewalks, railroads, public utilities, stormwater
management facilities, telecommunications, electric, gas, and oil
transmission lines. The approximate location of buildings, environmental
and topographic features, including, but not limited to, floodplains,
wetlands, woodlands, habitats for threatened and endangered species,
historic features, cemetery or burial sites, archeological sites, or areas with
highly erosive soils.
c. When available, the following items when located within two hundred (200) feet
of the subject tract:
1) The name adjacent landowners; names and approximate location and
approximate dimensions of existing rights-of-way and/or easements relating
to streets, cartways, access drives, driveways, alleys, sidewalks, railroads,
public utilities, stormwater management facilities, telecommunications,
electric, gas, and oil transmission lines. The approximate location (and
general use) of buildings, parking areas, floodplains, and wetlands.
d. In the case of a plan for which the Subject Tract has an Environmental Covenant
executed pursuant to the Pennsylvania Uniform Environmental Covenants Act, Act
No. 68 of 2007, 27 Pa. C.S. § 6501-6517 (UECA), the plan shall include the
boundary limits of any contamination remaining on site. The, application shall
include a copy the Environmental Covenant agreement and any required
engineering and institutional controls.
e. If applicable, proposed protective covenants running with the land.
3. Proposed Features and Plan Information.
a. The total approximate acreage of the entire existing tract.
b. The zoning district and lot size and/or density, and other requirements of the
applicable zoning regulations.
c. The approximate layout of lots, with approximate dimensions.
d. The total number of lots, units of occupancy, density and proposed land use (if
multiple land uses are proposed, the location of each land use shall be indicated).
e. The approximate layout of streets and alleys including cartway and right-of-way
widths (Appendix G for reference).
f. The approximate location and configuration of proposed buildings, structures,
parking compounds, streets, access drives, driveways, alleys, sidewalks,
easements, and general stormwater facility locations.
g. Building setback lines.
h. A note on the plan indicating the types of sewer or water facilities to be provided.
i. A statement indicating the granting (or proposed to be requesting) of any applicable
prior zoning approvals, special exceptions, variances, conditional use, and all related
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 5)
PART 5 - 3
Information to be Included on or with Plans
conditions and dates of approvals, and if applicable all prior modifications or
alterations granted by the Borough Council to sections of this Chapter.
SECTION 502 PRELIMINARY PLAN
A. Drafting Standards.
1. Scale: The plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a standard scale of not less one inch
equals ten feet (1” = 10’) to not more one inch equals one hundred feet (1” = 100’).
2. Dimensions and Bearings: The subject tract boundary dimensions shall be in feet and
decimals; bearings shall be in degrees, minutes and seconds. The description shall read in
a clockwise direction.
3. Survey Closure: The survey shall not have an error of closure greater than one (1) foot in
ten thousand (10,000) feet.
4. A legend of symbols, lines and appropriate explanatory notes.
5. Sheets:
a. The sheet size shall be no smaller than eighteen by twenty two (18 x 22) inches
and no larger than twenty four by thirty six (24 x 36) inches.
b. If the plan is prepared in two (2) or more sheets, a key map showing the location of
the phases shall be placed on each sheet. If more than one (1) sheet is necessary,
each sheet shall be the same size and numbered to show the relationship to the total
number of sheets in the plan (e.g., Sheet 1 of 5).
6. Presentation: Plans shall be presented in a clear, legible, coherent and organized manner.
B. Plan Information.
1. Location and Identification.
a. Preliminary plans shall be clearly marked with the following label, “Preliminary
Plan.”
b. The proposed development project name.
c. The name, address, and telephone number of the owner(s) of the tract (or
authorized agent), the developer, and the firm that prepared the plan.
d. The file or project number assigned by the firm that prepared the plan, the plan
date, and the date(s) of all plan revisions.
e. A north arrow, a graphic scale and a written scale.
f. A location map, drawn to a scale of a minimum of one inch equals one thousand
feet (l”=1,000’) relating the subdivision and/or land development to at least two (2)
intersections of street centerlines. The approximate distance to the intersection of
the centerlines of the nearest improved street intersection shall be identified.
g. If the tract of land is located within two hundred (200) feet of a Borough or zoning
district boundary line(s), the location of such boundary shall be shown and labeled
accordingly.
h. The entire existing tract boundary with bearings and distances described to the
accuracy requirements of this Chapter.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 5)
PART 5 - 4
Information to be Included on or with Plans
i. The source of title (including the deed, lot and plan of record number) to the
subject tract.
j. The (tax) parcel identification number(s) for the subject tract.
k. Utility listing with addresses and telephone numbers, and PA one-call number.
l. In the case of a plan for which the Subject Tract has an Environmental Covenant
executed pursuant to the Pennsylvania Uniform Environmental Covenants Act, Act
No. 68 of 2007, 27 Pa. C.S. § 6501-6517 (UECA), the plan shall include the
boundary limits of any contamination remaining on site. The, application shall
include a copy the Environmental Covenant agreement and any required
engineering and institutional controls.
m. If applicable, proposed protective covenants running with the land.
2. Existing Features.
a. The names of all immediately adjacent landowners and the names and plan book
record numbers of all previously recorded plans for adjacent projects.
b. The location of the benchmark and a notation indicating the datum used.
c. Existing contours at a minimum vertical interval of two (2) feet for land with slope
of fifteen (15) percent or less and at a minimum vertical interval of five (5) feet for
more steeply sloping land. Contours plotted from the United States Geodetic
Survey will not be accepted, and Dauphin County Geographic Information System
(GIS) Topography will not be accepted in areas where improvements are proposed
but should be used beginning fifty (50) feet outside the improvement boundary.
d. The following items when located within the subject tract:
1) The location, name and dimensions of existing rights-of-way and/or
easements relating to streets, cartways, access drives, driveways, alleys, and
sidewalks.
2) The location and size of the following features and related rights-of-way or
easements: buildings, public utilities, on-lot utilities, parking areas, and
stormwater management facilities.
3) The location of existing rights-of-way for telecommunications, electric, gas
and oil transmission lines, and railroads.
4) The size, capacity and condition of the existing stormwater management
system and any other facility that may be used to convey storm flows within
and from the subject tract.
5) The preliminary plan shall indicate any proposed disturbance, encroachment
or alteration to such features including; floodplains, wetlands, woodlands,
significant trees, habitats for threatened and endangered species, superfund
contaminations, historic features, cemetery or burial sites, archeological
sites, and areas with highly erosive soils.
e. The following items when located within two hundred (200) feet of the subject
tract:
1) The location and name of existing rights-of-way or easements relating to
streets, cartways, access drives, driveways, alleys, and sidewalks.
2) As available, the location (and general use) of buildings, public utilities, onlot
utilities, parking areas, and stormwater management facilities including
the location and size of related easements.
3) The location of existing rights-of-way for telecommunications, electric, gas
and oil transmission lines, and railroads.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 5)
PART 5 - 5
Information to be Included on or with Plans
4) As available, the size, capacity, and condition of the existing stormwater
management system and any other facility that may be used to convey storm
flows from the subject tract.
5) As available, the location of such features including; floodplains, wetlands,
woodlands, significant trees, habitats for threatened and endangered species,
historic features, cemetery or burial sites, archeological sites, and areas with
highly erosive soils.
3. Proposed Features and Plan Information.
a. The total acreage of the entire existing tract.
b. Identification and disposition of existing buildings and historic features.
c. The location and configuration of proposed buildings, parking compounds, streets,
access drives, driveways, alleys, sidewalks, shade/street trees, landscaping and all
other significant facilities (Appendix G).
d. Building setback lines, with distances from the street right-of-way line.
e. Existing and proposed easements.
f. A typical street cross-section for each proposed street (including alley) and typical
cross-section for any existing street (including alley) that will be improved as part
of the application. Each cross-section shall include the entire right-of-way width.
g. A note on the plan indicating the types of sewer or water facilities to be provided.
h. A table indicating the existing zoning district and applicable requirements
(including minimums/maximums, etc.) for use, lot size, lot width, setbacks,
development density, building height, impervious coverage, access, parking, and
other applicable standards.
i. The street (including alley) centerline profile for each proposed street, including
corresponding centerline stationing, shown on the preliminary plan.
j. The layout of streets (including alleys), including cartway and right-of-way widths,
pavement types, and the proposed street names.
k. The location of sight triangle easements and safe stopping distance at all applicable
street, alley, access drive, and driveway intersections in accordance with the latest
edition of the PennDOT Design Manual.
l. The location and material of existing lot line markers along the perimeter of the
entire existing tract.
m. The layout of lots, with approximate dimensions.
n. The total number of lots, units of occupancy, net density, and proposed land use (if
multiple land uses are proposed, the location of each land use shall be indicated).
o. Where the proposed subdivision or land development is located partially or wholly
within an area prone to frequent flooding (either by impoundment or conveyance)
as indicated by the flood boundary and floodway map, profiles, and supporting
data, soil type or local historical record; the developer shall supply the location and
elevation of all proposed streets, alleys, sidewalks, access drives, driveways, fills,
utilities, buildings, stormwater management, and erosion control facilities.
p. The location of all tree masses/woodlands and/or large trees on the site, as well as
those to remain and those to be removed.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 5)
PART 5 - 6
Information to be Included on or with Plans
q. Stormwater management plans and data designed in accordance with the Chapter 9
of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire relating to grading /
stormwater management.
r. In the case for the phased installation of improvements:
1) A schedule shall be filed delineating all proposed sections as well as
deadlines within which applications for final plan approval of each section
are intended to be filed.
2) Each section in any subdivision or land development, except for the last
section, shall contain a minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the total
number of dwelling units unless the Highspire Borough Council specifically
approves a lesser percentage for one or more of the sections.
3) Sections of the development shall be sequenced in such a manner that each
section (together with the previously approved and completed section(s))
shall be physically built to be in full compliance with the Chapter and not be
dependent on the construction completed at future phases. Including, but not
limited to stormwater management facilities, streets, and utilities.
4) Except for staged construction of streets intended to be extended in
subsequent phases, all improvements for each section shall be installed in
their permanent configuration. The final wearing course shall be carried in
an improvement guarantee until it is finally installed and inspected.
5) It is not necessary for construction in one section to be completed for the
next section to be submitted.
6) All subsequent phased final plans shall be submitted within five (5) years of
the date of Highspire Borough Council action on the preliminary plan unless
otherwise agreed upon by the applicant and Borough. The developer shall
take the responsibility to provide the Highspire Borough Council with
reasonable notice of delays in the filing of final plans.
7) The applicant shall annually update the Highspire Borough Council
regarding the schedule on or before the anniversary date of the preliminary
plan approval.
4. Certificates, Notifications and Reports.
a. Certificate, signature and seal of the qualified professional land surveyor registered
to practice in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to the effect that the survey is
correct, and certificate, signature and seal of the qualified professional land
surveyor, engineer or landscape architect licensed and/or registered to practice in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania that prepared the plan that all other
information shown on the plan is accurate.
b. A statement on the plan indicating the granting of any applicable zoning approvals,
special exceptions, variances, conditional use, and all related conditions and dates of
approvals, and if applicable all prior modifications or alterations granted by the
Borough Council to sections of this Chapter.
c. Any improvement that encroaches upon an electric transmission line,
telecommunications line, gas pipeline, petroleum or petroleum products
transmission line, fiber optics, public sewer, public water, etc. located within the
tract, the application shall be accompanied by a letter from the owner or lease of
such right-of-way (or easement) stating any conditions on the use of the land and
the building setback and/or right-of-way (or easement) lines.
d. When connection to an existing water and/or sanitary sewer system is proposed,
written notification from the authority or certified public utility providing sanitary
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 5)
PART 5 - 7
Information to be Included on or with Plans
sewer and/or water service indicating that sufficient capacity to service the
proposed development has been reserved shall be provided (in accordance with
current authority or entity standards).
e. Where the subdivision or land development proposal will generate fifty (50) or
more additional trips to or from the site during the development’s anticipated peak
hour, or the Highspire Borough Council indicates a need for one, a traffic impact
study as required by Section 700 shall be submitted with the preliminary plan.
f. In the case of a plan which requires access to a highway under the jurisdiction of
PennDOT, the inclusion of the following plan note:
1) “A Highway Occupancy Permit is required pursuant to Section 420 of the
Act of June 1, 1945 (P.L. 1242, No. 428), known as the “State Highway
Law,” before driveway access to a State highway is permitted. Access to the
State highway shall only be as authorized by a Highway Occupancy Permit,
and the Highspire Borough Council’s approval of this plan in no way
implies that such permit can be acquired.”
g. Where the land included in the subject application has a floodplain or other natural
resource easement located within the tract, the application shall be accompanied by
a copy of the agreement from the party holding the easement stating any conditions
on the use of the land.
C. Construction from Preliminary Plan.
1. An appropriately executed Memorandum of Understanding (Appendix D).
2. Posting of all appropriately executed financial securities.
3. Written notices of approval by outside agencies, if applicable:
a. Notification from PennDOT that approval of the HOP application has been
submitted and/or granted if applicable.
b. Notification from Dauphin County Conservation District that an acceptable
Erosion and Sedimentation Control P1an/NPDES Plan has been submitted and
approved by that agency.
c. Notification from DEP that either approval of the Sewer Facility Plan Revision (or
Plan Revision Module for Land Development) or Supplement has been granted or
that such approval is not required.
SECTION 503 FINAL PLAN AND PRELIMINARY/FINAL PLAN
A. Drafting Standards.
1. Scale: The plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a standard scale of not less one inch
equals ten feet (1” = 10’) to not more one inch equals one hundred feet (1” = 100’).
2. Dimensions and Bearings: The subject tract boundary dimensions shall be in feet and
decimals; bearings shall be in degrees, minutes and seconds. The description shall read in
a clockwise direction.
3. Survey Closure: The survey shall not have an error of closure greater than one (1) foot in
ten thousand (10,000) feet.
4. A legend of symbols, lines and appropriate explanatory notes.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 5)
PART 5 - 8
Information to be Included on or with Plans
5. Sheets:
a. The sheet size shall be no smaller than eighteen by twenty two (18 x 22) inches
and no larger than twenty four by thirty six (24 x 36) inches.
b. If the plan is prepared in two (2) or more sheets, a key map showing the location of
the phases shall be placed on each sheet. If more than one (1) sheet is necessary,
each sheet shall be the same size and numbered to show the relationship to the total
number of sheets in the plan (e.g., Sheet 1 of 5).
6. Presentation: Plans shall be presented in a clear, legible, coherent and organized manner.
B. Plan Information.
1. Location and Identification.
a. Final plans shall be clearly marked with the following label, “Final Plan.”, and
preliminary/final plans shall be clearly marked with the following label,
“Preliminary/Final Plan” where applicable.
b. The proposed development project name.
c. The name, address, and telephone number of the owner(s) of the tract (or
authorized agent), the developer, and the firm that prepared the plan.
d. The file or project number assigned by the firm that prepared the plan, the plan
date, and the date(s) of all plan revisions.
e. A north arrow, a graphic scale and a written scale.
f. A location map, drawn to a scale of a minimum of one inch equals one thousand
feet (l”=1,000’) relating the subdivision and/or land development to at least two (2)
intersections of street centerlines. The approximate distance to the intersection of
the centerlines of the nearest improved street intersection shall be identified.
g. If the tract of land is located within two hundred (200) feet of a Borough or zoning
district boundary line(s), the location of such boundary shall be shown and labeled
accordingly.
h. The entire existing tract boundary with bearings and distances described to the
accuracy requirements of this Chapter.
i. The source of title (including the deed, lot and plan of record number) to the
subject tract.
j. The (tax) parcel identification number(s) for the subject tract.
k. Utility listing with addresses and telephone numbers, and PA one-call number.
l. In the case of a plan for which the Subject Tract has an Environmental Covenant
executed pursuant to the Pennsylvania Uniform Environmental Covenants Act, Act
No. 68 of 2007, 27 Pa. C.S. § 6501-6517 (UECA), the plan shall include the
boundary limits of any contamination remaining on site. The, application shall
include a copy the Environmental Covenant agreement and any required
engineering and institutional controls.
m. If applicable, proposed protective covenants running with the land.
2. Existing Features.
a. The names of all immediately adjacent landowners and the names and plan book
record numbers of all previously recorded plans for adjacent projects.
b. The location of the benchmark and a notation indicating the datum used.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 5)
PART 5 - 9
Information to be Included on or with Plans
c. Existing contours at a minimum vertical interval of two (2) feet for land with slope
of fifteen (15) percent or less and at a minimum vertical interval of five (5) feet for
more steeply sloping land. Contours plotted from the United States Geodetic
Survey will not be accepted, and Dauphin County Geographic Information System
(GIS) Topography will not be accepted in areas where improvements are proposed
but should be used beginning fifty (50) feet outside the improvement boundary.
d. The following items when located within the subject tract:
1) The location, name and dimensions of existing rights-of-way and/or
easements relating to streets, cartways, access drives, driveways, alleys, and
sidewalks.
2) The location and size of the following features and related rights-of-way or
easements: buildings, public utilities, on-lot utilities, parking areas, and
stormwater management facilities.
3) The location of existing rights-of-way for telecommunications, electric, gas
and oil transmission lines, and railroads.
4) The size, capacity and condition of the existing stormwater management
system and any other facility that may be used to convey storm flows within
and from the subject tract.
5) The plan shall indicate any proposed disturbance, encroachment or
alteration to such features including; floodplains, wetlands, woodlands,
significant trees, habitats for threatened and endangered species, superfund
contaminations, historic features, cemetery or burial sites, archeological
sites, and areas with highly erosive soils.
e. The following items when located within two hundred (200) feet of the subject
tract:
1) The location and name of existing rights-of-way or easements relating to
streets, cartways, access drives, driveways, alleys, and sidewalks.
2) As available, the location (and general use) of buildings, public utilities, onlot
utilities, parking areas, and stormwater management facilities including
the location and size of related easements.
3) The location of existing rights-of-way for telecommunications, electric, gas
and oil transmission lines, and railroads.
4) As available, the size, capacity, and condition of the existing stormwater
management system and any other facility that may be used to convey storm
flows from the subject tract.
5) As available, the location of such features including; floodplains, wetlands,
woodlands, significant trees, habitats for threatened and endangered species,
historic features, cemetery or burial sites, archeological sites, and areas with
highly erosive soils.
3. Proposed Features and Plan Information.
a. The total acreage of the entire existing tract.
b. Identification and disposition of existing buildings and historic features.
c. The location and configuration of proposed buildings, structures, parking
compounds, streets, access drives, driveways, alleys, sidewalks, shade/street trees,
landscaping, buffer yards, and all other significant facilities (Appendix G).
d. Building setback lines, with distances from the street right-of-way line.
e. Existing and proposed easements.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 5)
PART 5 - 10
Information to be Included on or with Plans
f. A typical street cross-section for each proposed street (including alley) and typical
cross-section for any existing street (including alley) that will be improved as part
of the application. Each cross-section shall include the entire right-of-way width.
g. A note on the plan indicating the types of sewer or water facilities to be provided.
h. A table indicating the existing zoning district and applicable requirements
(including minimums/maximums, etc.) for use, lot size, lot width, setbacks,
development density, building height, impervious coverage, access, parking, and
other applicable standards.
i. A complete description of the centerline and the right-of-way line for all new
streets and alleys. This description shall include distances and bearings with curve
segments comprised of radius, tangent, arc, and chord.
j. The location and material of all proposed and existing permanent monuments and
lot line markers, including a note that all proposed monuments and lot line markers
are set or indicating when and by whom they will be set.
k. Lot lines, with accurate bearings and distances, and lot areas for all parcels. Curve
segments shall be comprised of arc, chord, bearing and distance. Along existing
street and alley rights-of-way, the description may utilize the existing deed lines or
road centerlines; along all proposed street rights-of-way, the description shall be
prepared to the right-of-way lines.
l. The final vertical and horizontal alignment for each proposed street, alley, and
access drive. All profiles shall show at least the existing (natural) profile along the
centerline, proposed grade at the centerline, and the length of all proposed vertical
curves. This information may be provided on separate sheets and is not subject to
recording with the final plan.
m. The total number of lots, units of occupancy, net density, and proposed land use (if
multiple land uses are proposed, the location of each land use shall be indicated).
n. Where the proposed subdivision or land development is located partially or wholly
within an area prone to frequent flooding (either by impoundment or conveyance)
as indicated by the flood boundary and floodway map, profiles, and supporting
data, soil type or local historical record; the developer shall supply the location and
elevation of all proposed streets, alleys, sidewalks, access drives, driveways, fills,
utilities, buildings, stormwater management, and erosion control facilities.
o. The location of all tree masses/woodlands and/or large trees on the site, as well as
those to remain and those to be removed.
p. A grading plan, which shall include finished land contours and grades, directions
of water movement, type of soils, location of water bars or silt fences and ground
floor elevations. This information may be provided on separate sheets and is not
subject to recording with the final plan.
q. Stormwater management plans and data designed in accordance with Part 8 of this
Chapter and Chapter 9 of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire
relating to grading / stormwater management.
r. In the case of Land Development Plans, architectural elevations and other
architectural drawings shall be submitted for review by the Borough.
1) Building elevations and other architectural drawings containing the
following information shall be provided. Elevations and drawings shall be
illustrated to scale showing:
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 5)
PART 5 - 11
Information to be Included on or with Plans
a) Front, rear and side perspectives of all proposed buildings including
building’s architectural features, exterior building materials, colors
and/or finishes.
b) First floor elevations of the building, the height of the building in feet
and number of stories and the building’s relationship to the finished
grade immediately surrounding the building; and
c) Spot elevations designating the existing and proposed grading.
s. Identification of any lands to be dedicated or reserved for public, semi-public or
community use.
t. The final street names as approved by the Borough (and if applicable the Borough
Post Master and Dauphin County Emergency Management Agency/911).
u. In the case for the phased installation of Improvements:
1) A schedule shall be filed delineating all proposed sections as well as dates
within which applications for final plan approval of each section are
intended to be filed.
2) Each section in any subdivision or land development, except for the last
section, shall contain a minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the total
number of units unless the Highspire Borough Council specifically approves
a lesser percentage for one or more of the sections.
3) Sections of the development shall be sequenced in such a manner that each
section (together with the previously approved and completed section(s))
shall be physically built to be in full compliance with the ordinance and not
be dependent on the construction completed at future Phases. For example,
but not limited to, stormwater management facilities.
4) Except for staged construction of Streets intended to be extended in
subsequent Phases, all Improvements for each section shall be installed to
the extent where they provide their intended services. The final wearing
course shall be carried in an Improvement guarantee until it is finally
installed and inspected.
5) It is not necessary for construction in one section to be completed before the
next section to be submitted or constructed.
6) In the case of a preliminary plan calling for the installation of improvements
beyond the five-year period, a schedule shall be filed by the landowner with
the preliminary plan delineating all proposed sections as well as deadlines
within which applications for final plan approval of each section are
intended to be filed. Such schedule shall be updated annually by the
applicant on, or before, the anniversary of the preliminary plan approval
until final plan approval of the final section has been granted and any
modification in the aforesaid schedule shall be subject to approval of the
Highspire Borough Council in its discretion.
4. Certificates, Notifications and Reports.
a. Certificate, signature and seal of the qualified professional land surveyor registered
to practice in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to the effect that the survey is
correct, and certificate, signature and seal of the qualified professional land
surveyor, engineer or landscape architect licensed and/or registered to practice in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania that prepared the plan that all other
information shown on the plan is accurate.
b. A statement, duly acknowledged before an officer authorized to take
acknowledgment of deeds and signed by the landowner, to the effect that the
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 5)
PART 5 - 12
Information to be Included on or with Plans
subdivision or land development shown on the plan is the act and the deed of the
owner, that all those signing are all the owners of the property shown on the survey
and Plan, and that they desire the same to be recorded as such. This statement shall
be signed and dated on or after the last change or revision to said plan.
c. Certificate for approval by the Highspire Borough Council.
d. Certificate of review to be signed by the Highspire Borough Planning
Commission.
e. Certificate of review to be signed by the Dauphin County Planning Commission.
f. Certificate to accommodate the Dauphin County Recorder of Deeds information.
g. A statement on the plan indicating the granting of any applicable zoning approvals,
special exceptions, variances, conditional use, and all related conditions and dates of
approvals, and if applicable all prior modifications or alterations granted by the
Borough Council to sections of this Chapter.
h. Certificate of dedication of streets and other public property, if applicable.
i. A note to be placed on the plan indicating any area that is not to be offered for
dedication, if applicable.
j. In the case of a plan which requires access to a highway under the jurisdiction of
the PennDOT, the inclusion of the following plan note:
“A Highway Occupancy Permit is required pursuant to Section 420 of
the Act of June 1, 1945 (P.L. 1242, No. 428), known as the “State
Highway Law,” before driveway access to a State highway is permitted.
Access to the State highway shall only be as authorized by a Highway
Occupancy Permit, and the Highspire Borough Council’s approval of this
plan in no way implies that such permit can be acquired.”
k. Any improvement that encroaches upon an electric transmission line,
telecommunications line, gas pipeline, petroleum or petroleum products
transmission line, fiber optics, public sewer, public water, etc. located within the
tract, the application shall be accompanied by a letter from the owner or lease of
such right-of-way (or easement) stating any conditions on the use of the land and
the building setback and/or right-of-way (or easement) lines.
l. Where the land included in the subject application has a floodplain or other natural
resource easement located within the tract, the application shall be accompanied by
a copy of the agreement from the party holding the easement stating any conditions
on the use of the land.
m. When connection to an existing water and/or sanitary sewer system is proposed,
written notification from the authority or certified public utility providing sanitary
sewer and/or water service indicating that sufficient capacity to service the
proposed development has been reserved shall be provided (in accordance with
current authority or entity standards).
C. As Condition of Recording a Final Plan:
1. An appropriately executed Memorandum of Understanding (Appendix D and D- 1).
2. Posting of all appropriately executed Financial Securities (Section 602).
3. Written notices of approval by outside agencies, if applicable:
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 5)
PART 5 - 13
Information to be Included on or with Plans
a. Notification from PennDOT that approval of the HOP application has been
submitted and/or granted if applicable.
b. Notification from Dauphin County Conservation District that an acceptable
Erosion and Sedimentation Control P1an/NPDES Plan has been submitted and
approved by that agency:
c. Notification from DEP that either approval of the Sewer Facility Plan Revision (or
Plan Revision Module for Land Development) or Supplement has been granted or
that such approval is not required.
4. A controlling agreement when an application proposes to establish a street which is not
offered for dedication to the public use.
SECTION 504 LOT ADD-ON PLANS / LOT CONSOLIDATION PLANS / REVISED
SUBDIVISION PLANS
A. General.
Plans shall be prepared by a qualified professional land surveyor registered to practice in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and shall be subject to the requirements of this Section.
B. Drafting Standards.
1. Scale: The plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a standard scale of not less one inch
equals ten feet (1” = 10’) to not more one inch equals one hundred feet (1” = 100’).
2. Dimensions and Bearings: The subject tract boundary dimensions shall be in feet and
decimals; bearings shall be in degrees, minutes and seconds. The description shall read in
a clockwise direction.
3. Survey Closure: The survey shall not have an error of closure greater than one (1) foot in
ten thousand (10,000) feet.
4. A legend of symbols, lines and appropriate explanatory notes.
5. Sheets:
a. The sheet size shall be no smaller than eighteen by twenty two (18 x 22) inches
and no larger than twenty four by thirty six (24 x 36) inches.
6. Presentation: Plans shall be presented in a clear, legible, coherent and organized manner.
C. Plan Information.
The following information shall be provided on the sheet to be recorded:
1. Location and Identification.
a. Plans shall be clearly marked with the label indicating “Final Plan – Lot Add-On
Plan”, “Final Plan – Lot Consolidation Plan”, or “Final Plan – Revised Subdivision
Plan”, as applicable.
b. The proposed project name.
c. The names, address, and telephone number of the owner(s) of the tract(s) and all
adjacent landowners affected by the proposed conveyance.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 5)
PART 5 - 14
Information to be Included on or with Plans
d. The name, address, and telephone number of the firm that prepared the plan, the
file or project number assigned by the firm, the plan date, and the date(s) of all
plan revisions.
e. A north arrow, a graphic scale and a written scale.
f. A location map, drawn to a scale of a minimum of one inch equals one thousand
feet (l”=1,000’) relating the subdivision and/or land development to at least two (2)
intersections of street centerlines. The approximate distance to the intersection of
the centerlines of the nearest improved street intersection shall be identified.
g. If the tract(s) of land is located within two hundred (200) feet of a Borough or
zoning district boundary line(s), the location of such boundary shall be shown and
labeled accordingly.
h. The source of title (including the deed, lot and plan of record number) to both the
receiving and conveying tracts.
i. The (tax) parcel identification number(s) for the subject tract.
j. Tie bars (or “lighting strike”) indicating parcels to be joined-in-common.
k. Utility listing with addresses and telephone numbers, and PA one-call number.
l. In the case of a plan for which the Subject Tract has an Environmental Covenant
executed pursuant to the Pennsylvania Uniform Environmental Covenants Act, Act
No. 68 of 2007, 27 Pa. C.S. § 6501-6517 (UECA), the plan shall include the
boundary limits of any contamination remaining on site. The, application shall
include a copy the Environmental Covenant agreement and any required
engineering and institutional controls.
2. Existing Features.
a. The names of all immediately adjacent landowners and the names and plan book
record numbers of all previously recorded plans for projects adjacent to either the
receiving or conveying tract.
b. The location, name and dimensions of existing rights-of-way and/or easements
relating to streets, cartways, access drives, driveways or alleys, and sidewalks on
or adjacent to both the receiving and conveying tracts.
c. The location of the following features and any related rights-of-way on both the
receiving and conveying tracts: buildings, utilities, stormwater management
facilities.
d. As available, the location of existing rights-of-ways for telecommunications,
electric, gas and oil transmission lines, and railroads.
3. Proposed Features and Plan Information.
a. The total acreage, total number of lots, and a table indicating the existing zoning
district and applicable requirements (including minimums/maximums, etc.) for
use, lot size, lot width, setbacks, development density, building height, impervious
coverage, access, parking, and other applicable standards.
b. An accurate description of the parcel to be conveyed, described to the accuracy
requirements of this Chapter.
c. The location and material of all proposed and existing permanent monuments and
lot line markers, including a note that all proposed monuments and lot line markers
are set or indicating when and by whom they will be set.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 5)
PART 5 - 15
Information to be Included on or with Plans
d. The location of sight triangle easements and safe stopping distance at all street,
alley, access drive, and driveway intersections in accordance with the latest edition
of the PennDOT Design Manual.
4. Certificates and Notifications.
a. Certificate, signature and seal of the qualified professional land surveyor registered
to practice in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to the effect that the survey is
correct.
b. A statement, duly acknowledged before an officer authorized to take
acknowledgment of deeds and signed by the owner of the receiving tract, to the
effect that the conveyance as shown on the plan is in accordance with the intent of
the landowner, that all those signing are all the owners of the property shown on
the survey and plan, and that they desire the same to be recorded as such. This
statement shall be signed and dated on or after the last change or revision to said
plan.
c. A statement, duly acknowledged before an officer authorized to take
acknowledgment of deeds and signed by the owner of the conveying tract, to the
effect that the conveyance as shown on the plan is in accordance with the intent of
the landowner, that all those signing are all of the owners of the property shown on
the plan, and that they desire the same to be recorded as such. This statement shall
be signed and dated on or after the last change or revision to said plan.
d. Certificate for approval by the Highspire Borough Council.
e. Certificate of review to be signed by the Highspire Borough Planning
Commission.
f. Certificate of review to be signed by the Dauphin County Planning Commission.
g. Certificate to accommodate the Dauphin County Recorder of Deeds information.
h. A statement on the plan indicating the granting of any applicable zoning approvals,
special exceptions, variances, conditional use, and all related conditions and dates of
approvals, and if applicable all prior modifications or alterations granted by the
Borough Council to sections of this Chapter.
SECTION 505 MINOR PLANS
A. Drafting Standards.
1. Scale: The plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a standard scale of not less one inch
equals ten feet (1” = 10’) to not more one inch equals one hundred feet (1” = 100’).
2. Dimensions and Bearings: The subject tract boundary dimensions shall be in feet and
decimals; bearings shall be in degrees, minutes and seconds. The description shall read in
a clockwise direction.
3. Survey Closure: The survey shall not have an error of closure greater than one (1) foot in
ten thousand (10,000) feet.
4. A legend of symbols, lines and appropriate explanatory notes.
5. Sheets:
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 5)
PART 5 - 16
Information to be Included on or with Plans
a. The sheet size shall be no smaller than eighteen by twenty two (18 x 22) inches
and no larger than twenty four by thirty six (24 x 36) inches.
6. Presentation: Plans shall be presented in a clear, legible, coherent and organized manner.
B. Plan Information.
The following information shall be provided on the sheet to be recorded:
1. Location and Identification.
a. Plans shall be clearly marked with the label indicating “Final Plan – Minor Plan”
b. The proposed development project name.
c. The name, address, and telephone number of the owner(s) of the tract (or an
authorized agent), the developer, and the firm that prepared the plan.
d. The file or project number assigned by the firm that prepared the plan, the plan
date, and the date(s) of all plan revisions.
e. A north arrow, a graphic scale and a written scale.
f. A location map, drawn to a scale of a minimum of one inch equals one thousand
feet (l”=1,000’) relating the subdivision and/or land development to at least two (2)
intersections of street centerlines. The approximate distance to the intersection of
the centerlines of the nearest improved street intersection shall be identified.
g. If the tract of land is located within two hundred (200) feet of a Borough or zoning
district boundary line(s), the location of such boundary shall be shown and labeled
accordingly.
h. The entire existing tract boundary with bearings and distances described to the
accuracy requirements of this Chapter.
i. The source of title (including the deed, lot and plan of record number) to the
subject tract.
j. The (tax) parcel identification number(s) for the subject tract.
k. Utility listing with addresses and telephone numbers, and PA one-call number.
l. In the case of a plan for which the Subject Tract has an Environmental Covenant
executed pursuant to the Pennsylvania Uniform Environmental Covenants Act, Act
No. 68 of 2007, 27 Pa. C.S. § 6501-6517 (UECA), the plan shall include the
boundary limits of any contamination remaining on site. The, application shall
include a copy the Environmental Covenant agreement and any required
engineering and institutional controls.
m. If applicable, proposed protective covenants running with the land.
2. Existing Features.
a. The names of all immediately adjacent landowners and the names and plan book
record numbers of all previously recorded plans for adjacent projects.
b. The location of the benchmark and a notation indicating the datum used.
c. Existing contours at a minimum vertical interval of two (2) feet for land with slope
of fifteen (15) percent or less and at a minimum vertical interval of five (5) feet for
more steeply sloping land. Contours plotted from the United States Geodetic
Survey will not be accepted, and Dauphin County Geographic Information System
(GIS) Topography will not be accepted in areas where improvements are proposed
but should be used beginning fifty (50) feet outside the improvement boundary.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 5)
PART 5 - 17
Information to be Included on or with Plans
d. The following items when located within the subject tract:
1) The location, name and dimensions of existing rights-of-way and/or
easements relating to streets, cartways, access drives, driveways, alleys, and
sidewalks.
2) The location and size of the following features and related rights-of- way or
easements: buildings, public utilities, on-lot utilities, parking areas, and
stormwater management facilities.
3) The location of existing rights-of-way for telecommunications, electric, gas
and oil transmission lines, and railroads.
4) The size, capacity and condition of the existing stormwater management
system and any other facility that may be used to convey storm flows within
and from the subject tract.
5) The plan shall indicate any proposed disturbance, encroachment or
alteration to such features including; floodplains, wetlands, woodlands,
significant trees, habitats for threatened and endangered species, superfund
contaminations, historic features, cemetery or burial sites, archeological
sites, and areas with highly erosive soils.
e. The following items when located within two hundred (200) feet of the subject
tract:
1) The location and name of existing rights-of-way or easements relating to
streets, cartways, access drives, driveways, alleys, and sidewalks.
2) As available, the location (and general use) of buildings, public utilities, onlot
utilities, parking areas, and stormwater management facilities including
the location and size of related easements.
3) The location of existing rights-of-way for telecommunications, electric, gas
and oil transmission lines, and railroads.
4) As available, the size, capacity, and condition of the existing stormwater
management system and any other facility that may be used to convey storm
flows from the subject tract.
5) The location of woodlands, habitats for endangered and threatened species,
and highly erosive soils.
3. Proposed Features and Plan Information.
a. The total acreage of the entire existing tract.
b. Identification and disposition of existing buildings and historic features.
c. The location and configuration of proposed buildings, structures, parking
compounds, streets, access drives, driveways, alleys, sidewalks, shade/street trees,
landscaping, buffer yards, and all other significant facilities (Appendix G).
d. Building setback lines, with distances from the street right-of-way line.
e. Existing and proposed easements.
f. A note on the plan indicating the types of sewer or water facilities to be provided.
g. A table indicating the existing zoning district and applicable requirements
(including minimums/maximums, etc.) for use, lot size, lot width, setbacks,
development density, building height, impervious coverage, access, parking, and
other applicable standards.
h. The location and material of all proposed and existing permanent monuments and
lot line markers, including a note that all proposed monuments and lot line markers
are set or indicating when and by whom they will be set.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 5)
PART 5 - 18
Information to be Included on or with Plans
i. Lot lines, with accurate bearings and distances, and lot areas for all parcels. Curve
segments shall be comprised of arc, chord, bearing and distance. Along existing
street and alley rights-of-way, the description may utilize the existing deed lines or
road centerlines; along all proposed street and alley rights-of-way, the description
shall be prepared to the right-of-way lines.
j. On and within two hundred (200) feet of the lots proposed for development,
identify the location of all proposed structures, existing floodplain, drainage
easements, points of ingress and egress, easements, and sewer and water facilities.
k. The capacity and condition of all stormwater management facilities located on, and
within, two hundred (200) feet of the lots proposed to be developed must be
identified. Any adverse impact to such facilities resulting from increased flows
from the site must be addressed in conformance with the provisions of Part 8 of
this Chapter and Chapter 9 of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of
Highspire relating to grading / stormwater management.
l. In the case of land development plans, architectural elevations and other
architectural drawings shall be submitted for review by the Borough.
1) Building elevations and other architectural drawings containing the
following information shall be provided. Elevations and drawings shall be
illustrated to scale showing:
a) Front, rear and side perspectives of all proposed buildings including
building’s architectural features, exterior building materials, colors
and/or finishes.
b) First floor elevations of the building, the height of the building in feet
and number of stories and the building’s relationship to the finished
grade immediately surrounding the building; and
c) Spot elevations designating the existing and proposed grading.
m. Identification of any lands to be dedicated or reserved for public, semi-public or
community use.
4. Certificates, Notifications and Reports.
a. Certificate, signature and seal of the qualified professional land surveyor registered
to practice in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to the effect that the survey is
correct, and certificate, signature and seal of the qualified professional land
surveyor, engineer or landscape architect licensed to practice in the and/or
registered of Pennsylvania that prepared the plan that all other information shown
on the plan is accurate.
b. A statement, duly acknowledged before an officer authorized to take
acknowledgment of deeds and signed by the landowner, to the effect that the
subdivision or land development shown on the plan is the act and the deed of the
owner, that all those signing are all the owners of the property shown on the survey
and plan, and that they desire the same to be recorded as such. This statement shall
be signed and dated on or after the last change or revision to said plan.
c. Certificate for approval by the Highspire Borough Council.
d. Certificate of review to be signed by the Highspire Borough Planning
Commission.
e. Certificate of review to be signed by the Dauphin County Planning Commission.
f. Certificate to accommodate the Dauphin County Recorder of Deeds information.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 5)
PART 5 - 19
Information to be Included on or with Plans
g. A statement on the plan indicating the granting of any applicable zoning approvals,
special exceptions, variances, conditional use, and all related conditions and dates of
approvals, and if applicable all prior modifications or alterations granted by the
Borough Council to sections of this Chapter.
h. Certificate of dedication of streets and other public property, if applicable.
i. A note to be placed on the plan indicating any area that is not to be offered for
dedication, if applicable.
j. In the case of a Plan which requires access to a highway under the jurisdiction of
the PennDOT, the inclusion of the following Plan note:
“A Highway Occupancy Permit is required pursuant to Section 420 of
the Act of June 1, 1945 (P.L. 1242, No. 428), known as the “State
Highway Law,” before driveway access to a State highway is permitted.
Access to the State highway shall only be as authorized by a Highway
Occupancy Permit, and the Highspire Borough Council’s approval of this
plan in no way implies that such permit can be acquired.”
k. Any improvement that encroaches upon an electric transmission line,
telecommunications line, gas pipeline, petroleum or petroleum products
transmission line, fiber optics, public sewer, public water, etc. located within the
tract, the application shall be accompanied by a letter from the owner or lease of
such right-of-way (or easement) stating any conditions on the use of the land and
the building setback and/or right-of-way (or easement) lines.
l. Where the land included in the subject application has a floodplain or other natural
resource easement located within the tract, the application shall be accompanied by
a copy of the agreement from the party holding the easement stating any conditions
on the use of the land.
m. When connection to an existing water and/or sanitary sewer system is proposed,
written notification from the authority or certified public utility providing sanitary
sewer and/or water service indicating that sufficient capacity to service the
proposed development has been reserved shall be provided (in accordance with
current authority or entity standards).
C. As Condition of Recording a Minor Subdivision Plan:
1. An appropriately executed Memorandum of Understanding (Appendix D) and, if
applicable, financial security (Appendix D-l) in accordance with Section 602.
2. Written notices of approval by outside agencies, if applicable:
a. Notification from PennDOT that approval of the HOP application has been
submitted and/or granted if applicable.
b. Notification from Dauphin County Conservation District that an acceptable
Erosion and Sedimentation Control P1an/NPDES Plan has been submitted and
approved by that agency:
c. Notification from DEP that either approval of the Sewer Facility Plan Revision (or
Plan Revision Module for Land Development) or Supplement has been granted or
that such approval is not required.
3. A controlling agreement when an application proposes to establish a street which is not
offered for dedication to the public use.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 6)
PART 6 - 1
Assurances for Completion
and Maintenance of Improvements
PART 6 - ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION 600 IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED
Equivalent MPC, 18th addition, Sections 509(a) and 509(1)
A. No plan shall be finally approved unless the streets shown on such plan have been improved to
a mud free or otherwise permanently passable condition, or improved as may be required by the
Chapter and any walkways, curbs, gutters, street lights, fire hydrants, shade trees, water mains,
sanitary sewers, storm sewers and other improvements as may be required by the Chapter have
been installed in accordance with such Chapter, except that the surface course of streets shall
not be completed until such time as ninety (90) percent of the lots in the subdivision or land
development have been improved by the construction of a dwelling if approved for residential
development or by the construction of the proposed commercial or industrial structures if the
lots are approved for such uses. In lieu of the completion of any improvements required as a
condition for the final approval of a plan, including improvements or fees required to pursuant
to Act 247 Section 509(i), the deposit with the Borough of financial security in an amount
sufficient to cover the costs of such improvements or common amenities including, but not
limited to, roads, stormwater detention and/or retention basins and other related drainage
facilities, recreational facilities, open space improvements, or buffer or screen plantings which
may be required.
B. The applicant shall not be required to provide financial security for the costs of any
improvements for which financial security is required by and provided to the Department of
Transportation in connection with the issuance of a highway occupancy permit pursuant to
Section 420 of the act of June 1, 1945 (p.L.1242, No. 428) known as the “State Highway Law.”
C. If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with apparatus or facilities related thereto,
are to be installed under the jurisdiction and pursuant to the rules and regulations of a public
utility or authority separate and distinct from the Borough, financial security to assure proper
completion and maintenance thereof shall be posted in accordance with the regulations of the
controlling public utility or authority and shall not be included within the financial security as
otherwise required by this section.
SECTION 601 PLAN IMPROVEMENTS
A. Recorded Plan Approval.
Equivalent MPC, 18th addition, Sections 509(b)
1. When requested by the developer, in order to facilitate financing, the Highspire Borough
Council, shall furnish the developer with a signed copy of a resolution indicating
approval of the final plan contingent upon the developer obtaining a satisfactory financial
security. The final plan or record plan shall not be signed nor recorded until the financial
improvements agreement is executed. The resolution or letter of contingent approval shall
expire and be deemed to be revoked if the financial security agreement is not executed
within ninety (90) days unless a written extension is granted by the Highspire Borough
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 6)
PART 6 - 2
Assurances for Completion
and Maintenance of Improvements
Council; such extension shall not be unreasonably withheld and shall be placed in writing
at the request of the developer.
B. Review Fees.
Equivalent MPC, 18th addition, Sections 503(1)
1. Review fees may include reasonable and necessary charges by the Borough’s
professional consultants for review and report thereon to the Borough. Such review fees
shall be based upon a schedule established by resolution. Such review fees shall be
reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and customary charges for similar service
in the community, but in no event shall the fees exceed the rate or cost charged by the
professional consultant for comparable services to the Borough for services which are not
reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants. Fees charged to the Borough relating to
any appeal of a decision on an application shall not be considered review fees and may
not be charged to an applicant.
C. Protection of Final Phases.
Equivalent MPC, 18th addition, Section 509(i)
1. In the case where development is projected over a period of years, the Highspire Borough
Council may authorize submission of final plans by section or stages of development
subject to such requirements or guarantees as to improvements in future sections or
stages of development as it finds essential for the protection of any finally approved
section of the development.
SECTION 602 IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION GUARANTEE
A. Form of Financial Security.
Equivalent MPC, 18th addition, Sections 509(c), 509(d), and 509(e)
1. Without limitation as to other types of financial security which the Borough may
approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, Federal or Commonwealth
chartered lending institution irrevocable letters of credit and restrictive or escrow
accounts in such lending institutions shall be deemed acceptable financial security for the
purposes of this section.
2. Such financial security shall be posted with a bonding company or Federal or
Commonwealth chartered lending institution chosen by the party posting the financial
security, provided said bonding company or lending institution is authorized to conduct
such business within the Commonwealth.
3. Such bond or other security shall provide for, and secure to the public, the completion of
any improvements which may be required on or before the date fixed in the formal action
of approval or accompanying agreement for completion of the Improvements.
B. Amount of Guarantee.
1. Amount of Financial Security Required.
Equivalent MPC, 18th addition, Section 509(f)
a. The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of the required
improvements shall be equal to one hundred ten (110) percent of the cost of
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 6)
PART 6 - 3
Assurances for Completion
and Maintenance of Improvements
completion estimated as of ninety (90) days following the date scheduled for
completion by the developer. Annually, the Borough may adjust the amount of the
financial security by comparing the actual cost of the improvements which have
been completed and the estimated cost for the completion of the remaining
improvements as of the expiration of the ninetieth (90th) day after either the
original date scheduled for completion or a rescheduled date of completion.
Subsequent to said adjustment, the Borough may require the developer to post
additional security in order to assure that the financial security equals said one
hundred ten (110) percent. Any additional security shall be posted by the developer
in accordance with this subsection.
2. Estimate of the Cost of Completion.
Equivalent MPC, 18th addition, Section 509(g)
a. The amount of financial security required shall be based upon an estimate of the
cost of completion of the required improvements, submitted by an applicant or
developer and prepared by a qualified engineer licensed to practice in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and certified by such qualified and licensed
engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of such cost. The Borough, upon the
recommendation of the Borough Engineer, may refuse to accept such estimate for
good cause shown. If the applicant or developer and the Borough are unable to
agree upon an estimate, then the estimate shall be recalculated and recertified by
another qualified engineer licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and chosen mutually by the Borough and the applicant or developer.
The estimate certified by the third (3rd) engineer shall be presumed fair and
reasonable and shall be the final estimate. In the event that a (3rd) third engineer is
so chosen, fees for the services of said third (3rd) engineer shall be paid equally by
the Borough and the applicant or developer.
3. Additional Time for Completion.
Equivalent MPC, 18th addition, Section 509(h)
a. If the party posting the financial security requires more than one (1) year from the
date of posting of the financial security to complete the required improvements, the
amount of financial security may be increased by an additional ten (10) percent for
each one (1) year period beyond the first (1st
SECTION 603 INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS
) anniversary date from posting of
financial security or to an amount not exceeding one hundred ten (110) percent of
the cost of completing the required improvements as reestablished on or about the
expiration of the preceding one (1) year period by using the above bidding
procedure.
The developer shall pay the cost of any such inspection in accordance with the provisions of Article V of
the Municipalities Planning Code. The developer shall contact the Borough Engineer to coordinate the
construction observation schedule, notification procedures, and other related improvement guarantee
administration topics and to determine the need for an on-site, pre-construction meeting. The developer
shall provide at least twenty four (24) hours notice prior to the start of construction of any improvements
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 6)
PART 6 - 4
Assurances for Completion
and Maintenance of Improvements
that are subject to inspection. All inspections of completed items shall be requested, in writing, at least
forty-eight (48) hours in advance of the inspection time and date.
It is generally required that the following phases of site construction have mandatory inspection. This
general list of phases may be amended by mutual agreement of the Borough and developer when the site
requires special construction procedures. The inspection schedule must be recorded with the final plan or
shown on the approved improvement construction plan.
A. General Site Construction
1. Upon completion of preliminary site preparation including stripping of vegetation,
stockpiling of topsoil and construction of temporary erosion and sedimentation control
devices.
2. Upon completion of rough grading, but prior to placing topsoil, permanent drainage, or
other site development improvements and ground covers.
3. During the construction of permanent stormwater management and BMP facilities.
4. Upon the final completion of permanent stormwater management and BMP facilities,
including the establishment of ground covers and plantings.
5. After review of the as-built drawings, required by Section 508, but prior to final release
of the financial guarantee for completion of final grading, vegetative controls required by
the BMP standards, or other site restoration work.
B. Street Construction
1. Preparation of Road Subgrade. At the time of this observation, the subgrade should be
proof rolled and the proposed crown and grade should be checked. It is recommended
that a developer's/contractor's representative accompany the observer when the crown
and grade are checked. Proof rolling should be performed with a fully loaded, tandemaxle
dump truck.
2. Placement and Compaction of Road Subbase. At the time of this observation, the depth
of subbase should be checked after compaction, the subbase should be proof rolled in the
same manner as the subgrade and the crown and grade should be checked again. This
observation must occur prior to any binder or base course being placed.
3. Placement and Compaction of the Binder/Base Course. At the time of this observation,
the depth of the binder/base course should be checked, ambient temperature should be
monitored (this is important in early spring and late fall days when the temperature can
go below acceptable limits), the temperature of the bituminous material should be
checked (if possible), and it is recommended that copies of the weight slips for each
truckload are obtained. The crown and grade should also be checked again. This
observation must occur prior to the wearing course being placed.
4. Placement and Compaction of the Wearing Course. At the time of this observation, the
guidelines for the placement and compaction of the binder/base course should be
followed.
C. In addition to the above outlined observations, additional observations will be made at the
request of the developer for reduction of financial securities. Random observations should be
made at the frequency desired by the Borough. At the time of any of the above listed
observations, all ongoing construction (i.e. storm drainage, sanitary sewer, water, erosion
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 6)
PART 6 - 5
Assurances for Completion
and Maintenance of Improvements
control, etc.) should also be checked for compliance with the approved plans and the findings
reported. Since the above inspections are mandatory, it is recommended that requests for
reduction of financial guarantee to be submitted to coincide with the above inspections.
D. Inspection of Improvements.
Equivalent MPC, 18th addition, Sections 5 10(a) and 510(g)(1)
1. When the developer has completed all of the necessary and appropriate improvements,
the developer shall notify the Highspire Borough Council, in writing, by certified or
registered mail, of the completion of the aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy
thereof to the Borough Engineer. The Highspire Borough Council shall, within ten (10)
days after receipt of such notice, direct and authorize the Borough Engineer to inspect all
of the aforesaid improvements. The Borough Engineer shall, thereupon, file a report, in
writing, with the Highspire Borough Council, and shall promptly mail a copy of the same
to the developer by certified or registered mail. The report shall be made and mailed
within thirty (30) days after receipt by the Borough Engineer of the aforesaid
authorization from the Highspire Borough Council; said report shall be detailed and shall
indicate approval or rejection of said improvements, either in whole or in part, and if said
improvements, or any portion thereof, shall not be approved or shall be rejected by the
Borough Engineer, said report shall contain a statement of reasons for such non approval
or rejection.
2. The Highspire Borough Council shall submit to the applicant an itemized bill showing
the work performed in connection with the inspection of improvements performed,
identifying the person performing the services and the time and date spent for each task.
In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such expense in connection with the
inspection of improvements, the applicant shall, no later than thirty (30) days after the
date of transmittal of a bill for inspection services, notify the Borough and the Borough
Engineer that such inspection expenses are disputed as unreasonable or unnecessary and
shall explain the basis of their objections to the fees charged, in which case the Borough
shall not delay or disapprove a request for release of financial security, a subdivision or
land development application or any approval or permit related to development due to the
applicant’s dispute of inspection expenses. Failure of the applicant to dispute a bill within
thirty (30) days shall be a waiver of the applicant’s right to arbitration of that bill under
this section.
E. Acceptance of Improvements.
Equivalent MPC, 18th addition, Sections 510(b) and 510(c)
1. The Highspire Borough Council shall notify the developer, within fifteen (15) days of
receipt of the Borough Engineer’s report, in writing by certified or registered mail of the
action of said Highspire Borough Council with relation thereto.
2. If the Highspire Borough Council or the Borough Engineer fails to comply with the time
limitation provisions contained herein, all improvements will be deemed to have been
approved and the developer shall be released from all liability, pursuant to its
performance guaranty bond or other security agreement.
F. Borough Does Not Accept Improvements.
Equivalent MPC, 18th addition, Section 510(d)
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 6)
PART 6 - 6
Assurances for Completion
and Maintenance of Improvements
1. If any portion of the said improvements shall not be approved or shall be rejected by the
Highspire Borough Council, the developer shall proceed to complete the same and, upon
completion, the same procedure of notification, as outlined herein, shall be followed.
G. Duplication of Inspections.
Equivalent MPC, 18th addition, Section 510(g)
1. The Borough may prescribe that the applicant shall reimburse the Borough for the
reasonable and necessary expense incurred in connection with the inspection of
improvements. The applicant shall not be required to reimburse the Highspire Borough
Council for any inspection which is duplicative of inspections conducted by other
governmental agencies or public utilities or authorities. The burden of proving that any
inspection is duplicative shall be upon the objecting applicant. Such reimbursement shall
be based upon a schedule established by resolution. Such expense shall be reasonable and
in accordance with the ordinary and customary fees charged by the Borough Engineer for
work performed for similar services in the community, but in no event shall the fees
exceed the rate or cost charged by the Borough Engineer to the Borough for comparable
services when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants.
H. Inspection Expenses Disputed.
1. Disputed Engineer Expenses.
Equivalent MPC, 18th addition, Section 5 10(1)
In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such expense in connection with the
inspection of Improvements, the applicant shall, no later than thirty (30) days after the
date of transmittal of a bill for inspection services, notify the Borough and the Borough
Engineer that such inspection expenses are disputed as unreasonable or unnecessary and
shall explain the basis of their objections to the fees charged, in which case the Borough
shall not delay or disapprove a request for release of financial security, a subdivision or
land development application or any approval or permit related to development due to the
applicant’s dispute of inspection expenses. Failure of the applicant to dispute a bill within
thirty (30) days shall be a waiver of the applicant’s right to arbitration of that bill under
this section.
2. Appointment of Third (3rd
If, the Borough Engineer and the applicant cannot agree on the amount of expenses
which are reasonable and necessary, then the applicant shall have the right, within fortyfive
(45) days of the transmittal of the final bill or supplement to the final bill to the
applicant, to request the appointment of another engineer to serve as an arbitrator. The
applicant and engineer whose fess are being challenged shall by mutual agreement,
appoint another engineer to review any bills the applicant has disputed and which remain
unresolved and make a determination as to the amount thereof which is reasonable and
necessary. The arbitrator shall be of the same profession as the engineer whose fees are
being challenged.
) Party Professional Engineer by Mutual Agreement.
Equivalent MPC, 18th addition, Section 51 0(g)(2)
3. Determination of Third (3rd
The arbitrator so appointed shall hear such evidence and review such documentation as
the arbitrator in his or her sole opinion deems necessary and shall render a decision no
) Party Professional Engineer.
Equivalent MPC, 1 8’ addition, Section 51 0(g)(3)
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 6)
PART 6 - 7
Assurances for Completion
and Maintenance of Improvements
later than fifty (50) days after the date of appointment. Based on the decision of the
arbitrator, the applicant or the engineer whose fees were challenged shall be required to
pay any amounts necessary to implement the decision within sixty (60) days. In the event
the Borough has paid the engineer an amount in excess of the amount determined to be
reasonable and necessary, the engineer shall within sixty (60) days reimburse the excess
payment.
4. Appointment of Third (3rd
In the event that the Borough’s Engineer and Applicant cannot agree upon the arbitrator
to be appointed within twenty (20) days of the request for appointment of an arbitrator,
then, upon application of either party, the President Judge of the Court of Common Pleas
of the judicial district in which the Borough is located (or if at the time there be no
President Judge, then the senior active judge then sitting) shall appoint such arbitrator,
who, in that case, shall be neither the Borough Engineer nor any engineer who has been
retained by, or performed services for, the Borough or the applicant within the preceding
five (5) years.
) Party Professional Engineer by Court.
Equivalent MPC, 18th addition, Section 51 0(g)(4)
5. Payment of Fee for Third (3rd
The fee of the arbitrator shall be paid by the applicant if the review fee charged is
sustained by the arbitrator, otherwise it shall be divided equally between the parties. If the
disputed fees are found to be excessive by more than five thousand dollars ($5,000), the
arbitrator shall have the discretion to assess the arbitration fee in whole or in part against
either the applicant or the engineer. The Highspire Borough Council and the Borough
Engineer whose fees are the subject of the dispute shall be parties to the proceeding.
) Party Professional Engineer.
Equivalent MPC, 18th addition, Section 510(g)(5)
SECTION 604 RELEASE OF FUNDS
A. Partial Release of Funds.
Equivalent MPC, 18th addition, Section 509(j)
1. As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the party posting the
financial security may request the Highspire Borough Council to release or authorize the
release, from time to time, such portions of the financial security necessary for payment
to the contractor or contractors performing the work. Any such requests shall be in
writing addressed to the Highspire Borough Council, and the Highspire Borough Council
shall have forty-five (45) days from receipt of such request within which to allow the
Borough Engineer to certify, in writing, to the Highspire Borough Council that such
portion of the work upon the Improvements has been competed in accordance with the
approved plan. Upon such certification the Highspire Borough Council shall authorize
release by the bonding company or lending institution of an amount as estimated by the
Borough Engineer fairly representing the value of the Improvements completed or, if the
Highspire Borough Council fails to act within said forty five (45) day period, the
Highspire Borough Council shall be deemed to have approved the release of funds as
requested. The Highspire Borough Council may, prior to final release at the time of
completion and certification by the Borough Engineer, require retention of ten (10)
percent of the estimated cost of the aforesaid improvements.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 6)
PART 6 - 8
Assurances for Completion
and Maintenance of Improvements
B. Final Release.
Equivalent MPC, 18th addition, Section 510(g)(1.l)
1. Subsequent to the final release of financial security for completion of improvements for a
subdivision or land development, or any phase thereof, the professional consultant shall
submit to the Highspire Borough Council a bill for inspection services, specifically
designated as a final bill. The final bill shall include inspection fees incurred through the
release of financial security.
C. Remedies to Effect Completion of Improvements.
Equivalent MPC, 18th addition, Section 511)
1. In the event that any Improvements which may be required have not been installed as
provided in the Chapter or in accord with the approved final plan the Highspire Borough
Council is hereby granted the power to enforce any corporate bond, or other security by
appropriate legal and equitable remedies. If proceeds of such bond, or other security are
insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections to all the
improvements covered by said security, the Highspire Borough Council may, at its
option, in stall part of such improvements in all or part of the subdivision or land
development and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action to recover the
moneys necessary to complete the remainder of the improvements. All of the proceeds,
whether resulting from the security or from any legal or equitable action brought against
the developer, or both, shall be used solely for the installation of the improvements
covered by such security, and not for any other Borough purpose.
SECTION 605 DEDICATION OF IMPROVEMENTS
Equivalent MPC, 18th addition, Section 509(m)
A. If financial security has been provided in lieu of the completion of improvements required as a
condition for the final approval of a plan as set forth in this section, the Borough shall not
condition the issuance of building, grading or other permits relating to the erection or placement
of Improvements, including buildings, upon the lots or land as depicted upon the final plan upon
actual completion of the improvements depicted upon the approved final plan. Moreover, if said
financial security has been provided, occupancy permits for any building or buildings to be
erected shall not be withheld following: the improvement of the streets providing access to and
from existing public roads to such building or buildings to a mud-free or otherwise permanently
passable condition, as well as the completion of all other improvements as depicted upon the
approved plan, either upon the lot or lots or beyond the lot or lots in question if such
improvements are necessary for the reasonable use of or occupancy of the building or buildings.
Any ordinance or statute inconsistent herewith is hereby expressly repealed.
SECTION 606 MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE
Equivalent MPC, 18th addition, Section 509(k)
A. Where the Highspire Borough Council accepts dedication of all or some of the required
improvements following completion, the Highspire Borough Council may require the posting of
financial security to secure structural integrity of said improvements as well as the functioning
of said improvements in accordance with the design and specifications as depicted on the final
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 6)
PART 6 - 9
Assurances for Completion
and Maintenance of Improvements
plan for a term not to exceed eighteen (18) months from the date of acceptance of dedication.
Said financial security shall be of the same type as otherwise required in this section with regard
to installation of such improvements, and the amount of the financial security shall not exceed
fifteen (15) of the actual cost of installation of said improvements.
SECTION 607 MAINTENANCE OF STREETS
A. The developer shall maintain all streets in the subdivision or development in travelable
condition, including the prompt removal of snow therefrom, until such time as the streets are
accepted by the Borough as part of the Borough highway system; or, if such streets are not to be
dedicated, until a homeowners' association or other entity responsible for the maintenance of the
streets has been formed.
SECTION 608 AS-BUILT PLAN
Prior to the final release of the financial security, the developer shall provide the Borough with one (1)
Mylar and two (2) prints of the final as-built plan showing the following:
A. Actual location of all concrete monuments which were set at all angle breaks, points of
curvature and tangents around the perimeter of the total tract. When the outside perimeter of a
tract falls within or along an existing road right-of-way, then the right-of-way of that roadway
shall be monumented at the above referenced points.
B. Actual location of all iron pins or drill holes in curbs for all individual lot lines.
C. Actual cul-de-sac radius (if permitted to be constructed).
D. Actual horizontal and vertical location of cartway centerline versus right-of-way centerline.
E. Actual location of floodplain by elevation and dimension from property line.
F. Actual location and cross section of swales and accompanying easements.
G. Actual horizontal and vertical location of stormwater management facilities including type and
size of storm drainage pipes.
H. Detention basin:
1. Actual contours of the detention basin.
2. Actual outlet structure details including type, size and inverts of outlet pipes.
3. Actual elevation of the embankment and emergency spillway.
4. A table showing the stage/storage/discharge curve for the constructed conditions.
5. A table providing a comparison of the approved design vs. the as-built discharge rates
from all detention facilities.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 7)
PART 7 - 1
Supplemental Requirements,
Tests & Studies
PART 7 - SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS, TESTS, & STUDIES
SECTION 700 TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDY
A. Study Required.
1. Abbreviated Traffic Impact Study.
Whenever a proposed project will generate fifty (50) to ninety nine (99) new vehicle trips
in the peak direction (inbound or outbound) during the site peak traffic hour, the
applicant shall perform an abbreviated traffic impact study. Based on this study, certain
improvements may be identified as necessary to provide safe and efficient access to the
development. The abbreviated traffic impact study shall include:
a. A capacity analysis report prepared under the supervision of a qualified and
experienced transportation engineer.
b. The study area for the capacity analysis report shall only include all proposed
intersections.
2. Comprehensive Traffic Impact Study.
Whenever a proposed project will generate one hundred (100) or more new vehicle trips
in the peak direction (inbound or outbound) during the site peak traffic hour, the
applicant shall perform a comprehensive traffic impact study. Based on this study, certain
improvements may be identified as necessary to provide safe and efficient access to the
development.
Transportation demand management measures such as staggered start and end work
times, telecommuting, utilization of transit, greenway or trail linkages, park and ride lots,
etc. may be used to reduce trip generation for the proposed development. If such
measures will reduce the new vehicle trips in the peak direction during the peak traffic
hour to less than one hundred (100), than an abbreviated traffic impact study may be
performed in lieu of a comprehensive study. When such trip reduction measures are used
to justify performance of an abbreviated study as permitted by this section, a developer
and successors shall be bound by a recorded agreement to implement such measures. The
terms and form of agreement shall be as mutually agreed upon by the Borough and the
developers.
3. In addition, a comprehensive traffic impact study shall be prepared at the discretion of the
Borough whenever either of the following conditions exists within the impact study area:
a. Current traffic problems exist in the local area or neighborhood, including but not
limited to a high crash location, confusing intersection, or a congested intersection
that directly affects access to the development.
b. The ability of the existing roadway system to handle increased traffic or the
feasibility of improving the roadway system to handle increased traffic is limited.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 7)
PART 7 - 2
Supplemental Requirements,
Tests & Studies
B. Traffic Impact Study Requirements
1. Area of Traffic Impact Study.
The traffic impact study area shall be based on the characteristics of the surrounding area.
The intersections to be included in the study shall be adjacent to the site or have direct
impact upon the access to the site. The intersections shall be mutually agreed upon by the
Borough and the transportation engineer preparing the study. The Dauphin County
Planning Commission shall be called upon to resolve any disputes between the Borough
and the transportation engineer.
2. Preparation by Transportation Engineer Required.
Traffic impact studies shall be prepared by or under the supervision of qualified and
experienced transportation engineers with specific training in traffic and transportation
engineering and at least two (2) years of experience related to preparing traffic studies for
existing or proposed developments.
3. Horizon Year.
The traffic forecasts shall be prepared for the anticipated opening year of the
development, assuming full build out and occupancy. This year shall be referred to as the
“Horizon Year.”
4. Non-Site Traffic Estimates.
Estimates of non-site traffic shall be made, and will consist of through motorized and
non-motorized traffic and motorized and non-motorized traffic generated by all other
developments within the study area for which preliminary or final plans have been
approved. Non-site traffic may be estimated using any one of the following three (3)
methods: “Build-up” technique, area transportation plan data or modeled volumes, and
trends or growth rates.
5. Trip Generation Rates Required.
The traffic impact study shall include a table showing the land use categories and
quantities, with the corresponding trip generation rates or equations (with justification for
selection of one or the other), and resulting number of trips. The trip generation rates
used must be either from the latest edition of Trip Generation by ITE, or from a local
study of corresponding land uses and quantities. All sources must be referenced in the
study.
6. Consideration of Pass-By Trips.
If pass-by trips or shared trips are a major consideration for the land use in question,
studies should be referenced and interviews should be conducted and documented at
similar land uses.
7. Rate Sums.
Any significant difference between the sums of single-use rates and proposed mixed-use
estimates must be justified and explained in the study.
8. Explanations Required.
The reasoning and data used in developing a trip generation rate for special/unusual
generators must be justified and explained in the report.
9. Definition of Influence Area.
Prior to trip distribution of site-generated trips, an influence area must be defined which
contains eighty (80) percent or more of the trip ends that will be attracted to the
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 7)
PART 7 - 3
Supplemental Requirements,
Tests & Studies
development. A market study can be used to establish the limits of an influence area, if
available. If no market study is available, an influence area should be estimated based on
a reasonable documented estimate. The influence area can also be based on a reasonable
maximum convenient travel time to the site, or delineating area boundaries based on
locations of competing developments.
Other methods, such as using trip data from an existing development with similar
characteristics or using an existing origin-destination survey of trips within the area, can
be used in place of the influence area to delineate the boundaries of the impact.
10. Estimates of Trip Distribution Required.
Trip distribution can be estimated using any one of the following three (3) methods:
a. Analogy.
b. Trip distribution model.
c. Surrogate data.
Whichever method is used, trip distribution must be estimated and analyzed for the
horizon year. A mixed-use development may require more than one distribution and
coinciding assignment for each phase (for example, residential and retail phases on the
same site). Consideration must also be given to whether inbound and outbound trips will
have similar distributions.
11. Trip Assignments.
Assignments must be made considering logical routings, available roadway capacities,
left turns at critical intersections, and projected (and perceived) minimum travel times. In
addition, multiple paths should often be assigned between origins and destinations to
achieve realistic estimates rather than assigning all of the trips to the route with the
shortest travel time. The assignments must be carried through the external site access
points and in large projects [those producing five hundred (500) or more additional peak
direction trips to or from the site during the developments peak hour] through the internal
roadways. When the site has more than one (1) access drive or driveway, logical routing
and possible multiple paths should be used to obtain realistic access drive or driveway
volumes. The assignment should reflect conditions at the time of the analysis.
Assignments can be accomplished either manually or with applicable computer models.
If a thorough analysis is required to account for pass-by trips, the following procedure
should be used:
a. Determine the percentage of pass-by trips in the total trips generated.
b. Estimate a trip distribution for the pass-by trips.
c. Perform two (2) separate trip assignments, based on the new and pass-by trip
distributions.
d. Combine the pass-by and new trip assignment.
Upon completion of the initial site traffic assignment, the results should be reviewed to
see if the volumes appear logical given characteristics of the road system and trip
distribution. Adjustments should be made if the initial results do not appear to be logical
or reasonable.
12. Total Traffic Impacts.
Motorized and non-motorized traffic estimates for any site with current traffic activity
must reflect not only new traffic associated with the site’s redevelopment, but also the
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 7)
PART 7 - 4
Supplemental Requirements,
Tests & Studies
trips subtracted from the traffic stream because of the removal of a land use. The traffic
impact study should clearly depict the total traffic estimate and its components.
13. Capacity Analysis.
Capacity analysis must be performed at each of the major street and project site access
intersection locations (signalized and unsignalized) within the study area. In addition,
analyses must be completed for roadway segments deemed sensitive to site traffic within
the study area as determined by the Borough. These may include such segments as
weaving sections, ramps, internal site roadways, parking facility access points, and
reservoirs for vehicles queuing on- and off-Site. Other locations may be deemed
appropriate depending on the situation.
The recommended level-of-service analysis procedures detailed in the most recent edition
of the Highway Capacity Manual must be followed.
The operational analyses in the Highway Capacity Manual should be used for analyzing
existing conditions, traffic impacts, access requirements, or other future conditions for
which traffic, geometric, and control parameters can be established.
14. Required Levels-of-Service.
The recommendations of the traffic impact study shall provide safe and efficient
movement of traffic to and from and within and past the proposed development, while
minimizing the impact to non-site trips. The current levels-of-service must be maintained
if they are levels “C” or “D”, not allowed to deteriorate to worse than level “C” if they
are currently levels “A” or “B”, and improved to level d if they are levels “E” or “F”.
15. Documentation Required.
A traffic impact study report shall be prepared to document the purpose, procedures,
findings, conclusions, and recommendations of the study.
a. The documentation for a traffic impact study shall include, at a minimum:
1) Study purpose and objectives.
2) Description of the site and study area.
3) Existing roadway conditions in the area of the development.
4) Recorded or approved development(s) within the traffic impact study area.
5) Trip generation, trip distribution, and modal split.
6) Projected future motorized and non-motorized traffic volumes.
7) An assessment of the change in roadway operating conditions resulting from
the development traffic.
8) Recommendations for site access and transportation improvements needed
to maintain and/or improve motorized and non-motorized traffic flow to,
from, within, and past the site at an acceptable and safe level-of-service.
9) Transit location, availability of bike routes, connection to a park and/or trail
system.
b. The analysis shall be presented in a straight forward and logical sequence. It shall
lead the reader step-by-step through the various stages of the process and resulting
conclusions and recommendations.
c. The recommendations shall specify the time period within which the
improvements should be made (particularly if the Improvements are associated
with various phases of the development construction), and any monitoring of
operating conditions and improvements that may be required. The
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 7)
PART 7 - 5
Supplemental Requirements,
Tests & Studies
recommendations shall also identify who will be responsible for making the
improvements.
d. Data shall be presented in tables, graphs, maps, and diagrams wherever possible
for clarity and ease of review.
e. To facilitate examination by the Borough, an executive summary of one (1) or two
(2) pages shall be provided, concisely summarizing the purpose, conclusions, and
recommendations.
f. The study documentation outlined above provides a framework for site traffic
access/impact study reports. Some studies will be easily documented using this
outline. However, the specific issues to be addressed, local study requirements, and
the study results may warrant additional sections.
C. Improvements.
1. Responsibility for Improvements.
The applicant shall be responsible for the improvements required to provide safe and
convenient ingress and egress to the development site.
2. Coordination with Borough Requirements.
The applicant shall be responsible for other improvements related to the results of the
traffic impact study as may be agreed to with the Borough or which are required by the
Borough impact fee ordinance to be installed or paid for by the applicant consistent with
provisions of Article V and V-A of the MPC.
SECTION 701 HISTORIC AND CULTURAL RESOURCES
A. Archaeological Investigations
Specific state and federal guidelines and procedures for review procedures as well as pertinent
legislation may be obtained by contacting the Bureau for Historic Preservation (BHP) and
Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission (PHMC). Specific state and federal
guidelines and procedures are outlined in detail in A Summary of Major Relevant Federal and
State Legislation and Regulations Appendix A, and Procedures for Compliance with Federal
and Commonwealth Preservation Law Appendix H. PHMC administers both the state and
federal regulations.
Projects affecting or potentially affecting historical and archaeological properties are subject to
review by the PHMC, BHP under the provisions of both Section 106 of the National Historic
Preservation Act of 1966 and Section 10 of the 1978 Pennsylvania Historic Preservation Act.
No project shall be developed on a site identified by the PHMC as containing or likely to
contain features of archaeological or historic significance until procedures for compliance with
Federal and State regulations have been realized and the review process has been completed.
All subdivisions and/or land development plans which meet the above mentioned requirements
shall provide a letter of determination and/or report from PHMC, BHP addressing the
following:
1. BHP Letter of Determination: The BHP letter of determination.
2. Additional Required Action: The BHP letter may recommend one (1) or more of the
following activities:
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 7)
PART 7 - 6
Supplemental Requirements,
Tests & Studies
a. Phase I Survey
b. Phase II Survey
c. Phase III (Mitigation)
B. Preservation of Historic Features.
1. Subdivisions and land developments shall be designed to preserve, adaptively reuse, or
otherwise provide for the historic features of Highspire Borough
a. Historic features that are retained within the project area shall be situated on a lot
of sufficient size to retain its integrity of setting.
b. After the lot area of the historic feature is determined, the remaining number of
buildable lots that would be allowed on the subject tract may each be reduced in
area, if necessary, to accommodate the same number of buildable lots on the
subject tract, to not smaller than that permitted in the applicable underlying zoning
district.
2. Modifications or exterior alterations to historic features or sites, or new construction in
the immediate vicinity of historic features shall be consistent with “The Secretary of the
Interiors Standards for Rehabilitation of Historic Properties”, as published by the
National Park Service (NPS). New construction should be visually compatible with the
character of historic features in the vicinity in terms or size, scale, mass, shape,
proportion, materials and textures, rhythm and patterns, orientation and location, cornice
and floor to floor heights, arrangement and size of windows on the facade, etc. See
Appendix F.
3. A landscape plan shall be provided that provides buffering, using vegetative materials,
walls or fencing as appropriate, between new construction and historic features to help
mitigate adverse visual or auditory impacts and to help the historic feature retain its
integrity of setting.
C. Demolition Restricted.
1. Prior to the demolition or removal from its original foundation, review and approval by
the Highspire Borough Council shall occur. The applicant must provide the Highspire
Borough Council with an evaluation by a qualified historic preservation professional of
the historic and/or architectural significance of the building. In addition, the applicant
must provide credible evidence in response to each of the following specific criteria:
a. That it is not feasible to continue the current use.
b. That other uses permitted within the underlying zoning district, either as permitted
uses, special exception uses, or conditional uses, have been denied or are not
feasible due to constraints on the building or structure.
c. That adaptive use opportunities do not exist due to constraints related to the
building, structure, or property.
d. That the building, it’s permitted uses, and adaptive use potential does not provide a
reasonable rate of return, based on a reasonable initial investment.
e. That the applicant has not contributed to the existing conditions, either through
neglect or prior renovation, conversion, alteration, or similar physical action.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 7)
PART 7 - 7
Supplemental Requirements,
Tests & Studies
f. That the demolition will not adversely affect the character of the neighborhood or
community.
g. That a proposed new building(s), structure(s), or use of the property will not
adversely affect the character of the neighborhood or community.
h. That the building is structurally unsound.
2. If the application for a permit for demolition, relocation, or removal is approved, said
permit shall not be issued by the Borough until the following additional requirements
have been satisfied.
a. The recording of an approved subdivision or land development plan for the lot
where the demolition, removal, or relocation is proposed;
b. Issuance of any necessary zoning approvals; and
c. Approval of the subdivision or land development plan by the Highspire Borough
Council.
3. Applicants whose applications for demolition, removal, or relocation are approved may
be subject to conditions that include but may not be limited to the following. (The
applicant will be informed at the conclusion of the review process regarding any
conditions that must be satisfied. refusal to comply with the conditions will be deemed a
violation.)
a. A complete set of exterior and interior photographs of the building or proposed for
all demolition, removal, or relocation which includes all exterior elevations,
interior spaces, and all significant architectural features.
b. A historic structure report which may include any or all of the following;
1) Physical description including a site plan with north arrow, showing all
buildings on the parcel nearby streets, landmarks, streams, etc., a written
description of the general area, a written description of the lot or parcel with
relationships of buildings one to another, and a written description of each
building with exterior and interior pictures.
2) Historic narrative telling the story of the property and including a
bibliography.
3) Chain of title including documentation of the source of the information such
as the deed or will book, volume, page number, etc.
4) Photo documentation including general photos of property showing
relationships of buildings and detailed photos (interior and exterior) of all
buildings.
5) Measured drawings labeled and cross-referenced to photographs of the same
detail.
6) Appendices including copies of deeds and wills, maps, and other supporting
materials
c. A plan for the salvage of architectural features and/or building materials.
D. Retention of Local Names.
Applicants are encouraged to perpetuate historic names or geographic references that are
traditionally associated with the area, in which a project is located, rather than proposing
project names that are not consistent with Highspire Borough or Dauphin County traditions or
culture.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 7)
PART 7 - 8
Supplemental Requirements,
Tests & Studies
SECTION 702 PARKS AND OPEN SPACE
A. Dedication.
All plans for residential subdivision or residential land developments shall provide for the
dedication of land for park and open space uses, and/or, upon agreement by the applicant, the
construction of recreation facilities, the payment of fees in lieu thereof, the private reservation
of land, or any combination thereof.
B. Limited Exemption.
The developer of any residential subdivision or land development, whether single and two (2)
family or multi-family and single family attached that contains less than thirty (30) dwelling
units may be exempted by Borough Council from dedicating land for recreational purposes,
provided the developer pays a fee in lieu of dedication as provided herein this Section.
C. General Requirements.
The applicant shall make an irrevocable offer of dedication for such land to the Borough, as
required by the Highspire Borough Council. Title to such land shall be good and marketable,
free of liens or other defects, and acceptable to the Borough Solicitor. The Highspire Borough
Council may, upon agreement of the applicant, authorize the transfer of the land to a
homeowners association or to a non-profit corporation whose purpose is the conservation or
preservation of land.
D. Amount of Land to be Dedicated.
1. The amount of park and open space land to be dedicated shall be equal to, and in
conformance with, standards as follows:
a. Single family and two family residential developments: In the case of single and
two family residential subdivisions, the developer shall provided a minimum of
one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet per lot.
b. Multi-family dwellings/apartment, and single family attached residential
developments: In the case of multi-family dwellings/apartment, and single family
attached residential developments, a minimum area of ten (10) percent of the total
tract area shall be provided for recreation exclusive of streets of the land being
developed.
2. If the applicable plan specifically designates a future park site within the acreage of the
tract proposed for development, all subdivision and land development plans shall be
designed in conformance with such designation in that all land required to be dedicated
shall correspond to the location of the future park site.
a. Should the amount of land required to be dedicated exceeds the acreage of the
future park site as designated within the applicable plan, the development proposal
shall provide for such additional area to be located in a manner that best serves
future residents of the proposed development.
b. Should the amount of land required to be dedicated falls short of the acreage of the
future park site as designated within the applicable plan or if the proposed
development involves only a portion of the development rights afforded to the
tract, the applicant shall reserve that portion of the future park site which will best
serve the immediate development. In addition, a sketch plan shall be prepared to
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 7)
PART 7 - 9
Supplemental Requirements,
Tests & Studies
depict how full build-out of the site will be accomplished in a manner that respects
the location of the future park site and ensures its accessibility to all future
dwellings on the tract. As an alternative to such piecemeal dedication, the Borough
may opt to purchase that portion of the future park site. In which case, the future
dedication of land associated with the development of the tract would proceed in
accordance with the provisions of Section 702.J.
E. Fee in Lieu of Dedication.
The applicant may, with the consent and approval of the Highspire Borough Council, elect to
pay a fee to the Borough in lieu of the park and open space dedication and so note on the plans.
1. The amount of any fee to be paid in lieu of dedication of land shall be equal to the
average fair market value of the land (based on the unimproved land value) otherwise
required by this section or shall be in accordance with any existing, Borough adopted flat
fee-in-lieu schedule which establishes a fixed price per lot, unit, or acre. If no formula is
provided in any other Borough planning documents, the formula to be used in computing
the fee based upon fair market value shall be:
N x (average FMV of one acre) = fee.
Where: N = the number of acres required to be dedicated for park and open space
purposed, calculated in accordance with Section 702.D, and FMV = fair market value
based on the unimproved land value.
2. The applicant shall provide the Highspire Borough Council with all information
necessary to determine the fair market value of the land, including, but not limited to, the
following:
a. If the applicant is the equitable owner, or purchased the land in fee simple less than
two (2) years prior to the preliminary or final plan submission, a copy of the
agreement of sale or real estate transfer tax affidavit of value.
b. If the applicant is the equitable owner, or purchased the land in fee simple more
than two (2) years prior to the preliminary or final plan submission, an opinion of
value of the property by a state certified appraiser acceptable to the Highspire
Borough Council.
Any applicant aggrieved by the fee established shall have the right to secure a second
(2nd
3. Such fee shall be payable to the Highspire Borough Council prior to the recording of each
final phase of the plan and shall be in an amount equal to the percentage of the total
number of dwelling units in the phase.
) opinion of value of the property by a state certified appraiser acceptable to the
Highspire Borough Council. The two (2) estimated values shall be averaged, with the
result being the amount upon which the fee will be based.
F. Parkland Acquisition Fund.
All fees paid by the developer in lieu of dedication of park and open space land shall be paid to
the Borough and upon its receipt shall be deposited in a separate interest-bearing account. Fees
deposited to this account shall be administered as required by the MPC.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 7)
PART 7 - 10
Supplemental Requirements,
Tests & Studies
G. General Design Criteria.
Except as provided in Sections 702.H and I, the type of areas to be dedicated for park and open
space land within a subdivision or land development plan shall principally involve
neighborhood parks which are defined as ‘those parks providing primarily active outdoor
recreational opportunities located within one-half (1/2) mile radius from a majority of the
residences to be served thereby”. Exceptions to this will be when dedications are made to a
community park which serves the subdivision or land development and is located within a two
(2) mile radius of the majority of the residences to be served, or a County park which serves
residences located within a ten (10) mile radius.
The land set aside for park and open space uses shall meet the following design criteria:
1. The park and open space land shall be reasonably located so as to serve all of the
residents of the subdivision or land development.
2. The park and open space land shall be accessible from a street either directly or by
pedestrian connection or shall adjoin and become a part of an already existing public park
or open space area that is accessible from a street. Where access to the park is by public
streets, the width of the frontage shall be a minimum length deemed necessary by the
Borough for access, visibility of the site, and public safety.
3. No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the park and open space land shall contain
detention basins or other storm water management facilities, or be located within a
floodplain or wetland unless such area is part of a linear trail or green way along an
existing watercourse. In all cases, land containing detention basin or other storm water
management facilities, floodplains, or wetlands, must be suitable for public recreation use
without compromising the function of these areas.
4. The park and open space land shall be compact and contiguous unless the land is located
adjacent to and combined with existing park and open space land, or specific topographic
features require a different configuration. An example of such topographic features would
be the provision of linear public open space along a scenic creek.
5. When public park and open space land exists adjacent to the tract to be subdivided or
developed, the park and open space land shall be located to adjoin and enlarge the
presently existing park and open space land.
6. The park and open space land shall be accessible to utilities such as sewer, water, and
power that are provided within the subdivision or land development, and if so, the
developer shall extend such utilities to the park and open space land.
7. If the developer is planning to construct facilities for recreation on the dedicated property
as an amenity for the development, such facilities shall be constructed in accordance with
current standards established by the National Recreation and Park Association. Where
applicable, facilities constructed shall also comply with the accessibility guidelines of the
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. Playground equipment constructed or placed on
parkland shall be in compliance with guidelines from the Consumer Products Safety
Commission.
H. Existing Trails.
When a subdivision or land development is traversed by or abuts an existing public trail,
customarily used by pedestrians and/or equestrians, the applicant shall make provision for the
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 7)
PART 7 - 11
Supplemental Requirements,
Tests & Studies
continued recreational use of the trail, subject to alterations of the course of the trail within the
boundaries of the development under the following conditions:
1. The points at which the trail enters and exits the tract shall remain unchanged.
2. The proposed alteration exhibits quality trail design according to the generally accepted
principles of landscape architecture.
3. The proposed alteration does not run coincidentally with the paved road intended for use
by motorized vehicles.
4. The land set aside for the continuation of such existing trail shall be counted towards the
amount of park and open space land.
I. Trails and Linear Parks.
The trail or linear park shall conform to any applicable Borough master park and open space
plan, any County-wide trail and recreation master plan, and appropriate and most recent
versions of the Highspire Borough and/or Dauphin County Comprehensive Plans. The
Highspire Borough Council may require, as a condition of final plan approval, the dedication
and improvement of trails and linear parks, which may be credited toward the park and open
space land requirement. Trails and linear parks developed and dedicated for public use may be
credited toward the park and open space land requirement.
J. Borough Fund Reimbursement.
The Borough may from time-to-time decide to purchase land for parks in or near the area of
actual or potential development. If the Borough does purchase park and open space land within
a distance of one-half (1/2) mile, subsequent park and open space land dedications within that
area may, upon agreement with the applicant, be in cash only and shall be calculated on a
percentage basis to reimburse the Borough’s actual cost of acquisition and/or cost of
development of such land for park and open space purposes. The cash amount shall be equal to
the sum of the average price per acre of such land plus the actual costs of adjacent streets and
on-site utilities (or an estimate of such actual costs provided by the Borough Engineer) divided
by the number of lots or dwelling units in the development.
K. Additional Recreation Reservations.
The provisions of this section are minimum standards and shall not be construed as prohibiting
a developer, with the approval of the Highspire Borough Council, from dedicating or reserving
other land for recreation purposes in addition to the requirements of this Chapter.
L. Private Reservation of Land.
Notwithstanding anything contained in the above sections, the applicant may, with the consent
and approval of the Highspire Borough Council, elect to fulfill the open space requirements
through the private reservation of a recreation area.
1. Any project that proposes the private reservation of land shall be accompanied by an
agreement, which is acceptable to the Borough Solicitor, and which shall be recorded
prior to or concurrent with the preliminary plan approval. Such agreement shall stipulate:
a. That maintenance of the designated open space is the responsibility of the
applicant, a homeowners association, a condominium unit owners’ association, or
other recognized conservation organization.
b. The availability of such private open space to non-residents of the development.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 (22, PART 7)
PART 7 - 12
Supplemental Requirements,
Tests & Studies
c. The method by which the private, reservation may be offered for public dedication.
d. That the land cannot be developed for anything other than open space purposes.
e. That the land cannot be sold or disposed of by the association except to another
organization formed to own and maintain said open space and without first (1st
2. If such lands are to become common elements of a homeowners or condominium unit
owners’ association of any type, then such association’s organizational by-laws must
conform to the requirements of applicable state law.
)
offering to dedicate the land and improvements to the Borough.
M. Construction of Recreation Facilities.
Notwithstanding anything contained in the above Sections, the applicant may, with the consent
and approval of the Highspire Borough Council, elect to fulfill the open space requirements
through the construction of recreational facilities. All approved recreation facilities constructed
in lieu of land dedication shall be included within the cost estimate for the improvement
guarantee.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 8)
PART 8 - 1
Design Standards
PART 8 - DESIGN STANDARDS
The purpose of these design standards is to promote revitalization, direct reinvestment, and sustain the
economic vitality while being sensitive to design context and individual neighborhood character for infill,
replacement, redevelopment, and new development. Therefore, the design standards incorporate
flexibility into traditionally regulated areas and promote a unified streetscape to strengthen the visual and
physical character of existing neighborhoods and other areas of Highspire Borough. The intent is to retain
and promote the existing traditional residential and mixed use areas, businesses, and to facilitate new
development that is consistent and compatible with, contributes to, and upgrades, older, established
building and development patterns within Highspire Borough. As increased development interest in older,
urban areas such as Highspire Borough continues, it is essential that new projects (adaptive reuse, infill,
replacement, redevelopment, and new development) contribute, be respectful, and be sensitive to the
distinctive neighborhood character and the established built environment and development patterns.
The intent of Part 8 is to provide clear, quantitative review standards that are easy to administer and offer
certainty to developers, residents, business owners, and officials alike while maintaining a degree of
design flexibility to allow and encourage creative site and building designs and encourage alternative
design solutions that result in a better, distinctive product.
SECTION 800 GENERAL
Use of a sketch plan per Section 403 and 501 and Appendix H (Street ROW Matrix) is strongly
encouraged to be used in conjunction with the site design and layout out of plans.
A. Minimum Standards and Requirements.
1. The following standards shall apply to proposed subdivisions and/or land developments
within Highspire Borough.
2. The provisions of these regulations are intended as a minimum standard for the protection
of the public health, safety and general welfare. If the literal compliance with any
mandatory provision of these regulations is demonstrated by the applicant to be
unreasonable and to cause undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to
the particular property, and if the applicant demonstrates that an alternative proposal will
provide equal or better results, the Highspire Borough Council, after review and
recommendation by the Highspire Borough Planning Commission, may grant a
modification from such mandatory provision so that substantial justice may be done and
the public interest secured while permitting the reasonable utilization of the property.
However, the granting of a modification shall not have the effect of making null and void
the purpose and/or intent of this Chapter.
3. Additional conditions may be applied to any application for subdivision and/or land
development by Borough Council.
B. Compliance with Borough Ordinances Required.
All projects shall be designed in compliance with the Chapter 27 of the Codified Ordinances of
the Borough of Highspire relating to zoning, and all other applicable ordinances, plans, studies,
and local requirements. Chapter 27 of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire
relating to zoning specifically contains standards and provisions governing lot, building, and
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 8)
PART 8 - 2
Design Standards
development character, design, height, scale, setback, orientation, frontage, access, parking,
loading/unloading, landscaping, and other features to ensure they are consistent and compatible
with adjacent and nearby buildings/structures and development on the same shared block face
(between two [2] intersecting streets) along the same side of the street.
C. Zoning Approvals Required Prior to Plan Submission.
Whenever the Chapter 27 of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire provides that
the use proposed by the applicant for subdivision or land development approval shall constitute
a use by special exception or conditional use, or when a variance from the terms of the zoning
ordinance is required to develop in accordance with the plan, the applicant shall obtain such
special exception, variance or conditional use approval from the Highspire Borough Zoning
Hearing Board or Borough Council, as applicable, prior to the submission of the preliminary
plan, or final plan as applicable. The plan shall be designed and developed in accordance with
any conditions which have been imposed upon the grant of such special exception, variance or
conditional use by the Zoning Hearing Board or Borough Council, as applicable. The plan shall
note the date of the hearing where approval was granted, along with all conditions of approval,
and all such specific related section references of the zoning ordinance.
SECTION 801 SITE LAYOUT/DEVELOPMENT PATTERN
A. Intent.
All new development shall generally be compatible in lot, building, and development character,
design, height, scale, setback, orientation, frontage, access, parking, loading/unloading, and
other features to ensure the new development is consistent and compatible with adjacent and
nearby buildings/structures and development on the same shared block face (between two [2]
intersecting streets) along the same side of the street and generally in the neighborhood.
The layout of principal buildings, accessory structures, lot access, and parking areas is an
example of a repeated site pattern that creates a cohesive visual identity and attractive
pedestrian street scene for an area. Creating a strongly defined street edge will improve the
pattern of development. A sense of visual unity is created within a neighborhood or area when
similar building and site features are repeated.
Building orientation strongly influences a development site’s focus of activity. A building
oriented at least in part to an abutting public street can create a strong presence in the public
realm, and can contribute significantly to a pedestrian-friendly built environment. Building
design that creates or adds to the visual interest of a streetscape and a pedestrian scale is an
essential element of the Borough’s community planning and implementation efforts. Building
height, scale, and massing can be used to emphasize important corners, designate points of
entry, and promote compatibility with surrounding uses. Planting shall be sited, massed, and
scaled to maintain visibility of doors and first or ground floor windows from the street and from
within the development.
B. General Arrangement.
1. Buildings and open space shall be compatible with, or complement the established and
predominant proportion and building mass of adjacent and nearby buildings/structures
and development. In addition to the building orientation, façade treatments, and/or other
design standards set forth in Chapter 27 of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 8)
PART 8 - 3
Design Standards
Highspire relating to zoning, buildings and open space relationships shall comply with
the following:
a. Buildings shall create an inviting image, consistent front, and street edge
definition, by repeating the predominant relationship of buildings-to-buildings and
buildings-to-street.
b. In order to maintain or create a sense of place and “arrival”, all developments in
the mixed use zoning districts (MN/C and CBD) at the intersection of two (2)
arterials, an arterial and a collector, and/or two (2) collector streets (excluding
alleys) shall comply with the following site layout and building orientation
standards:
1) Off-street parking areas shall not be located within a one hundred fifty (150)
foot radius measured from the intersection of the centerline of the two (2)
streets.
2) Development located within a one hundred (150) foot radius from the
intersection of the centerline of the two (2) streets shall include one or more
of the following focal point features which shall be visible from the
intersecting streets;
a) A distinctive architectural or building design that does not represent
standard franchise architecture;
b) Fountains or other water feature;
c) Public plazas or other open space; or
d) Significant landscape feature. (See Section 809.B.2.c)
C. Lot Access.
1. Lot access shall be compatible with, or complement the established and predominant
methods, types, and patterns of adjacent and nearby lots and development. In addition to
the lot access standards set forth in Chapter 27 of the Codified Ordinances of the
Borough of Highspire relating to zoning, lot access shall comply with the following:
a. Connections to compatible adjacent land uses should be provided to the maximum
extent feasible.
1) Common or shared access to compatible land uses should be provided
between adjacent parcels, lots, and/or buildings.
2) Projects should not become an isolated island in the surrounding
neighborhood and community. Instead, to reduce vehicle congestion and
offer greater connectivity between adjacent land uses, the following
standards shall apply except where prohibited for overriding public safety or
other traffic related considerations:
a) The internal street system shall connect to the perimeter public street
system to provide multiple direct connections to, and between local
destinations.
b) The internal street system shall connect to the perimeter public street
system to provide community and neighborhood connections to knit
separate development together rather than forming barriers between
them.
b. Lot access on corner lots or where more than one (1) intersecting street (including
alleys) abuts the lot, a new curb cut or access shall be provided on the street
conveying the lesser amount of existing or proposed daily traffic. This specifically
includes alleys.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 8)
PART 8 - 4
Design Standards
c. In order to maximize the efficiency of the street network, major traffic generators
should be located so that their primary access is from a public street or access
drive.
1) If a land use is proposed at a location or density that will have a significant
effect on current traffic patterns, a traffic impact study shall be required to
ensure that the street network can accommodate the anticipated traffic
demands and to define required street improvements.
2) The number of entrances should be minimized to the extent possible in order
to reduce conflicting points and facilitate traffic flow. The specific location
of primary vehicle entrances is dependent on the following factors:
a) Access and proximity to alleys;
b) The location of existing or planned median breaks;
c) Separation distances between the entrance and major intersections,
minor intersections, and adjacent entrances;
d) The need to provide shared access to adjacent parcels of land and
lots;
e) The need to align with previously approved or constructed access
points on the opposite side of the street;
f) The minimum number of entrances needed to move traffic onto and
off the site safely and efficiently; and
g) The need to provide multiple direct connections to, and between,
local destinations such as parks, schools, etc.
d. Specific design or geometries of development streets, access drives, and driveways
shall meet the intent of these design guidelines. (See Section 803)
1) Configuration and design shall be appropriate given the size of the
development and the capacity of the street.
2) Geometries shall be dependent on a variety of factors including traffic
volume, speed, and distribution. The resulting design should provide an
efficient ingress and egress to the development and the following design
issues should be addressed in each case:
a) The number of in-bound and out-bound lanes;
b) Lane width;
c) Throat length (i.e. the distance between the street and the first (1st)
point at which cross traffic or left turns are permitted);
d) Curb radii;
e) The need or desirability of a raised median;
f) The need for a deceleration lane; and
g) Accommodation for pedestrian and non-motorized crossings.
e. A clear system of driveways / access drives / streets shall be established to carry
the highest volumes of traffic within the site. (See Section 803)
1) Internal driveways / access drives / streets shall contain no perpendicular
parking spaces that directly access them.
2) Truck loading and circulation facilities shall be appropriately designed and
provided for. To the greatest extent possible, these areas should be separate
from customer parking and pedestrian areas.
3) As the size of the development and the volume of the trucks increase,
internal circulation patterns should reflect an increased separation between
non-truck and truck traffic.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 8)
PART 8 - 5
Design Standards
SECTION 802 BLOCKS AND LOTS
A. Blocks.
1. Blocks shall be compatible with, or complement the established and predominant
methods and patterns of adjacent and nearby blocks and development. Otherwise blocks
should comply with the following:
a. Minimum block length shall be two hundred fifty (250) feet.
b. Maximum block length shall be one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet.
1) The design of any block longer than six hundred (600) feet shall give special
consideration to the requirements of fire protection, pedestrian circulation,
and utility service. The Highspire Borough Council may require easements
as necessary for these purposes.
B. Lots
1. Lot Configuration.
Lot configuration shall be compatible with, or compliment the established and
predominant lot configurations. Additionally, lot configuration shall be based upon the
minimum and maximum lot area requirements, salient natural features, existing
improvements, proposed improvements, and the adjacent development pattern. Lot
configurations should provide for flexibility in building locations, while providing safe
vehicular and pedestrian circulation.
2. Lot Frontage.
In addition to the lot frontage standards set forth in Chapter 27 of the Codified
Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire relating to zoning, lot frontage shall be
compatible with, or complement the established and predominant methods and patterns of
adjacent and nearby lots and development.
3. Provisions for Future Subdivision.
In addition to any oversized lot standards set forth in Chapter 27 of the Codified
Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire relating to zoning, lots resulting from a proposed
subdivision that will be large enough to be further subdivided should be configured to
facilitate such future subdivision. Adequate street right-of-way shall be provided as
necessary.
4. Reverse Frontage, Through or Double Frontage Lots.
In addition to the reverse frontage lot, or through or double frontage lot standards set
forth in Chapter 27 of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of relating to zoning,
reverse frontage lots, or through or double frontage lots shall be compatible with, or
complement the established and predominant methods and patterns of adjacent and
nearby lots and development and the following:
a. New double frontage lots are only permitted when a reduction of access drives and
driveway intersections along a street (excluding alleys) with a high volume of
vehicular movements is desired or the maintenance of the integrity of a corridor is
desired.
b. New reverse frontage lots may be permitted when rear alleys are proposed to
provide vehicular access to lots.
c. New double and reverse frontage lots shall include an identification of the frontage
for use as a street access.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 8)
PART 8 - 6
Design Standards
d. New reverse frontage lots shall have within the yard(s) that is/are adjacent to any
street right-of-way, other than the street of vehicular access, an easement running
the entire width of the proposed lot, across which there shall be no vehicular
access.
SECTION 803 STREETS, ACCESS DRIVES AND DRIVEWAYS
A. Each street shall be designed to meet the design requirements by use of Appendix G and
Appendix H. Consideration should be given to where snow placement easements will be
situated on the site.
B. Intent.
Ensure that new streets and related development patterns are consistent and compatible with
established street and development pattern and support the expansion of the overall street
system.
Maintaining established and predominant street and development patterns within established
communities such as Highspire Borough helps to retain a visual continuity and unity to an area
or a neighborhood. Projects shall repeat established patterns of vehicle circulation, when
feasible, and shall provide safe, convenient, and efficient vehicular access both within a
development and to the surrounding communities, neighborhoods, and areas. Circulation
patterns shall be designed to limit points of access from major thoroughfares and minimize the
impacts of non-residential traffic on adjacent residential properties. Joint use with adjacent
landowners is encouraged and access easements to adjoining properties should be explored.
Internal vehicle circulation shall provide a clear visual path to provide safe, convenient, and
efficient vehicular access within and between developments.
C. General Arrangement.
The following criteria shall be considered in the design of new streets.
1. The alignment of streets shall conform to most recent version of the Highspire Borough
Comprehensive Plan, to any official map, and to such Borough, County and State road
and highway plans as have been duly adopted.
2. For streets not shown on the Highspire Borough Comprehensive Plan or official map, the
arrangement shall take into account existing development patterns, topography, and other
site constraints when providing for the appropriate extension of existing streets.
3. Local streets shall be arranged so as to discourage excessive speeds when their function is
to remain local.
4. Curvilinear streets and cul-de-sacs are generally prohibited, and should be utilized only
where topography and natural features dictate them on the site, and where their use will
be consistent with adjoining development patterns. Curvilinear streets shall not be used
immediately adjacent to an existing grid street system without providing a transition that
continues and protects the grid. New street systems shall take into consideration the
dispersal of traffic and to the ultimate functioning of the existing street system and
regional transportation network.
5. Streets shall be laid out to provide convenient and safe access to the property. Where
appropriate, the Highspire Borough Council may require additional cartway
improvements and/or right-of-way width along existing street frontages to accommodate
the anticipated traffic increases and to facilitate vehicular turning movements to and from
individual lots.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 8)
PART 8 - 7
Design Standards
6. Where a development abuts an existing or proposed arterial and collector street, the
Highspire Borough Council may require access management techniques such as the use
of alleys, marginal access streets, reverse frontage lots, shared access drive and/or
driveways, or other such treatment that will provide protection for abutting properties,
reduce the number of intersections with the arterial and collector streets, and separate the
local and through traffic.
7. The use of permeable pavement is encouraged on sidewalks, plazas, driveways, parking
lots, and low-traffic roads and streets including alleys. Permeable pavement shall not be
located in the I zoning district; on industrial sites; on any site dispensing or selling fuel /
gas; sites with expansive soils or high depth to bedrock; areas draining to the permeable
pavement greater than five (5) acres; and areas with the water table less than two (2) feet
below the bottom of the pavement base.
8. Streets shall be designed with drainage grates that are safe for crossing by bicycles. All
inlets within the street right-of-way shall be bicycle safe designs approved by PennDOT.
9. Proposed private streets (other than approved private access drives), shall not be
permitted.
a. If approved by the Borough, all private streets shall conform to all Borough design
standards, construction specifications, other applicable provisions of this Chapter
and any related construction and materials specifications, relating to public streets.
D. Street Hierarchy.
1. Each proposed street shall be classified and designed to meet the standards for one of the
street types by use of Appendix G. This classification should be according to the street
hierarchy of the existing transportation network
E. Determination of Required New Street Design Standards.
Each street shall be designed to meet the design requirements by use of Appendix G and
Appendix H. Newly created right-of-way and cartway width for each interior street
classification shall be determined by the proposed use, projected ADT and the intensity of
development permitted and existing along each street. Each cartway width shall be based on the
travel lane, on-street parking, multi-modal lanes, and gutter width.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 8)
PART 8 - 8
Design Standards
1. Travel Lanes.
a. Travel lane width requirements shall vary according to the average daily trips
(ADT).
Miles Per Hour Under 400 ADT 401 to 1500 ADT 1501 to 2000 ADT Over 2000 ADT
15 9 ft. travel lane 10 ft. travel lane 10 ft. travel lane 11 ft. travel lane
20 9 ft. travel lane 10 ft. travel lane 11 ft. travel lane 12 ft. travel lane
25 9 ft. travel lane 10 ft. travel lane 11 ft. travel lane 12 ft. travel lane
30 9 ft. travel lane 10 ft. travel lane 11 ft. travel lane 12 ft. travel lane
35 9 ft. travel lane 10 ft. travel lane 11 ft. travel lane 12 ft. travel lane
40 9 ft. travel lane 10 ft. travel lane 11 ft. travel lane 12 ft. travel lane
45 10 ft. travel lane 11 ft. travel lane 11 ft. travel lane 12 ft. travel lane
50 10 ft. travel lane 11 ft. travel lane 11 ft. travel lane 12 ft. travel lane
55 11 ft. travel lane 11 ft. travel lane 12 ft. travel lane 12 ft. travel lane
* derived from AASHTO as amended
2. Non-Motorized Multimodal Travel Lanes.
a. Non-motorized travel lanes shall be provided for all collector and arterial streets.
b. Non-motorized travel lane requirements shall vary according to the speed of the
street.
1) For a posted speed limit of twenty-six (26) to thirty-five (35) miles per hour,
four (4) foot multimodal lanes shall be provided.
2) For a posted speed limit of thirty-six (36) to forty-five (45) miles per hour,
six (6) foot multimodal lanes shall be provided.
3) For a posted speed limit of greater than forty-five (45) miles per hour, eight
(8) foot multimodal lanes shall be provided.
c. Grates shall be bicycle safe.
3. Curbs, Gutters, and Swales
a. Flexibility regarding curbing (type and necessity to provide) shall be permitted as
long as the existing stormwater management system can accommodate design
flows from the proposed drainage system.
b. Design of curbs, gutters, and swales should take the following into consideration:
1) Stormwater management.
2) Road and inlet stabilization.
3) Soil and/or topography.
4) Cohesive best management practice (BMP) design.
5) Pedestrian/handicap safety.
c. Otherwise, in addition to the provisions set forth in Chapter 21 of the Codified
Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire relating to curbs, specifically relating to
the construction and materials specifications, curbs are required for new
developments and shall also comply with the following:
1) Curbs shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications set forth in
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Publication 408 as
amended, and as detailed on the Roadway Construction Standard Drawings
(RC-64). All curbs shall be premolded expansion joints; saw cutting of new
curbing shall not be allowed.
2) Rolled curbs will not be acceptable.
3) Curbs shall be constructed in accordance with the cross section details
shown on approved drawings.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 8)
PART 8 - 9
Design Standards
4) Curbs shall be set and finished to the line and grade as shown on approved
drawings.
5) Backfill must be placed within forty-eight (48) hours after form removal and
this backfill shall be compacted in place along the rear face to within six (6)
inches of the top of the curb.
6) When curbing is to be removed to constructed a driveway or access drive,
the removal shall be done on the complete curb section. The length of
curbing to be removed shall be carried to the nearest expansion joint if the
joint is located more than five (5) feed from the end of the curb removal.
Curb replacement shall be formed and shaped to the required driveway or
access drive width. The driveway or access drive shall be depressed to a
height of one and one half (1.5) inches above the fished paving grade.
7) No partial breaking out of the curb shall be permitted with approval by the
Borough Engineer.
4. Tree Lawn Areas: When tree lawn areas are provided, signage and shade/street trees
shall generally be located within the tree lawn area of the right-of-way. Tree lawn areas
should be planted with grass, ground cover, or treated with other suitable pervious
material. See Section 809 for shade/street tree standards. When tree lawn areas are
provided, tree lawn areas should be a minimum of four (4) feet wide with eight (8) feet
preferred.
5. Rights-of-way.
a. Centerline of the right-of-way may not always be the centerline of the travel lanes.
b. Where the right-of-way width of the new street is different than the existing street,
a transition area shall be provided, the design of which is subject to Highspire
Borough Council approval.
c. The right-of-way width shall be designed to meet the design requirements by use
of Appendix G. Right-of-way widths may change for each street, based on the
anticipated future development.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 8)
PART 8 - 10
Design Standards
6. Vertical Street Alignments:
a. Vertical curves shall be used in changes in grade exceeding one (1) percent.
b. Alignment:
1) Vertical street and access drive alignments shall be measured along the
centerline.
2) Minimum rate of vertical curvature “K” shall be as specified below:
Initial Speed (mph) Curvature, K1 (ft/%)
Crest
Curvature, K1
(ft/%) Sag
15 3 10
20 7 17
25 12 26
30 19 37
35 29 49
40 44 64
45 61 79
50 84 96
55 114 115
1 Rate of vertical curvature, K = length of curve (L) per percent algebraic difference (A) in
the intersection grades (K=L/A)
c. Leveling areas shall have a maximum grade of four (4) percent for a minimum
length of forty (40) feet measured from the intersection of the centerlines.
7. Horizontal Street Alignments.
a. Horizontal curves shall be used at all angle changes in excess of two (2) degrees.
b. The design of horizontal curves shall be based on an appropriate relationship
between design speed and curvature and on their joint relationships with
superelevation (roadway banking). (The longer the radius of a curve, the higher the
speed through that curve).
c. Single, long radius curves shall be used rather than a series of curves with varying
radii and/or a series of short curves separated by short, straight segments.
d. Access drives intersections shall be designed to local street horizontal alignment
standards.
e. Determination of minimum horizontal centerline radius*
Initial Speed (mph)
Centerline Radius1
(feet) with
No Superelevation
Centerline Radius1
(feet) with
4% Superelevation (e max)
15 50 42
20 107 86
25 198 154
30 333 250
35 510 371
40 762 533
45 1,039 711
50 926
55 1,190
* derived from AASHTO formula Rmin V2 / 15*(0.01e + fmax)
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 8)
PART 8 - 11
Design Standards
Initial Speed (mph)
Centerline Radius1
(feet) with
No Superelevation
Centerline Radius1
(feet) with
4% Superelevation (e max)
1 Curve radius shall be measured to the centerline of Cartways and Access Drives.
f. Superelevation in certain conditions may be amended when using AASHTO
Exhibit 3-16 as updated.
g. No street intersection shall be granted at an angle of less than sixty (60) degrees.
8. Sight Distance at Intersections.
a. Proper sight distance shall be provided at all new streets, access drives, and all
driveway intersections in accordance with the latest edition of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Design Manual - Part 2, Highway Design
(Publication 13), and Section 2.18.F as amended. Sufficient design and plan
information shall be submitted with the plan application proving that this minimum
standard will be achieved. Such design information shall be sealed by a qualified
professional engineer licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to
perform such design work.
1) Access drive sight distance based on ten (10) foot off of edge of cartway, an
eye height of three and one half (3.5) feet to an object at three and one half
(3.5) foot height.
2) Street sight distance based on fifteen (15) foot off of edge of cartway, an eye
height of three and one half (3.5) feet to an object at three and one half (3.5)
foot height.
b. All intersections shall be provided with appropriate stop control devices on the
lesser classification street or access drive. No sight triangle easements are required
when stop control devices are used.
c. Sight triangle easements shall include the area on each street corner that is
bounded by the line which connects the sight or ‘connecting” points located on
each of the right-of-way lines of the intersecting street. The planting of trees, other
plantings, signs, and structures exceeding two and one half (2.5) feet in height that
would obstruct the clear sight across the area of the easements shall be prohibited.
1) Arterial streets shall have a clear sight triangle side of one hundred fifty
(150) feet.
2) Collector streets shall have a clear sight triangle side of one hundred (100)
feet.
3) Local streets, roads, alleys shall have a clear sight triangle side of seventy
five (75) feet.
9. New Street Improvements: All street paving must conform to the following
specifications:
a. Streets must be surfaced to the grades and dimensions drawn on the plans, profiles
and cross-sections submitted by the applicant, and approved by the Highspire
Borough Council after consulting with the Borough Engineer. Before paving the
streets surface, the applicant must install the required utilities and provide, where
necessary, adequate storm water drainage for the street acceptable to the Borough
Council. The pavement base, wearing surface and shoulders must be constructed
according to the following specifications excepting however that for the
construction of arterial roads or highways, the developer shall consult with the
Borough Engineer and be governed by the PennDOT for the method of
construction to be used and the design shall conform to PennDOT Pub. 242
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 8)
PART 8 - 12
Design Standards
1) All new streets shall be designed the following cross-sectional specifications
(all courses are compacted thicknesses).
2) The use of recycled materials is strongly encouraged.
3) Pavement - The pavement base and wearing surface must be in accordance
with, and constructed in accordance with the PennDOT, Pub. 408, as revised
to date. The following table will outline the alternatives available to the
developer:
Flexible Pavements Pavement Courses Streets
Minor Collector
Option No. 1
Wearing* 1 1/2" 1 1/2"
Binder* * 0" 2"
Base* * * 4 1/2" 4"
Subbase* * * * 8" 8"
Option No. 2
Wearing* 1 1/2" 1 1/2"
Binder* * 2" 2"
Base* * * 6" 8"
Subbase* * * * 8" 8"
LEGEND
* Wearing: Superpave Asphalt Mixture Design, HMA Wearing Course, PG
64-22, 0.0 to 0.3 million ESAL’s, 9.5 mm mix, SRL L.
* * Binder: Superpave Asphalt Mixture Design, HMA Binder Course, PG
64-22, 0.0 to 0.3 million ESAL’s, 19.0 mm mix.
* * * Base: Superpave Asphalt Mixture Design, HMA Base Course, PG 64-
22, 0.0 to 0.3 million ESAL’s, 25.0 mm mix.
* * * * CABC Crushed Aggregate Base Course
a) For the construction of arterial roads or highways, the developer shall
consult the Borough Engineer and be governed by the PennDOT
Specifications for the method of construction to be used. (Pub. 408,
as revised to date) and to submit pavement design calculations in
accordance with PennDOT Pub. 242.
b) The Borough Council after consulting with the Borough Engineer
shall decide if a Collector or Arterial Street is required as a direct
result of the construction of this development in which case the
applicant is responsible for paving the additional width required and
submitting pavement design calculations in accordance with
PennDOT Pub. 242.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 8)
PART 8 - 13
Design Standards
4) Shoulders – If curb and gutters are not provided, streets shall be provided
with shoulders in accordance with the following:
a) All shoulders shall be constructed in accordance with PENNDOT
Pub. 408, latest revision.
b) Minor roads shall be a Type 3 Shoulder as shown on RC-25 of the
PENNDOT Standards for Roadway Construction, Pub. 72, latest
revision.
c) Collector roads shall be a Type 1 Shoulder, Type l-I Shoulder, or a
Type I-S Shoulder as shown on RC-25 of the PennDOT Standards for
Roadway Construction, Pub. 72, latest revision.
d) Arterial roads shoulders shall be the type as determined by the
Borough Council after consulting with the Borough Engineer, and
PennDOT.
F. Access Drives: Access drives shall be designed to meet the following requirements:
1. Any property that utilizes an access drive shall have frontage along a public right-of-way.
2. The plan shall note that the access drive does not qualify for dedication to the Borough
and that the landowner assumes all responsibility for its maintenance.
3. Access drives shall be designed for their intended function. All travel lanes shall be a
minimum of eight (8) feet wide; however, sufficient design information must be
submitted to indicate that the number of travel lanes and width proposed has been
designed to accommodate the anticipated traffic to and from the development.
4. Parking shall be permitted when sufficient cartway width is proposed.
5. Access drives shall maintain a centerline separation distance of one hundred and twentyfive
(125) feet from all other access drives and streets. Access drive intersections with
other access drives within the site shall not be subject to such restrictions.
6. Proper sight distance shall be provided at access drive intersections with existing public
streets according to this Chapter.
G. Driveways
In addition to all driveways complying with the standards of Chapter 27 of the Codified
Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire relating to zoning, all driveways shall be paved with
pervious or impervious surfaces.
H. Single Access / Cul-de-Sac Streets
1. To the greatest extent possible, through streets shall be provided. The feasibility of a
through street will be based on the physical features of the tract, parcel, or lot proposed
for development and/or abutting lots, the potential for extension of the street to abutting
lands based on existing development patterns, restrictions imposed by other government
regulations and other recorded documentation, and the ability of the design to meet all
other requirements of this Chapter. When single access / cul-de-sac streets are proposed,
the application shall be accompanied by a written analysis of the merits of the design and
the reasons that a through street would not be desirable.
2. Cul-de-sacs shall have a circular, “T” shaped or “hammerhead” shaped turnarounds.
Turnarounds shall be constructed completely within the right-of-way.
a. “T” shaped or hammerheads may be used if the cul-de-sac serves less than ten (10)
dwelling units. Dimensions of a “T” shaped or hammerhead are sixty (60) feet by
twenty (20) feet.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 8)
PART 8 - 14
Design Standards
3. The length of a cul-de-sac street shall be measured from the centerline intersection with
the through street to the center point of the turnaround.
4. The minimum length shall be two hundred fifty (250) feet. Temporary cul-de-sac streets
shall not have a minimum length.
5. The maximum length shall be four hundred (400) feet.
6. Any temporary cul-de-sac street designed for access to an adjoining property or for
authorized phased development and which is greater than one lot deep shall be provided
with a temporary all-weather turnaround. The use of such turnaround shall be guaranteed
to the public until such time as the street is extended. Sidewalks along temporary cul-desacs
must be continued at the same time that the street is continued.
7. When connecting to an existing temporary cul-de-sac, removal of the cul-de-sac paved
areas and restoration of the sidewalk and curb system within the right-of-way shall be the
responsibility of the connecting developer.
8. Permanent cul-de-sacs with a circular turnaround shall be paved, have a minimum radius
of forty two (42) feet without a center island and forty five (45) with a center island.
9. Unless otherwise approved by the Borough to be located in the center island, all cul-desac
streets, whether permanently or temporarily designed as such, shall be provided with
a snow removal easement with a width of twenty (20) feet located at the terminus of the
cul-de-sac street for plowed snow during the winter months. Designated snow removal
areas shall not encroach upon access drives, driveways, trees, fire hydrants, water or gas
shutoff valves.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 8)
PART 8 - 15
Design Standards
I. Street Names.
1. Continuation of existing streets shall be known by the same name.
2. The proposed new street names shall be acceptable to the Borough which may include
input from the Borough Post Master and the Dauphin County Emergency Management
Agency/911.
3. At least two (2) street name signs shall be placed at each four (4) way street intersection
and one (1) at each “T’ intersection.
4. Signs shall be free of visual obstruction. The design of street name signs should be
consistent, of a style appropriate to the Borough, of a uniform size and color, and erected
in accordance with Borough standards.
SECTION 804 TRAFFIC SIGNS.
1. Design and placement of traffic signs shall follow the requirements of the Borough and
PennDOT.
2. Signs shall be free of visual obstruction.
SECTION 805 DWELLING UNIT IDENTIFICATION.
Street numbers for all units of occupancy for buildings and properties shall be visible from the
approved street frontage.
SECTION 806 UNDERGROUND WIRING.
1. All electric, telephone, television, and other communication facilities distribution lines
servicing new developments should be provided by underground wiring within easements
or dedicated public rights-of-way, installed in accordance with the prevailing standards
and practices of the utility or other companies providing such services.
2. Lots which abut existing easements or public rights-of-way where overhead electric or
telephone distribution supply lines and service connections have heretofore been installed
may be supplied with electric and telephone service from those overhead lines, but the
service connections from the utilities’ overhead lines shall be installed underground.
3. Where overhead lines are permitted as the exception, the placement and alignment of
poles shall be designed to lessen the visual impact of overhead lines, preferably along
alleys rather than along streets. Trees shall be planted in open areas and at key locations
to minimize the view of the poles and the alignments.
SECTION 807 PEDESTRIAN ACCESS AND CIRCULATION
A. Intent.
By creating a safe, continuous network of walkways within, and between developments, and
completing partially constructed sidewalk patterns within communities and neighborhoods,
pedestrians feel more inclined to safely walk, visit, or shop. Walkways should provide an
inviting and convenient option for pedestrian movement within a community and promote
direct pedestrian access to neighboring residential, non-residential, and public uses.
Sidewalks and other pedestrian facilities shall be compatible with, or complement the
established and predominant pedestrian circulation system and features of adjacent and nearby
development.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 8)
PART 8 - 16
Design Standards
B. Design Guidelines.
1. Sidewalks. In addition to the provisions set forth in Chapter 21 of the Codified
Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire relating to streets/sidewalks, specifically relating
to the construction and materials specifications, sidewalks are required for all new
developments and shall also comply with the following:
a. Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of a street.
b. Sidewalk widths shall be a minimum of four (4) feet.
c. Where possible, sidewalks should be sloped towards adjacent pervious surfaces,
not adjacent impervious surfaces.
d. Encroachments into the sidewalk shall not result in less than a four (4) foot wide
minimum clearance width from any obstacles.
e. Sidewalks shall not exceed a cross slope of two (2) percent.
f. Ramp curb cuts shall be located at all sidewalks intersecting with vehicular travel
ways.
g. Marked crosswalks shall be provided within the vehicular travel ways intersecting
with sidewalks.
2. Trails.
a. Trail width shall be a minimum of four (4) feet.
b. Easements ten (10) feet wide are required for trails. Provide a plan note indicating
such easement must be five (5) foot on either side of the centerline of the trail as
constructed.
c. Encroachments into the trail shall not result in less than a four (4) foot wide
minimum clearance width from any obstacles.
d. Marked crosswalks shall be provided within the vehicular travel ways intersecting
with trails.
SECTION 808 PRESERVATION OF NATURAL, HISTORIC, AND CULTURAL
FEATURES
A. Intent.
Mature trees, topography, natural drainage ways, and historic sites are a few of the elements
that contribute to the distinct character of Highspire Borough. To protect these features and
resources that enhance the local character, new projects shall work within the context and
integrity of this environment by preserving natural, historical, and cultural features to the
maximum extent possible.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 8)
PART 8 - 17
Design Standards
B. Design Guidelines.
New projects should integrate existing natural features, required open space, existing historic
structures, and cultural resources located on the site into the overall design and layout of the
development.
1. A site analysis shall be submitted using all applicable reports, plans, and maps to
determine whether significant natural or other features exist on a site that should be
protected, with priority being given to the following areas (which are not listed in order
of priority or significance):
a. Floodplains, surface drainage swales, bodies of water;
b. Wetlands;
c. Existing significant trees;
d. Historical, cultural, or archeological sites or areas recognized by the Borough,
state, or federal governments as significant;
e. Prominent topography; and
f. Steep slopes
2. The proposed building and impervious footprint(s) shall be clearly identified on each plan
to identify potential impacts to existing trees, other natural features, historic structures,
and cultural resources.
SECTION 809 LANDSCAPING
A. Intent.
Landscaping plants intercept rainfall; reduce stormwater runoff, prevent erosion, and reduce the
need for detention. Landscape plants also provide shade and reduce the temperature created by
additional impervious surfaces. Plants release moisture back into the environment, improve air
quality, and remove contamination from the soil and water by absorbing excess nutrients, filter
sediments, and break down pollutants. Planting native plants helps provide habitat, food, and
protection for native species and ecosystems. Planting native species generally increases the
chance for long term survivability of the plant because they are naturally adapted to local
conditions. Planting non-native species and cultivars could be incorporated in designs when
they provide a superior plant for spatial constraints and urban stress mitigation found in local
site conditions. Existing significant trees which help contribute to the sense of place should be
preserved to the maximum extent practical.
B. Design Guidelines
In addition to the landscaping, screening, buffering, and vegetative preservation standards set
forth in Chapter 27 of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire relating to zoning,
landscaping, screening, buffering, and vegetation preservation shall comply with the following:
1. Native and Invasive Planting.
a. Native plant materials should be incorporated in all designs. The use of native
plant material can help improve water quality, provide additional and improved
wildlife habitat, and typically adapt to local conditions which then require less
maintenance. Native plants must be used near greenways, urban forested areas,
wetlands, and riparian areas.
b. Except as noted above, non-native plants may be included in place of a native plant
if it is not considered invasive and the plant does not introduce pests or diseases. A
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 8)
PART 8 - 18
Design Standards
non-native plant may be incorporated into designs when they prove to be better
suited for the urban soil, environment, or spatial constraints, urban stress
mitigation, and integration into the surrounding ecosystem.
c. The following is a list of invasive plants (trees, shrubs, grasses, flowers, and vines)
which shall not be used in any planting schedule:
1) Trees:
Common Name Botanical Name
Tree-of-heaven Ailanthus altissima
Norway maple *Acer platanoides
Sycamore maple Acer pseudoplatanus
Empress tree Paulownia tomentosa
Callery pear *Pyrus calleryana
Siberian elm Ulmus pumila
2) Shrubs:
Common Name Botanical Name
Japanese barberry *Berberis thunbergii
European barberry Berberis vulgaris
Russian Olive Elaegnus angustifolia
Autumn olive Elaeagnus umbellate
Winged Euonyimus *Euonymus alatus
Border privet Ligustrum obtusifolium
Common Privet Ligustrum vulgare
Tartarian honeysuckle Lonicera tartarica
Standish honeysuckle Lonicera standishii
Morrow’s
honeysuckle Lonicera rnorrowii
Amur honeysuckle Lonicera maackii
Bell’s honeysuckle Lonicera morrowii x tatarica
Common buckthorn Rhamnus catharticus
Glossy buckthorn Rhamnus frangula
Wineberry Rubus phoenicolasius
Multiflora rose Rosa multiflora
Japanese spiraca *Spiraeajaponica
Guelder rose
*Viburnurn opulus var.
opulus
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 8)
PART 8 - 19
Design Standards
3) Grasses:
4) Flowers:
5) Vines:
Common Name Botanical Name
Fiveleaf akebia Akebia quinata
Porcelain-beffy
Ampelopsis
brevipedunculata
Oriental bittersweet Celastrus orbiculatus
Japanese honeysuckle Lonicera japonica
Common Name Botanical Name
Cheatgrass Bromus tectorum
Japanesestilt grass Microstegium vimineum
Maiden grass *Miscanthus sinensis
Common reed Phragmites australis
Reed canary grass Phalaris arundinacea
Johnson grass Sorghum halepcnse
Shattercane
Sorghum bicolor ssp.
drummondii
Common Name Botanical Name
Garlic mustard Alliaria petiolata
Goutweed Aegopodium podagraria
Bull thistle Crisium vulgare
Canada thistle Cirsium arvense
Musk thistle Carduus nutans
Jimsonweed Datura stramonium
Goatsrue Galega officinalis
Giant hogweed Heracleum mantegazzianum
Dame’s rocket Hesperis matronalis
Purple Loosestrife
Lythrum salicaria, L.
virgatum
Eurasian water-milfoil Myriophyllum spicatum
Star-of-Bethlehem
Omithogallum nutans,
umbellatum
Japanese knotweed
Polygonum (Falopia)
cuspidatum/ Polgonum
sachalinense
Wild parsnip Pastinaca sativa
Beefsteak plant Perilla fmtescens
Lesser celandine Ranunculus ficaria
Water chestnut Trapa natans
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 8)
PART 8 - 20
Design Standards
Common Name Botanical Name
Kudzu Pueraria lobata
Mile-a-minute vine Polygonum perfoliatum
* Species with cultivars that are known to be non-invasive may be
acceptable within a planting plan.
2. Shade Trees, Vegetation, and Landscaping.
a. Any existing vegetation that is in appropriate locations, of an acceptable species
and quality may be used to fulfill landscaping, screening, and/or buffering
requirements.
b. In order to aid surveillance and minimize the potential for crime, planting shall
also be sited, massed, and scaled to maintain visibility of doors and first (1st) or
ground floor windows from the street and from within the development to the
greatest extent possible. Planting patterns shall not obstruct sight lines or create
isolated areas, especially near pedestrian walking paths.
c. Urban open space and other public areas should also include but not be limited to
at least three (3) of the following:
1) Seasonal planting areas
2) Large deciduous trees
3) Seating
4) Pedestrian scale lighting
5) Gazebos or other decorative shelters
6) Play Structures for children
7) Natural environment areas
8) Recreational amenities
9) Trails
10) Other features approved by the Borough Council which would implement
the goals of the Highspire Borough Comprehensive Plan
d. All plantings shall be performed in conformance with good nursery and landscape
practice. Plant materials shall conform to the standards recommended by the
American Association of Nurseryman, Inc., in the American Standard of Nursery
Stock, ANZIZ6O, current edition, as amended.
1) Provide a landscape plan note indicating that the top of the main order root
(first [1st] large set of roots that divide from the trunk) shall be planted no
lower than one (1) or two (2) inches into the soil.
2) Planting designs are encouraged to share planting space for optimal root
growth whenever possible. Continuous planting areas rather than isolated
planting boxes are generally encouraged.
3) No staking and wiring of trees shall be allowed without a maintenance note
for the staking and wiring to be removed within one (1) year of planting.
4) All trees shall be provided by the applicant in accordance with the following
standards:
a) The trees shall be nursery grown in a climate similar to that of the
locality of the project.
b) All trees shall have a normal habit of growth and shall be sound,
healthy, and vigorous; they shall be free from disease, insects, insect
eggs, and larvae.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 8)
PART 8 - 21
Design Standards
c) All trees shall have a minimum diameter of two and one half (2.5)
inches measured at four and one half (4.5) feet above the finished
grade.
d) Tree planting depth shall bear the same relationship to the finished
grade as the top of the root ball or original grade of origin.
5) All required landscape plants shall be maintained and guaranteed for a
length of eighteen (18) months from the date of planting, but shall be
perpetually maintained in a healthy condition by the property owner. Any
required planting that dies, is removed, or is severely damaged shall be
replaced by the current property owner as soon as is practical considering
growing seasons, within a maximum of one hundred fifty (150) days..
6) The plant’s growth shall not interfere with the street cartway, sidewalk,
signage, easements, clear sight triangles, or utility line. Within the clear
sight triangle, typical branching shall not be within ten (10) feet of ground
level after ten (10) years of growth.
7) No one species shall comprise more than thirty-three (33) percent of the
entire number of shade trees in a particular development.
8) Additionally, shade trees within the right-of-way and/or upon public
property shall:
a) comply with Chapter 25 of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough
of Highspire relating to shade trees specifically relating to the
varieties, locations, and spacing, and be subject to the approval of the
Borough Environmental Advisory Board and Borough Council.
b) be planted along both sides of the streets (where applicable) within
street rights-of-way (existing or planned to be dedicated to the
Borough) abutting or located within new development.
9) Existing significant trees and natural features, such as drainage corridors,
shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable and incorporated into
site plans and site design as major amenities.
a) If a significant tree is designated to be preserved but is removed or
substantially damaged during the clearing, grading, or construction,
the applicant or developer may be required by the Borough to replace
the removed or damaged tree.
3. Ground Cover.
Any part of a lot which is not used for structures, loading areas, parking spaces and aisles,
sidewalks and designated storage areas shall be provided with an all-season, well-maintained
vegetative groundcover, and shall be landscaped with trees and shrubs.
4. Existing Wooded Areas.
No more than twenty five (25) percent of existing woodlands located in environmentally
sensitive areas shall be destroyed or altered. If the applicant can prove that invasive species are
within either of these areas, then the percent of woodlands to be removed may be increased to
eradicate invasive species.
5. Tree Protection Zone.
a. Prior to construction the tree protection zone shall be delineated at the dripline of
the tree canopy. All trees scheduled to remain shall be marked; however, where
groups of trees exist, only the trees on the edge need to be marked. A forty-eight
(48) inch high snow fence or forty-eight (48) inch high construction fence mounted
on steel posts located eight (8) feet on center shall be placed along the boundary of
the tree protection zone.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 8)
PART 8 - 22
Design Standards
b. No construction, storage of material, temporary parking, pollution of soil, or
regrading shall occur within the tree protection zone. When there is a group of
trees, the tree protection zone shall be based on the location of the outer trees.
SECTION 810 LIGHTING
A. Intent.
Lighting must be scaled and laid out in a pattern that promotes safe vehicular and nonpedestrian
access to and within a development while minimizing impacts on adjacent
properties. Lighting in outdoor public places helps improve public safety and welfare. The
control of glare from non-vehicular light sources can improve impaired safe travel. Controlling
glare also helps protect neighbors and the night sky from nuisance glare and stray light from
poorly aimed, placed, applied, maintained, or shielded light sources.
B. Design Guidelines.
1. Lighting shall have intensities and uniformity ratios in accordance with the current
recommended practices of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America
(IESNA) as contained in the IESNA Lighting Handbook. Future amendments to said
recommended practices shall become a part of this Chapter without further action of the
Borough. Examples of intensities for typical outdoor applications, as extracted from the
8th Edition of the Lighting Handbook, are presented below:
Use Task Maintained
Footcandles1
Uniformity
Ratio2
(Max.:Min.)
Streets
Local Residential 0.4 Min. 6:1
LocalMixed Use 0.65 Min. 6:1
Local Non-Residential 0.9 Min. 6:1
Parking: Multi-Family (and
single family attached on 1
lot) Residential & Mixed Use
Low Vehicular/Pedestrian Activity 0.2 Min. 4:1
Medium Vehicular/Pedestrian Activity 0.6 Min. 4:1
Parking: Non-Residential
High Activity (e.g., regional shopping
centers/fast food restaurant facilities, major
athletic/ civic/cultural events).
0.9 Min. 4:1
Medium Activity (e.g., community
shopping centers, office parks, hospitals,
commuter lots, cultural/civic/recreational
events).
0.6 Min. 4:1
Low Activity (e.g., neighborhood shopping,
industrial employee parking, schools,
church parking).
0.2 Min. 4:1
Walkways and Bikeways 0.5 Min. 5:1
Building Entrances and Signs 4.0 Avg. -
1. Illumination levels are maintained horizontal Footcandles on the task, e.g., pavement or area surface.
2. Uniformity ratio is a measure of the dispersion of light on an area. The ratio is measured as maximum light level to
minimum light level. Example: 4:1 for the given area, the maximum level of illumination should be no less than 4 times the
minimum level of illumination (0.2 x 4 = 0.8 maximum light level)
2. Dedicated lighting fixtures shall be of a type and design appropriate to the lighting
application and aesthetically acceptable to the Borough. Dedicated and non dedicated
lighting fixtures shall meet the following standards:
a. For lighting horizontal tasks such as roadways, sidewalks, entrance, and parking
areas, fixtures shall meet IESNA fully shielded criteria (no light output emitted
above ninety (90) degrees at any lateral angle around the fixture). Individual
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 8)
PART 8 - 23
Design Standards
fixtures whose aggregate lamp output does not exceed one thousand eight hundred
(1,800) lumens (typical household outdoor lighting) are exempt from this
requirement.
b. Fixtures shall be equipped with, or be modified to, incorporate light directing
and/or shielding devices such as shields, visors, skirts, or hoods to redirect
offending light distribution and/or reduce direct or reflected glare. Glare control
shall be achieved primarily through the use of such means as cutoff fixtures,
shields and baffles, and appropriate application of fixture mounting height,
wattage, aiming angle and fixture placement.
c. The use of floodlighting, spotlighting, wall-mounted fixtures, decorative globes
and spheres, and other fixtures not meeting IESNA full-cutoff criteria shall be
permitted only with the approval of the Borough, based upon applicability in
retaining the character of the Borough and achieving acceptable glare control.
3. All outdoor lighting shall be aimed, located, designed, fitted, and maintained so as not to
present a hazard to drivers or pedestrians by impairing their ability to safely travel.
4. Unless for safety, security, or all-night operations, lighting shall be controlled by
automatic switching devices to permit extinguishing between eleven (11) p.m. and dawn.
a. Lighting proposed for use after eleven (11) p.m., or after the normal hours of
operation, shall be reduced by an average of seventy-five (75) percent from that
time until dawn, unless supporting a specific purpose.
5. Vegetation screens shall not be employed to serve as the primary means for controlling
glare.
6. The intensity of illumination projected onto an existing residential use from an existing
property boundary shall not exceed the following vertical footcandles, measured at the
existing property line at a height of five (5) feet;
a. One-tenth (0.1) Footcandle in the residential zoning districts.
b. Two-tenths (0.2) Footcandles in all other zoning districts except the residential and
CBD zoning districts.
c. Six-tenths (0.6) Footcandles in the CBD zoning district.
7. Pole mounted fixtures shall not be mounted in excess of twenty five (25) feet high.
8. Lighting standards in parking areas shall be placed outside paved areas or on concrete
pedestals at least two and one half (2.5) feet high above the pavement, or by other
approved protective means.
9. The Borough reserves the right to conduct a post installation nighttime inspection to
verify compliance with the requirements of this Chapter and, if appropriate, to require
remedial action at no expense to the Borough.
10. The Borough must accept dedication of street lighting facilities located within the rightof-
way of a street to be dedicated to the Borough.
a. Until such time as the street lighting is dedicated, the developer of the tract (who
has escrowed the street lighting) will be responsible for any and all costs
associated with each streetlight. Such costs shall include, but not be limited to:
administration, placement, and maintenance. Electrical charges shall be the
responsibility of the Borough at the issuance of the first (1st) building occupancy
permit within the development.
b. Streetlights not dedicated to the Borough will remain the responsibility of the
developer or appropriate private entity including all costs and responsibilities for
the lighting in perpetuity.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 8)
PART 8 - 24
Design Standards
SECTION 811 EASEMENTS
A. General.
All easements including by way of example and not limitation; sanitary sewer facilities,
stormwater drainage facilities, public or private utilities, access and/or pedestrian access shall
meet the standards found in this Section.
B. Design Guidelines.
1. To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be centered on property lines.
2. Nothing shall be placed, planted, set, or put within the area of an easement that would
adversely affect the function of the easement.
3. Indicate on the plans all proposed and existing easements of record and indicate their
location and width. All structures located within the easement shall be indicated. Note the
recording information on the plan of record.
4. To the fullest extent practical, utilities and pedestrian paths should be centered within an
easement. However, due to unexpected on-lot conditions, utility and pedestrian locations
may be flexible within the easement.
5. All utility companies are encouraged to use common easements. Utility easements shall
be based on the width required by the utility authorities but shall have a minimum width
of ten (10) feet. Utility easements shall be located within the street right-of-way,
preferably along alleys, or within the required building setback.
6. Where pedestrian access is provided outside of a street right-of-way, pedestrian
easements shall have a minimum width of ten (10) feet.
7. The applicant shall reserve easements where stormwater management and surface water
facilities exist or are proposed when located within the boundaries of the subject tract.
The applicant proposing to alter existing stormwater management facilities on adjacent
and/or downstream properties shall obtain a temporary construction easement or a
permanent easement and maintenance responsibilities shall be established, to the extent
feasible.
When the proposed stormwater management system will utilize or be integrated into an
existing stormwater collection or conveyance system, the existing facilities shall be
improved to the standards of this Chapter and Chapter 9 of the Codified Ordinances of
the Borough of Highspire relating to grading/stormwater. The applicant shall determine
the impacts of any proposed improvements of the existing system to downstream
properties. If the improvements will cause adverse impacts on downstream properties, the
applicant shall mitigate such impacts.
SECTION 812 SURVEYMONUMENTS ANDMARKERS
A. Monuments Shown on Final Plan.
The location of all existing and proposed monuments, lot line markers, property corners, and
drill holes shall be shown on the final plan. Those that are proposed shall be labeled as such.
Drilled holes in curbing shall be referenced mathematically to a point on the right-of-way line.
B. New Monuments.
Three (3) monuments shall be spaced around the proposed project with precise bearings and
distances labeled which reference those monuments to known property corners.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 8)
PART 8 - 25
Design Standards
1. Two (2) such monuments shall be consecutive corners along street rights-of-way and the
third (3rd) may be placed either on the boundary or internal to the site.
2. Longitude and latitude coordinates of the monuments shall be shown on the recorded
plan.
3. If GPS technology is used, it shall be rectified and calibrated to the State Plane
Coordinate System, North American Datum (NAD) 1983.
a. Monuments must be readily accessible and clear of overhead obstructions.
4. A computer readable point file including property lines, corners, rights-of-way, and
easements for the site shall be submitted to the Borough prior to plan recordation.
C. Monument Materials.
Monuments shall be of concrete or stone, with a flat top having a minimum width or diameter
of four (4) inches and a minimum length of thirty (30) inches. Concrete monuments shall be
marked with a three-quarter (3/4) inch copper, brass dowel, or drill hole; stone or precast
monuments shall be marked on the top with a drill hole.
D. Existing and Proposed Property Line and Right-of-Way Markers.
Markers shall be set at all points where lot lines intersect curves, at all angles in property lines,
at the intersection of all other property lines, and at the street right-of-way.
E. Marker (Pin) Materials.
1. Markers shall consist of iron pipes or steel bars at least thirty (30) inches long and not
less than five-eighth (5/8) of an inch in diameter.
2. Drill holes shall be drilled in concrete curbs (with or without PK nails or discs) having a
minimum diameter of one-quarter (1/4) inch. The depth of the holes shall be such that a
PK nail or disc, if used, can be set in as close to the surface of the curb as possible.
Minimum depth without the use of PK nail or disc shall be one-half (1/2) inch. In the
absence of PK nails or discs, chisel or saw marks shall be used to facilitate and identify
the drill hole locations.
F. Certification of Monuments and Markers.
1. All monuments, markers, and drilled holes shall be placed by a the qualified professional
land surveyor licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania so that the
scored marked point, or center of the drilled hole shall coincide with the point of
intersection of the lines being monumented or marked.
2. Provide a note on the plan indicating when the monuments and markers are to be set.
SECTION 813 SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL
A. Sanitary Sewage Disposal.
1. In addition to the provisions set forth in Chapter 18 of the Codified Ordinances of the
Borough of Highspire relating to sewers, the applicant shall provide the development
with a complete sanitary sewage system to be connected to the existing sanitary sewerage
system in accordance with any other Borough Authority and Borough specifications as
well as the following:
a. The sanitary sewer shall be installed in the street bed or approved right-of-way.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 8)
PART 8 - 26
Design Standards
b. Lateral installation shall be to the right-of-way lines of the streets, lot, parcel, or
property lines or sewer easement right-of-way lines, whichever pertains to
individual situations.
c. All termini shall be capped in a manner with will insure that all laterals and house
connections shall be water tight-pending connection with the public sanitary
sewerage system. The system shall be designed by a qualified professional
engineer licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and approved
by the Borough Authority Engineer. The Borough Authority engineer shall also
inspect construction of all sanitary sewers to insure that said sewers have been
installed in accordance with the all Borough Authority and Borough specifications.
2. The applicant shall provide evidence of approval from the DEP prior to plan recording.
3. When connection to an existing public sewage system is proposed, the application shall
include a statement from the Borough Authority that sufficient capacity to service the
proposed development is available. Such notice shall be dated within twelve (12) months
of the plan application. Extenders agreements shall be provided prior to dedication.
4. Approval by the Borough Authority of the sewage facilities shall be received and
submitted to the Borough prior to final plan recording.
SECTION 814 WATER SUPPLY
A. Water Supply.
1. The applicant shall provide the development with a complete water main supply system
to be connected to the existing or proposed water main supply system in accordance with
Borough and private water utility service provider specifications.
2. The applicant shall provide documentation in the form of a copy of a Certificate of Public
Convenience from the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission and/or water utility
service provider that the project is located in an area served by a public utility and a
statement that the utility has the capacity to serve the project at this time; or a cooperative
agreement or an agreement to serve the project from the water utility service provider.
3. Fire hydrants shall be provided in accordance with the following:
a. The location and kind of fire hydrant shall meet the specifications of the local
Borough regulation.
b. Fire hydrants shall meet the specifications of the Middle States Department
Association of Fire Underwriters and the Borough Fire Department.
c. All dwellings and buildings shall be located within six hundred (600) feet of an
active fire hydrant, measured by way of accessible streets.
d. All fittings shall be in accordance with the standards of the applicable Borough
Fire Department. The large fitting shall face the street and be a minimum of
sixteen (16) inches above the ground level.
e. Fire hydrant location(s) shall be submitted prior to final plan approval.
SECTION 815 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
A. For all subdivision and/or land development plans, the applicant shall submit a stormwater
management plan in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 9 of the Codified Ordinances of
the Borough of Highspire relating to grading/stormwater management. Action on the
stormwater management plan shall be made in conjunction with the development plan.
RETTEW
Draft Date: September 13, 2011
Enacted: November 15, 2011 (22, PART 8)
PART 8 - 27
Design Standards
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 APPENDICES
APPENDICES - 1
LANDOWNER
APPENDIX A - CERTIFICATIONS
A statement duly acknowledged before an officer authorized to take acknowledgement of deeds and
signed by all landowners. This statement shall be signed and dated on or after the last change or revision
to said plan.
A. Individual - Certification of Ownership, Acknowledgement of the Plan, and Offer of
Dedication.
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
County of Dauphin
On this, the day of , 20 , before me, the undersigned officer, personally appeared
who being duly sworn according to law, deposes and says that he is the of the property shown on
this plan, that he acknowledges the same to be his act and plan, that he desires the same to be recorded,
and that all streets and other property identified as proposed public property (excepting those areas
labeled “not for dedication” are hereby dedicated to the public use.
__________________________________
Signature of Landowner
_______________________________________________________________________
Signature and Seal of Notary Public or Other Officer Authorized to Acknowledge Deeds
My Commission Expires .
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 APPENDICES
APPENDICES - 2
B. Co-Partnership - Certification of Ownership, Acknowledgement of the Plan, and Offer of
Dedication.
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
County of Dauphin
On this, the day of , 20 , before me, the undersigned officer, personally appeared ,
being of the firm of who being duly sworn according to law, deposes and says that the copartnership
is the of the property shown on this plan, that the plan thereof was made at its
direction, that it acknowledges the same to be his act and plan and desires the same to be recorded, and
that all streets and other property identified as proposed public property (excepting those areas labeled
“not for dedication”) are hereby dedicated to the public use.
____________________________________
Signature of the Individual
_______________________________________________________________________
Signature and Seal of Notary Public or Other Officer Authorized to Acknowledge Deeds
My Commission Expires
C. Corporate - Certification of Ownership, Acknowledgement of the Plan, and Offer of Dedication.
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
County of Dauphin
On this, the day of , 20 , before me, the undersigned officer, personally appeared
being of (Name of Corporation), who being duly sworn according to law, deposes and says
that the corporation is the of the property shown on this plan, that he is authorized to execute said
plan on behalf of the corporation, that the plan is the act and deed of the corporation, further
acknowledges, that all streets and other property identified as proposed public property (excepting those
areas labeled “not for dedication”) are hereby dedicated to the public use.
_________________________________________
Signature of the Individual Corporate Seal
_______________________________________________________________________
Signature and Seal of Notary Public or Other Officer Authorized to Acknowledge Deeds.
My Commission Expires .
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 APPENDICES
APPENDICES - 3
SURVEYOR, ENGINEER AND/OR LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT STATEMENT OF ACCURACY
A. Survey Certification of Accuracy.
I hereby certify that, to the best of my knowledge, the survey and plan shown and described hereon is true
and correct to the accuracy required by Chapters 22 and 9 of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of
Highspire relating to subdivision/land development and stormwater management.
B. Storm Drainage Plan Certification.
I hereby certify that, to the best of my knowledge, the storm drainage facilities shown and described
hereon are designed in conformance with Chapters 22 and 9 of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of
Highspire relating to subdivision/land development and stormwater management.
C. General Plan/Report Data.
I hereby certify that, to the best of my knowledge, the (title of Plan report data) shown and
described hereon is true and correct to the accuracy required by Pennsylvania State Law and by Chapters
22 and 9 of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspirerelating to subdivision/land development
and stormwater management.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 APPENDICES
APPENDICES - 4
MUNICIPAL APPROVAL
A. Highspire Borough Preliminary Plan Approval Certification
At a meeting on , 20 the Highspire Borough Council granted PRELIMINARY PLAN
APPROVAL of this project, including the complete set of plans marked Sheet(s) through
which form a part of the application dated , last revised . This plan may not be recorded in the
office of the Dauphin County Recorder of Deeds, nor may any construction be initiated but when
combined with the other necessary approvals and permits, grants of authority to install on the public
improvements required as part of the plan.
___________________________________________ _______________________________________
Highspire Borough Council Signature Highspire Borough Council Signature
B. Highspire Borough
At a meeting on
Final Plan Approval Certification
, 20 , the Highspire Borough Council approved this project, and all conditions
have been met. This approval includes the complete set of plans and information that are filed with the
Borough in File No. , based upon its conformity with the standards of the Chapters 22 and 9 of the
Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspirerelating to subdivision/land development and
stormwater management.
___________________________________________ _______________________________________
Highspire Borough Council Signature Highspire Borough Council Signature
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 APPENDICES
APPENDICES - 5
C. Highspire Borough
At a meeting on
Planning Commission Review Certification
, 20 , the Highspire Borough Planning Commission reviewed this plan.
_____________________________________ ____________________________________
Highspire Borough Planning Commission Signature Highspire Borough Planning Commission Signature
D. Highspire Borough Engineer Review Certificate
Reviewed by the Highspire Borough Engineer.
_____________________________________
Highspire Borough Engineer Signature Date
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 APPENDICES
APPENDICES - 6
DAUPHIN COUNTY APPROVAL
A. Dauphin County Planning Commission (DCPC) Review Certificate
The Dauphin County Planning Commission, as required by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, Act 247 of 1968, as amended, reviewed this Plan on , 20 , and copy of the review is on file
at the office of the planning commission in DCPC File No. . This certification does not indicate
approval or disapproval of the plan by the Dauphin County Planning Commission, and the Commission
does not represent nor guarantee that this plan complies with the various ordinances, rules, regulations, or
laws of Highspire Borough, the Commonwealth, or the Federal Government.
_______________________________ ______________________________________
Chairman Designee signature Vice Chairman Designee signature
B. Dauphin County Recorder of Deeds Certificate
Recorded in the office for Recording of Deeds, in and for Dauphin County, Pennsylvania, in Subdivision
Plan Book , Volume , Page . Witness my hand and seal of office this day of
A.D.20 .
______________________________________
Recorder
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 APPENDICES
APPENDICES - 7
APPENDIX B - APPLICATION FOR CONSIDERATION OF A SUBDIVISION AND/OR
LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN
For Borough Use Only:
File No.:
Date of Receipt/Filing:
Highspire Borough Planning
Commission Meeting Date:
Highspire Borough Council Meeting Date:
The undersigned hereby applies for approval under Chapters 22 of the Codified Ordinances of the
Borough of Highspire relating to subdivision/land development for the Plan, submitted herewith and
described below:
1. Application Classification:
Sketch Plan Preliminary Plan
Final Plan Preliminary/Final Plan
Consolidation Plan Lot Add-On Plan
Waiver/Modification Process
2. Plan Name:
Consultant Project No.:
Plan Date:
3. Project Location:
4. Name of Property Owner(s)
Address: Phone No.:
Source of Title: Account No.:
Second Property Owner(s)
Address: Phone No.:
Source of Title: Account No.:
5. Land Use and Number of Lots and/or Units (indicate answer by number):
Single Family Detached Industrial
Multi-Family Attached Institutional
Mixed Use Other (please specify)
Commercial
6. Name of Applicant (if other than Owner(s))
Address: Phone No.:
7. Firm that prepared the Plan:
Address: Phone No.:
Person Responsible for the Plan:
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 APPENDICES
APPENDICES - 8
8. Zoning District:
Is a Zoning Variance, Special Exception, and/or Conditional Use Approval Necessary? Y / N
If Yes, please specify:
9. Net Acreage of Parent Tract(s):
Gross Acreage of Parent Tract(s):
Square Feet of Ground Floor Area:
10. Type of Water Supply Proposed:
Public Private Community
Community On-Lot Individual On-Lot
12. Sewage Facilities Plan Revision or Supplement Number:
Date Submitted:
13. Lineal Feet of New Street:
Identify all Street(s) Not Proposed for Dedication:
14. Acreage Proposed for Park or Other Public Use:
The undersigned hereby represents that, to the best of his knowledge and belief, all information listed
above is true, correct, and complete.
Signature of Landowner or Applicant Date
Signature of Landowner or Applicant Date
We do hereby request the Dauphin County Planning Commission review the enclosed Subdivision or
Land Development Plan in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, of
1968, as amended, Article V, Section 502.
Signature Title Date
For Dauphin County Planning Commission Use Only:
DCPC File No.:
Date of Receipt:
Dauphin County Planning Commission Meeting Date:
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 APPENDICES
APPENDICES - 9
APPENDIX C - APPLICATION FOR CONSIDERATION OF A MODIFICATION
For Borough Use Only:
File No.:
Date of Receipt/Filing:
Planning Commission Meeting Date:
Highspire Borough Council Meeting Date:
The undersigned hereby applies for approval of a Modification/Waiver, submitted herewith and described
below:
1. Plan Name:
Plan No.: Plan Date:
2. Project Location:
3. Name of Property Owner(s)
Address: Phone No.:
Source of Title: Account No.:
Second Property Owner(s)
Address: Phone No.:
Source of Title: Account No.:
4. Specific Section of the Chapters 22 and 9 of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspire
relating to subdivision/land development for which a modification is
requested:
The Proposed Alternative to the Requirement:
Justification for the Modification/Waiver:
The undersigned hereby represents that, to the best of their knowledge and belief, all information listed
above is true, correct, and complete.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 APPENDICES
APPENDICES - 10
Signature Date
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 APPENDICES
APPENDICES - 11
APPENDIX D - MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
This Memorandum of Understanding is entered into by and between the following parties: Highspire
Borough, hereinafter called “Borough” and , hereinafter called “Developer”.
RECITALS:
WHEREAS, Developer has submitted to the Borough a plan and application for a subdivision or land
development plan located in which is known and designated as .
WHEREAS, The Borough and Developer desire to set forth their understanding concerning the
Developer’s agreement and responsibility to install the public improvements and pay the costs involved in
processing, inspecting, and reviewing Developer’s subdivision and land development plan.
NOW, THEREFORE, intending to be legally bound hereby, the Borough and Developer agree as follows:
1. The Developer, at their own cost and expense, shall proceed to perform and complete
only those public improvements required by the Developer’s subdivision and land
development plan, subject to the approval of the plan and specifications by the Borough.
2. The Developer, prior to the commencement of work, shall provide in writing to the
Borough a notice of intent to commence construction and to provide an anticipated
construction commencement date
3. The Borough, or its designee, and the Developer shall agree upon a notification
procedure and a schedule of field inspections to be made during construction and upon
completion of all public improvements.
4. Upon completion of the public improvements, the Developer shall give notice to the
Borough, in writing, to inspect the public improvements. The Borough shall inspect the
public improvements within ten (10) days and shall approve same if they are completed
in accordance with the subdivision or land development plan and acceptable engineering
practices. If the Borough disapproves, they shall notify the Developer promptly.
5. Developer agrees to reimburse the Borough for professional engineering consultant
services, and Dauphin County Planning Commission services necessitated by the review
and approval of the Developer’s plans and necessitated by the review and inspection of
all required public improvements (both at the plan and installation stages) at the
prevailing rate, plus associated itemized expenses, where applicable. It is agreed that
professional engineering consultant services, and Dauphin County Planning Commission
services shall be payable by developer within forty-five (45) days after the date of invoice
and prior to final approval of developer’s subdivision or land development plan.
6. Where applicable, developer agrees to reimburse the Borough for solicitor services
necessitated by the review and approval of the Developer’s plan, and necessitated by the
review of all required financial security and other agreements. It is agreed the solicitor’s
INSTALLATION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS IN CONJUNCTION WITH PRELIMINARY
PLAN APPROVAL
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 APPENDICES
APPENDICES - 12
services shall be payable within forty-five (45) days after the date of invoice and prior to
final approval of Developer’s subdivision or land development plan.
7. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Developer reserves the right to contest the amount and/or
reasonableness of the fees pursuant to the provisions of the MPC.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hence caused this Memorandum of Understanding to be executed,
dated this day of 20 .
HIGHSPIRE BOROUGH COUNCIL
(Notary Seal) DEVELOPER
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 APPENDICES
APPENDICES - 13
APPENDIX D-1 - MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING AND FINANCIAL SECURITY
This Memorandum of Understanding is entered into by and between the following parties: Highspire
Borough, hereinafter called “Borough” and , hereinafter called “Developer”.
RECITALS:
WHEREAS, Developer has submitted to the Borough a plan and application for a subdivision or land
development plan located in which is known and designated as .
WHEREAS, The Borough has required and Developer has agreed that public improvements shall be
completed by the Developer, as provided in Part 6 of the Chapter 22 of the Codified Ordinances of the
Borough of Highspire relating to subdivision/land development.
WHEREAS, The Borough and Developer desire to set forth their understanding concerning the
Developer’s agreement and responsibility to install the public improvements and pay the costs involved in
processing, inspecting, and reviewing Developer’s subdivision or land development plan.
NOW, THEREFORE, intending to be legally bound hereby, the Borough and Developer agree as follows:
1. The Developer, at their own cost and expense, shall proceed to perform and complete
only those public improvements required by the Developer’s aubdivision or land
development plan, subject to the approval of the plans and specifications by the Borough.
2. The Borough, or its designee, and the Developer shall agree upon a notification
procedure and a schedule of field inspections to be made during construction and upon
completion of all public improvements.
3. Upon completion of the public improvements, the Developer shall give notice to the
Borough, in writing, to inspect the public improvements. The Borough shall inspect the
public improvements within ten (10) days and shall approve same if they are completed
in accordance with the subdivision or land development plan and acceptable engineering
practices. If the Borough disapproves, they shall notify the Developer promptly.
4. Developer agrees to reimburse the Borough for professional engineering consultant
services, and Dauphin County Planning Commission services necessitated by the review
and approval of the Developer’s plans and necessitated by the review and inspection of
all required public improvements (both at the Plan and Installation stages) at the
prevailing rate, plus associated itemized expenses, where applicable. Developer agrees to
reimburse the Borough for engineering, professional consultant services, and Dauphin
County Planning Commission services associated with the As-Built Plan review. It is
agreed that professional engineering consultant services, and Dauphin County Planning
Commission services shall be payable by Developer within forty-five (45) days after the
date of invoice and prior to final approval of Developer’s subdivision or land
development plan.
5. Where applicable, Developer agrees to reimburse the Borough for solicitor services
necessitated by the review and approval of the Developer’s plan and necessitated by the
INSTALLATION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS IN CONJUNCTION WITH FINAL PLAN
APPROVAL
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 APPENDICES
APPENDICES - 14
review of all required financial security and other agreements. It is agreed the solicitor’s
services shall be payable within forty-five (45) days after the date of invoice and prior to
final approval of Developer’s subdivision or land development plan.
6. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Developer reserves the right to contest the amount and/or
reasonableness of the fees pursuant to the provisions of the MPC.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hence caused this Memorandum of Understanding to be executed,
dated this day of , 20 .
MUNICIPAL GOVERNING BODY
(Notary Seal) DEVELOPER
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 APPENDICES
APPENDICES - 15
FINANCIAL SECURITY
This Financial Security is entered into by and between the following parties:
Highspire Borough, hereinafter called “Borough” and , hereinafter called “Developer”.
RECITALS:
WHEREAS, Developer has submitted to the Borough a plan and application for a subdivision and land
development plan located on which is known and designated as .
WHEREAS, The Borough and Developer desire to set forth their understanding concerning the
Developer’s agreement and responsibility to install the public improvements, provide a financial security,
and pay the costs involved in inspecting and approving Developer’s subdivision or land development
plan.
NOW, THEREFORE, intended to be legally bound hereby, the Borough and Developer agree as follows:
1. The Developer, at their own cost and expense, shall proceed to perform and complete all
Public Improvements required by the Developer’s subdivision or land development plan,
subject to the approval of the plans and specifications by the Borough.
2. To assure completion of the public improvements required as a condition for the final
approval of the Developer’s subdivision and land development plan, the Developer shall
provide for deposit with the Borough, financial security (consistent with Part 6 of the
Chapter 22 of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Highspirerelating to
subdivision/land development, in the amount sufficient to cover the costs of all public
improvements, including, but not limited to, streets, street signs, sidewalks, curbs,
landscaping including shade/street trees, storm drainage for dedication or which affect
adjacent properties or streets, sanitary sewer facilities for dedication, water supply
facilities for dedication, fire hydrants, lot line markers, survey monuments, and other
related facilities. Such security shall provide for, and secure the completion of the public
improvements within one (1) year of the date fixed in the subdivision or development
plan. The amount of financial security shall be equal to one hundred ten (110) percent of
the cost of the required public improvements for which financial security is posted. The
cost of the public improvements shall be established by submission to the Borough of an
estimate prepared by the Developer’s Engineer, subject to review, comment, and
approval by the Borough or its designees.
3. The Borough, or its designee, and the Developer shall agree upon a notification
procedure and a schedule of field inspections to be made during construction and upon
completion of all public improvements.
4. Upon completion of the public improvements, the Developer shall give notice to the
Borough or its designee, in writing, to inspect the public improvements. The Borough or
its designee shall inspect the public improvements within ten (10) days and shall approve
same if they are completed in accordance with the subdivision or land development plan
and acceptable engineering practices. If the Borough or its designee disapproves, they
shall notify the Developer promptly.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 APPENDICES
APPENDICES - 16
5. Developer agrees to reimburse the Borough for professional engineering consultant
services, necessitated by the review and approval of the Developer’s plans and
necessitated by the review and inspection of all required public improvements at the
prevailing rate, plus associated itemized expenses, where applicable. It is agreed that
engineering, professional consultant services shall be payable by Developer within ten
(10) days after the date of invoice and prior to final approval of Developer’s subdivision
or land development plan.
6. Where applicable, Developer agrees to reimburse the Borough for solicitor services
necessitated by the review and approval of the Developer’s plan(s), and necessitated by
the review of all required financial security and other agreements. It is agreed the
solicitor’s services shall be payable within ten (10) days after the date of invoice and
prior to final approval of Developer’s subdivision or land development plan.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hence caused this financial security to be executed, dated this
day of , 2009.
MUNICIPAL GOVERNING BODY
(Notary Seal) DEVELOPER
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 APPENDICES
APPENDICES - 17
APPENDIX E - Reserved for Future Use
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 APPENDICES
APPENDICES - 18
APPENDIX F - GENERAL DESIGN GUIDELINES WITH HISTORIC FEATURES
A. Size, Scale and Proportion.
New construction should reflect the dominant proportions, size and scale of buildings
comprising the streetscape. The height and width of the front façade should relate to the
average height and width of historic buildings. New buildings should be designed within ten
percent of the average height of adjacent historic buildings.
B. Massing and Shape.
Building shape, massing, and roof shape of new construction should reflect that found in
surrounding buildings.
C. Materials and Textures.
Building materials, textures and treatments should be compatible with surrounding buildings.
Where traditional materials, such as brick, stone, and wood area common in the immediate
neighborhood, use of these materials on front facades and secondary facades for corner
properties is recommended.
D. Rhythm and Patterns.
Design elements of principle facades should reflect the neighborhood patterns. Examples
include prevalent vertical or horizontal orientation of elements. Large buildings can be divided
into bays to reflect neighborhood rhythms.
E. Cornice and Floor-to-Floor Heights.
Design elements of principal facades should reflect the cornice and floor-to-floor heights,
spacing between windows and doors and between windows and cornices or rooflines, or should
incorporate detailing to suggest the same. The design should also reflect the dimensions of the
façade’s base and cornice.
F. Windows and Doors.
The use of window and door openings of size and design typical to the neighborhood is
recommended.
G. Streetscapes, Orientation and Location.
New construction should reflect prevailing setbacks, orientation and physical elements, which
define streetscapes.
RETTEW
Effective Date: November 4, 2009
Enacted: December 15, 2009 APPENDICES
APPENDICES - 19
APPENDIX G - CHECKLIST FOR STREET & ACCESS DRIVE DESIGN
STREET NAME: PROJECT NAME:
STATION NUMBER: DATE: SHEET /
1. Classification: (circle one) 3. Ownership: (circle one) 5. Street Function: (circle one)
• Rural • Public/Dedicated • Alley
• Urban • Private • Local
• Collector
2. Project Type: (circle one) 4. Principal Design Vehicle: (circle one) • Arterial
• Residential • Automotive
• Mixed Use • Truck
• Commercial/Industrial
6. Attached Design Criteria Matrix Verifies the Following:
• Volume of Average Daily Trips:
• Design Speed:
• Vertical Attributes:
? Maximum Slope: %
? Minimum Slope: %
? ”K” Value for Crest Curves:
? ”K” Value for Sag Curves:
• Level of Service (LOS) at Intersections:
? New Intersection: LOS C or better
New Intersection with Existing Street: LOS D or better
• Horizontal Attributes:
? Minimum Safe Stopping Sight Distance:
? Minimum Sight Distance at Intersections:
? Minimum Centerline Curve Radius:
? Curb Radii
• Local – Local: 10’-15’
• Local – Collector: 15’-20’
• Collector – Collector: 15’-25’
One Side/Both Sides Width Total Width
? Thru lanes: x =
? Turn lane: x =
? On-Street Parking: x =
? Multi-modal lane: x =
? Gutter (Storm Water): x =
? Shoulder: x =
? Curb: x =
? Swale: x =
? Sidewalk: x =
? Grass/Tree Strip: x =
? Boulevard Island: x =
Total Right-of-Way Width =
7. Special Considerations: (traffic signals, streetscape and lighting requirements, crosswalk treatments, etc.)
8. Agreed by Developer meeting attendee(s):
9. Agreed by Borough meeting attendee(s):
RETTEW APPENDICES
Preliminary Draft – XX, 2009
APPENDICES - 20
APPENDIX H - STREET / RIGHT OF WAY MATRIX
Project Name: Developer: Borough: Date:
Signature Signature
Existing Streets Proposed Street =
Frontage St. Connection St’s Arterial Major Collector Minor Collector Major Local Minor Local/Cul-de-sac Alley
Street & Segment
Design Speed (mph) 55 mph 45 mph 50 mph 30 mph 35 mph 40 mph 45 mph 25 mph 30 mph 35 mph 15 mph 20 mph 25 mph 15 mph
Travel Lane Width
One-way
Two-way
Turn Lane Width
On Street Parking (7 ft min)
None
One-side
Two-side
Multi-Modal Lane Width
(One-Sided or Two Sided)
2 feet
4 feet 1 or 2 1 or 2 1 or 2 1 or 2
5 feet (min. for bike)
6 feet 1 or 2 1 or 2 1 or 2
8 feet 1 or 2 1 or 2
Gutter (SWM) Width
Curb (Yes/No if gutter is used)
Buffer Strip Width (4 ft min)
Sidewalk Width (4 ft min)
None
One Side (=2 u/a)
Two Sided (=2 u/a)
Total Right-of-Way Width
Design Speed Equals: 15 mph Alley, Minor Local/Cul-de-Sac 35 mph Major Local, Minor Collector 55 mph Arterial, Major Collector
20 mph Minor Local/Cul-de-Sac 40 mph Minor Collector
25 mph Minor Local/Cul-de-Sac, Major Local 45 mph Major Collector, Minor Collector Not to be used
30 mph Major Local, Minor Collector 50 mph Major Collector