- I
j
- 1
- l •
1 -~
i
~ -j
'
1
- g ~'j
!
-~
j
1
-!
l
~
. .
ZONING ORDINANCE
. .
· · OF THE
CITY OF HAZLETON
. . . .
···:LUZ·E·RNE C6UNT·v PENNSYLVANIAt-: ···-· ·~ . • .. . . I . . •.. ·· . - .., ;-
'
Adopted December 14, 1995
. .· ,.
. : • • ·I
... ' .
..
----- ---
......
ZONING ORDINANCE
CITY OF HAZLETON
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 1 -
SECTION 2 -
SECTION 3 -
SECTION 4 -
. .
Titles, General Intent, Establishment of Controls
Establishment of Districts
The Zoning Map
Definitions, Interpretations of Regulations
ARnCLE 11·- RESibi;NDAL DliDICTS ..
SECTION 1 ....
SECTION 2 ...
SECTION 3 -
·SECTION 4 -
SECTION 5 -
Statement of Intent
R-1 Low Density Residential District
R-2 Medium Density Reslde~tfal District·
R-3 High Density ·Residential District
0-S Open ~pace District
ARTICLE Ill - OFFICE AND COMMERCIAL· DIUBICTS
SECTION 1 -
.SECTION 2 -
SECTION 3 -
SECTION 4 -
Statement of Intent
ProfessiOnal. Office and Commercial Office Dlst.
CC~Central Commercial District
CH :.. Commerci.a~ Highway District
ARTICLE lV • iNDUSTRIAL DtmiCTS
SECTION 1 -
SECTION 2 -
SECTION 3 -
Statement of Intent
1-:-1 Light Industrial District
1-2· General Industrial District
ARTICLE V ... SIGIY$ AND SUpPLEMENTARY REGUL~OIYS
SECTION 1 ...
SECTION 2 -
Stgn Regulations
. Supplementary Regulations
ARTICLE VI - MpDIBCADONS AIYD NOIYCONFORMmES
SECTION 1 ..;
SECTION 2 -
. Modifications
Nonconformities
pg. 1 - 3
pg. 3. 4
pg. 4. 5
pg. 5 -.28
pg. 27
pg. 28-30
pg. 31-33
pg. 33-38
pg. 38-39
pg.40
pg. 41-46
pg. 45-48
pg. 4&-52.
pg.63
pg. 64-81
pg. e;-e3
pg. 64-70
pg. 71-88
pg. 89-94
pg. 94-104
-J ORDINANCE 95-26
THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF HAZLETON
-1
pREAMBLE
-1 1 This Ordinance is adopted In order to promote and protect the public health, .
safetY, comfort, convenience, prosperity and other aspects of the general welfare.
-1 These general goals include, among others; the specific purposes set forth in the
J statements of intent of the regulations for the respective districts.
"l -, ARnCLEI
GENERAL PROVJSIONS
-1 SECTION 1 TIRES. GENERAL INTENT~ ESTABLISHMENT OF CONmDLS
_ J 1.1 Long Title
~
-l
-1
1 .. 2
REPEALING THE ZONING ORDINANCE ·oF THE CITY OF HAZLETON OF
.1965 AS.AMENDED, REPLACING SAID ORDINANCE WITH·AN ORDINANCE
PERMITTING, "PROHIBITING, REGULATING, RESTRICTING, AND
DETERMINING;THE USES OF .LAND, WATERCOURSES, AND OTHER
BODIES.OF .. WATER; THE.SilE,.HEIGHT,.BULK, LOCATION, ERECTION,
CONSTRUCTION,. R.EPAIR,, .MAINTENANCE, ALTERATION, RAZING,
REMOVAL AND use··oF-STRUCTURES; THE AREAS AND DIMENSIONS OF
LAND AND BODIES OF WATER TO BE OCCUPIED BY.USES AND
STRUCTURES AS _WELL AS COURTS, YARDS, AND OTHER OPEN SPACES
AND DISTANCES TO BE LEFT UNOCCUPIED BY USES AND STRUCTURES;
THE DENSITY .OF POPULATION AND INTENSITY OF USE; THE LOCATION
AND SIZE OF SIGNS; CREATING ZONING DISTRICTS AND ESTABLISHING
THE BOUNDARIES THEREOF; CONTINUING THE OFFICE OF ZONING
OFFICER; CONTINUING A ZONING HEARING BOARD; AND PROVIDING FOR
THE ADMINISTRATION, AMENDMENT, ANP ENFORCEMENT OF THE
ORD~NANCE,·1NCLUDING THE IMPOSITION OF PENAL TIES.
Short Title
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Zoning Ordinance of
the City of Hazleton, Luzerne County, Pennsylvania- 1995.
1
ARTICLE VII - ZONING HEARING BOARD .
SECTION 1 -
SECTION 2 -
SECTION 3 -
SECTION 4 -
Powers and Duties - General
Public Hearings
Varianc's
Special Exceptions
ARTICLE VIII - STANDARDS FOB SpECIAL EXCEeJION USES
SECTION 1 -
SECTION 2 -
. . .
Requirement of Specific Standards
Special ~caption. Standards
ARTICLE IX .. ADMINISTBADON
SECTION 1 -
SECTION 2 -
SECTION 3 -
SECTION 4 -
· Administration and Enforcement
Permit$ and· Certificates
Amendments
Adoption
pg. 105-107
pg. 108-110
pg. 111-112
pg. 112-115
pg. 116
pg. 116-139
pg. 140-143
pg. 144-147
pg. 147-150
pg. 150
-,
- 1
-;
-j
_1
1
i
-l
i
j
-J
!
-~
1.3
1 .. 4
Community Goals and Objectives ·
The zoning regulations and districts set forth in this Ordinance are made in
apcordance with the goals, objectives and recommendations of the City of
Hazleton Comprehensive Plan of 1992 with consideratron for the character
of the municipality, and the suitability of the various parts for particular uses
an~ structures, and is enacted for the following purposes: to promote the
health, safety, morals and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City of
Hazlato~J by lessening conge$tion in the roads and streets, by securing
safety from fire and other danger, by providing adequate light and air, by
preventing the overcrowding of the land, by avoiding undue concentration
of population, by facilitating the ·adequate provision of transportation, water,
sewage, schools, parks; pollee protection and other public requirements, as
well as to conserve the value of land and buildings. The regulations were
made with reasonable consideration, among other things, of the existing
character of the various areas within the City and their respective suitability
for particular uses.
Establishment of Controls
~~
··>r
1.4. 1 ~lnimum and. Uniform Regulations
~?-
"' "(--he regulations set ·by this Ordinance within each district shall be minimum
~~gulations, except when the contrary is specifically noted and shall apply
~iformly to each class or kind of structure of lalld. · ·
".r:-!.
1 .4. 2 Controls Over New Usas··and Structures
In all districts, after the effective date of this Ordinance. any new building or
other structure, or any tract of land shall be constructed, developed and
used only in accordance with the regulations specified for the district within
which It is listed.
1.4.3 Controls Over Existing Uses and Structures
In all districts. after the effective date of this Ordinance, any existing
building or other structure, or any tract·of land which is not in conformity
with the regulations for the district In which it is located shall be deemed
non-conforming and subject to the regulations of Article VI.
2
1.4.4 Uses With Nuisance Effect
In no case is a use permitted which by reason of noise, dust, odor,
. appearance, or other objectionable factor, creates a nuisance, hazard, or
other substantial adverse effect upon· the reasonable enjoyment of the
surrounding property. Every reasonable effect must be made to prevent this
effect thro.ugh: ·
a) Control of lighting.
b) Design and maintenance of structures.
c) Use of planting screens or attractive fences.
d) Placement of structures on the site.
e) Appropriate control of use •
. f, Prompt removal of trash or junk.
SECTION 2 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
2.1 Types of Districts
For the purposes of this Ordinance the City of Hazleton is hereby divided
into nine districts, designated as follows: ·
2. 1. 1 Residential Districts
R-1 Low:-Denslty, Residence D~strict
R-2 Medium-Density Residence District
R-3 High-Density Residence District
0-S Open Space District
2~ 1.2 Commercial Districts
0 Professional Office District
CC Central Commercial District
CH Commercial Highway District
2. 1.3 Industrial Districts
· J-1 Light Industrial District
1-2 General Industrial District
3
- 1
-l
1
2. 2 Districts of Annexed Area
Any territory hereafter annexed by the City of Hazleton shall be considered
to be zoned R-1, Low Density Residence District, until otherwise classified
by action of City Council.
2.3 Lot Sizes
Any lot hereafter created, as· well as the open spaces reserved on it, must
equal, or exceed, the minimum sizes prescribed by this Ordinance for the .
district in which the lot is located, unless otherwise specifically stipulated in
the City of Hazleton Subdivision and Land ~evelopment Ordinance.
SECTION 3. IHE ZONING MAP
-l
1 3.1 Adoption of Zoning Map j
-~
-·
The areas within the City of Hazleton assigned to EJach district and the
location of boundaries for the districts established by this Ordinance are
shown upon the Zoning Map, dated 9/96, which, together with. all
wxplanatory matter thereon, Is c:Jeclared to be a part of this Ordinance and
·.shall be kept on file with the Council Clerk. Any change in boundaries of
other matter included on the Zoning Map, shall be made on the Map
,promptly after amendment has been approved by City Council.
3.2 ··.District Boundary .Linea
District boundary lines shall b~ as shown on the Zoning Map. Where
uncertainty exists as to .the ·boundaries of the zones as shown on the City of
Hazleton Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
a) Boundaries indicated ·as approximately following the centerline of
streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such
centerline. ·
b) Boundaries Indicated as approximately foll~wlng platted lot lines .shall
be construed ~s following such lot lines. ·
c) BOundaries indicated as approximately following municipality limits
Shall be construed 8S following municipality limits. .
d) Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to
be midway between the main tracks.
4
e) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of
streams, rivers or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow
such centerline.
f) Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions. or features indicated
ir:- Sub-section (a) through (e) shall be so construed. Distances not
specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined
by the scale of the map.
g) Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground·are at
variance with those shown on the official zoning map or in
circumstances not covered by Sub-section ·(a) through (f), the Zoning
Hearing Board shall interpret the district boundaries.
SECTION 4. bEFINmONS. INTERPRETATIONS ·of BEGULADONS
4.1 VV~rd Usage
·Words and-phrases shall be·presumed to be used in their ·ordinary context
unless .s.uch word or phrase is defined or interpreted differently within this
Section.·
..
4.2 lnterpretadon.of Language
For the.purpose of.this- Ordinance, certain words shall have the meaning
assigned to. them, as follows:.
a) . Words used in the present tense include the future. The sing_ular
number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
b) The word .. shall" is always mandatory.
. .
c) The word •building• includes •structure• and any part thereof.
d) .The phrase "used for• includes •arranged fora, "designed for",
•intended for•, •maintained for• or •occupied for".
e) The word •person• l~;~cludes an individual, partnership, corporation,
incorporated association or any ot~er similar entity.
f) The. ~ord •includes• or '*including• shall not limit the term to the
~pacified example, but is int~nded to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like, kind and character.
5
·t 4.2 Interpretation of Regulations
f
~
i
The interpretation of the regulations of this Ordinance is intended, in
addition to the provisions of Article I ~ Section 1.4.1 and Article IX - Section
4. 2, to be such that, whenever its requirements are at variance with any
other lawfully adopted rules, regulation, ordinances, deed restrictions or
covenants which refer particularly to area an~ bulk regulations, and which
Impose higher standards, the most restrictive requirement shall govern.
- I 4.4 Deflnldons ·
'
-.I' j
• -1
~
-~
The following words and phrases shall have the particular meaning assigned
by this section, In the appr_oprlate sections_ of this Ordinance.
AREA. LOT- The total area within the lot lines.
ACCESSORY BUILDING - A subordinate building whose use is customarily
incidental to that o fa principal building, and which is used for an accessory
use as defined herein, and, located on one lot with the principal building to -•¥-, . .
Which it Is subordinate. . .
ACCESSORY USE OR ACCESSORY - An •accessory usen Is: a use
9.,0nducted on the same lot as a principal use to which it is related, and
located either within the same structure or In an accessory structure or as
1\9-·. accessory use _of land; except that off..:street parking need not be located
on the. same lot.
Clearly if)cidental to, and customarily found in connection with a particular
princip~l use, and either in the same ownership as such principal use or
operate~ and maintained on one lot with such principal use for the express
benefit of its oWner, employees, customers or .visitors. An accessory use
Includes: ·
o Residential accommodations for caretakers of institutions and
large commercial or industrial uses.
o Keepin~ of domestic animals, but not for sale or hire.
. ' .
o Swimming pools whose use is restricted to the occupants of
the principal use and guests for whom no admission or
membership fee is charged.
6
o Domestic or agricultural storage customarily found in barn,
shed, tool room or similar structure.
o Incinerators
o In connection with commercial or manufacturing uses, as listed
in Articles Ill and IV, the storage of goods normally carried in
stock, used in, or produced by such uses, ur:aless the storage is
expressly prohibit(td under the applicable district regulations.
o The removal for sale or otherwise of loam, clay, sand, gravel,
or stone in· connectio~ with the construction of a building or
other structure on the same lot, or in connection with gri!ding
said lot, but in no case to a point below the legal street grade.
o Accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed.
o Accessory off-street loading berths.
o Accessory signs.
o Accessory radio or television antennas.
o Home occupation.
ALLEY - A public thoroughfare which normally. affords only a secondary
means of access to abutting property.
AQVEBDSING SIGN - (See Sign, and Billboard).
' -
AIBPOBT - Any landing area, excludin.g heliports which are accessory to a
principal commercial or industrial use, runway or other facility designated or
used· or Intended to be used, either publicly or by any person or persons, for
the l_anding and taking off of aircraft, fixed wing or non-fixed wing, inclu~ing
all necessary taxi-ways; aircraft storage and tie-down areas, hangars and
other necessary buildings, and open spaces within the airport boundaries.
ALTERATIONS • AU incidental changes or replacements In the non-structural
parts of a building or other ~tructures, and, minor changes or replacements
In the structural parts of a building. or other structure, limited to the
following examples and others of similar character or extent:
7
-j
- J
-1 l
-,l
1
1 -'i
-~
-~
j
- ~
0
0
0
0
Alteration of interior partitions to improve livability in non~
conforming residential buildings, provided no additional dwelling
units are crested thereby.
Alteration of interior partitions in all other types of buildings or
other structures.
Making windows or· doors in exte.rior walls.
Strengthening the load bearing capacity of a floor to permit
accommodation of a specialized unit of machinery or .
equipment, but not over an area which exceeds ten percent of
total floor area.
APPLICAlfi- A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has
flied an application for development including his heirs, successors and
assigns.·
APPLICATION FOB DEVELOPMENT - Every application, whether preliminary,
tentative or final, .required to be flied and approved prior to stai't of
construction or development including but not limited to an application for a
building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plan or for the approval of
a development plan. ·
AUTHORITY - A body politic and corporate created pursuant to the act of
~ay 2, 1945 (P.L. 382,· No. 164), known as the nMunicipality Authorities
Act of 1945•.
AUTOMOTIVE WASHING FACILITIES- Any premises used exclusively for
the washing and/or cleaning of vehicles.
BASEMENT - A story partly underground which has at least one-half of its
height abov, the average level of the adjoining ground. A basement shall be
counted as a story for the purpose of height measurement if the vertical
dis~ance between th(l ceiling and. the average level of the adjoining ground is
more. than five (5) feet or if -used for business or dwelling purposes, other
than as storage or recreation room.
BILLBOARQ - An· off premises sign upon which advertising matter of any
character is printed, posted or ·lettered. Such a sign may be either
freestanding or attached to a surface of a building or other structure.
8
BLOCK - A tract of land bounded on three sides by any combination of the
following: ·
o Streets
o Public Park
o Railroad right-of-way~ excluding siding and spurs
o Corporate boundary lines of the City of Hazleton
BOARDING HOUSE -. See Rooming House
BUILI)ING - Any structure having a roof supported by walls and intended for
shelter,. housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattel.
BULK- Bulk is the term used to describe the.size of buildings or other
structures and their relationship to one another, to open areas such as
yards, and to lot lines. The term bulk,. therefore, includes:
o The size, including height and floor area, of building or. other
.structure.
o The relation of the number of dwelling units in a residential
. building to the area of the lot.
o The relation of. buildings and other struC?tures .to areas in open
yards.·
CENTER LINE OF STREET - (See Street, Center Line Of)
Ct:IILQ-CABE CENTER - A facility dedicated to the care of children during
daylight hours. ·
C.llY - Hazleton City, Luzerne County, PA.
CQDE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER- Appointed by Mayor •.
CQM~ON OPEN SPACE - A parcel or pareel~ of land or an area of waste, or
a combination of land and water within a development -site and designed
and intended for the use or. enjoyment of residents of a development not
Including streets, off street parkin.g areas,. and areas sat aside for public
facilities.
CQMPBEf:IENSIYE PLAN - The official public document prepared in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Coda, Act 170 of
9
_]
1
'
·~
-;
-1
_;
1988, as amended, consisting of maps, charts, and textual materials, that
constitutes a policy guide to decisions about the physical and social
development of the City of Hazleton, adopted in 1992 and as amended from .
time to time.
CONDITIONAL use - A use which is not appropriate to a particular zoning
district as a whole, but which may be suitable in certain localities within the
district only when specific conditions and factors prescribed· fur such cases
within the Zoning Ordinance are present. Conditional uses are allowed or
denied by the Planning Commissi_on.
CONVENIENCE STOBE • A Commercial facility for the sale of fQOd and
sundry items. The sale of gasoline and related products, and/or the repair
of vehicles, requires a special. exception to be· granted by the Zoning Board.
CORNER LOT - A lot with two (2} adjacent sides abutting on streets which
has an Interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees at
the intersection of the two (2) street lines. A lot abutting on a curved street
shall be considered a corner lot if the tangents to the curve at the points of
intersection of the side lot lines with the street line intersect at an interior
angle of less than one hundred thirty-five ( 135) degrees.
COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION - The Luzerne County Planning
Commission. ·
CURB LEYEL - The officially established elevation of the top of curb in front
of the midpoint of the lot.
DAY -CABE CENTER - A facility dedicated to the housing and ca~e of elderly
persons~
DEVELOPE& • Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with the
permission of such landowner. who makes or causes to be mad~ a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DEYELOPMENT PLAN - The provisions for development, including a planned
residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to· use,
location· and· bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or
density of develop"tl~lent, streets, ways and parking facilities, common open
space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of the development plan"
When used in this act shall mean the written and graphic materials referred
to in this definition.
10
POMICILIARY CARe UNIT- (Personal Care)- See Day-Care Center.
DRIVEWAY - A minor vehicular right-of-way providing access between a
street and a parking area, garage, or a structure within a lot or property. A
driveway may also be used for short-term, temporary parking of vehicles.
DWELLING - A building or structure .designed for living quarters for. one or
more families, including mobile homes, which are supported either by a
foundation or by blocks or jacks covered by skirts or are otherwise ·
permanently attached to the land and anchored against wind and water
movement, but not including rooming houses, convalescent homes, motels,
hotels, and tourist homes or other accommodations used for transient
occupancy.
o Apartment - A dwelling containing three (3) or more dwelling
units which may be· separated horizontally and/or _vertically.
The individual dwelling units may or may not be in separate
ownership, however, the land shall be in single ownership or in
com~on ownership.
o Single-FamUy Detached - A dwelling unit, not attached to any
other dwelling unit, accommodating a single family and having
two side yards.
o Single-Family Semi-Detached - Two dwelling units
accommodating two families which are attached side by side
through the use of a party wall, and having one side yard ·
adjacent to each dwelling unit. ·
o Two-Family Detach~d - Two dwelling units accommodating two
families which are located one over the other and having two
side yards.
o Two-Family Semi-Detached - Four dwelling units
accommodating four families, two units of which are located
directly over the other two units.
o Townhouse - (Row Dwelling) Three or more dwelling units, but
not more than eight (8), accommodating three or more families
which are attached side by 'Ide ttlrough the use of common
party walls and which shall have side yards adjacent to each
end unit. Each dwelling unit Is generally two stories in height,
but may conceivably be either one or three stories in eight:
11
-l . B
-j
_J
l
1
-J'
1
'~
0
0
Garden Apartments - Three or more dwelling units
accommodating three or more families which are located one
o\fer the other and which, when more than three units are
utilized, are attached side by side through the use of common
party walls, and which shall have side yards adjacent to each
first $tory end unit. Each dwelling unit Is· accessible by a
commC?n walkway or sta.irwell.
Zero Lot Llni Dwelling - A single-family dwelling unit with no
more than two exterior walls located on a lot line with no
corresponding year area; provided however, that single·famJiy
semi·detached defined, shall not be deemed to be zero lot line
dwellings. Zero lot line dwellings may share up to two .
common walls with other zero lot line dwellings.
DWELLING UNJI • A Rdwelliilg unit• consists of one or more rooms. being
used .by one or rnore persons living toge~her and maintaining a common
household, and accessible· from the outdoors either directly or through an
entrance hall shared with other dwelling units.
EASEMENT- A right-of-way granted for limited use of private land for a
public or quasi-public purpose, and within which the ~wner of the property
shall .not have the right to make use of the land In a manner that violates the
right of the .grantee. · ·
ENLARGEMENT- An •enlargement" .is an addition to the floor area or an
&X;Isting b~ilding, an increase in size. of another structure, or an increase in
that portion of a t~act of land .on existing use.
FAMILY;
o A single person occupying a dwelling unit and maintaining a
household, or
o Two or more persons related by blood or marriage, occupying
dwelling unit, living together and maintaining a common
household, Including not mote than one boarder, roomer or
lodger, or
o Not more than five (5) unrelated persons occupying a dwelling
unit, living together and maintaining a common household.
12
FLOOR ABEA - The sum of the gros~ area of the several floors of a building
or buildings measured from the face of exterior walls or from centerlines of
walls separating two. buildings. lri particular, floor area includ.es:
o Basement space, except such enclosure as does not have any
windows on exterior walls..
o Elevator shafts, stairwells and attic space (whether or not a
floor has been laid} providing structural headroom of eight feet
or more.
o Roofed terraces, exterior balconies, breezeways or porches,
provided that over 50 percent of ~e perimeter of these is
enclosed. · · · · ·
o Any other floor space used for dwelling purposes, no matter
where located wlth.in a building.
o Accessory buildings, excluding space used for accessory offstreet
parking or for loading. benhs.
o Any other floor space not specifically excluded, except space
· used for air conditioning machinery or cooling towers and
similar mechanical equipment serving the building and cellar
space.
FLOOR AREA RATIO- "Floor Area Ratio" represents the total floor area
allowable. on a given lot, divided by the area of that ·lot. (For example, a
building containing 15,000 sq. ft. of floor area on a given lot of 10,000 sq.
ft. of lot area has floor area ratios of 1.5).
FRONT YARD.~ (See Yard)
EBONT YARD .LINE .. (See Yard Line)
GARAGE, PUBLIC ·- (See Parking Garage)
. .
GARAGE. PRIVATE- An accessory to a principal building, either attached to
it or separate, and used for storage purposes, and other personal uses of an
owner~ or tenant.·
GOVERNING BODY- The City Council.
13
- i
j
-I
-1 !
GB.OUP HOME~ ~
HEIGHT OF BUii.DING- The vertical distance measured from the average
level of finished grade along all the exterior walls of a building to:
0
0
0
The highest point of the roof. in the case of a flat roof;
The mean height between eaves and ridge, in the case of a
pitched roof; and
The highest point on any structure which rises wholly or partly
above the roof line, and whose area equals or exceeds 20 ·
percent of the ground floor area of the building which supports
it.
HEIGHT OF SIGN- The vertical distance measured:
0
~ ..
'··
0
From ground level to the. highest point on the sign itself and/or
its supporting structure~
Along the face of the sign or its supporting frame from lowest
point to highest.
~OME OCCUPATION - An. occupation in the home that is limited to the
occupational activities of the resident, and .
o Is clearly incidental or secondary to the (esidt;ma;ial use of the·
dwelling unit, or
o Is. customarily carried on within a dwelling unit or accessory
building by one or more occupants of suQh dwelling unit,
except that, in connection with the practice of the medical
profession or with other offices whose operations require
supplementary secretarial, clerical, accounting or drafting skills,
one person not residing in such dwelling may be employed.
o Occupies not more than 25 percent of the total floor area of
such dwelling unit or 500 sq. ft. , whichever is less. In
connection with the ·operation of a home occupation it shall not
be permitted:
o To sell articles produced elsewhere than on the
premises.
14
o To have interior displays of goods visible from the
outside.
o To store materials or products outsid~ a principal
. or accessory building or other structure.
o To make external alterations wh,ch are not
customary in residential buildings.
o To produce offensive and disturbing ·noise, smoke,
odor or other objectionable effects.
Home occupations include:
Fine arts studios, photography, private instruction, clergy, physician,
dentist, lawyer, engineer, accountant, architect,· barber and beauty
shop, dressmaking, steno service, consulting, or similar occupations,
but excluding the following occupations· or uses which shall include
but·are not·limited to· commercial stables or kennels, real estate or
. insurance offices, commercial merchandising or retail activities, and
any occu.pation that may customarily require the use of a panel truck
·or 8 delivery truck or SifJlilar vehicle.
HOTEL - A building or ·part of a building in which ·living and sleeping
accommodations are ·-used primarily for 11'8nsient ·occupancy and may be
rented on a daily basis, and desk service Is provided, in addition to one or
more of the following services: maid, telephone, ~ellboy services, or the
furnishing or laundering_ of linens. · ·
o A restaurant, cocktail lounge, public banquet hall, ballroom, or
meeting room are permitted as an accessory use.
LAND DEVELOPMENT -
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose Involving:
o A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed Initially or cumulatively, or a single
·nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number
of occupants or tenure; or
15
-i
j
-1 g
-j'
1
-l
1
-~
-1
0
0
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
A subdivision of land.
LANQOWNER - The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option or
contract Is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under the
lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having a
pr'!p rietary int~rest in land.
JJJJ: • A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit •
. ,\PI. LINE. FRONT - The street line separating the lot from the street, said
J~na ~eing lot front line as described in lot deeds.
?--~
LOT LINE. BEAR- Any lot line, except a front lot line, which Is parallel to, or
Within 45 degrees of being parallel to, and does not intersect and street line;
¥.¥hen an alley exists, It coincides with the accepted. boundary of such alley~
;).: J{l the case of a cornet lot, the owner or developer may make ·a different
designation. See definition of •corner lot" for reqvirements.
LOT LINE. SIDE - Any lot line which Is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
In the case of a corner lot, the owner or developer may make a different
designation. See definition of •corner Lot• for requirements. ·
MEDIATION - A voluntary negotiating process In which parties In a dispute
mutually select a neutral mediator to assist them In Jointly exploring and
settling :their differences, culminating In a written agreement ·which the
parties themselves create $nd consider acceptable.
MINI-MART - See Convenience Store. . .
MOBILE HOME- A transportable, single family dwelling Intended for
permanent occupancy, contained In one un~t, or In two or more units
d~signed to be joined into one integral unit capable of agahi being separated
for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for
occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
16
operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.
MOBILE HOME LQT - A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved with
the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary for the
erections thereon of a single mobilehome. ·
MOBILE HOME PARK - A parcel or contiguous parcels of rand which has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobilehome
lots. for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MOTEL - Building or a group of buildings which:
o Contain living and sleeping accommodations used primarily for
transient occupancy, and
o Have individual entrances from outside the building to serve
each such living or sleeping unit.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY - A body politic· and corporate create pursuant to
the act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No. 164), known as the •Municipality
Authorities· Act of 1945n .
. : .MUNICIPAL-ENGINEER -·. A-~.professlonal.engineer·licensed as such In the
· · ·Commonwealth 'i:Jf·.Pennsylvanla, duly, appointed as the engineer for a
municipality, planning agency or joint·planning commission.
MUNICIPALII'( - Any City of secorid Class A or third class, borough,
·incorporated town, township of the first-or second class, county of the
second cl~ss A through eighth class, home rule ·municipality, or any similar
ge~eral purpose unit of government which shall hereafter be created by the
Gener~l Assembly. ·
MULD-EAMILY OR TWO-fAMILY CONVERSIONS - A multi-fainily or two
family dwelling constructed by converting an existing building Into ·
apar:tments for more than one family, without substantially altering the
exterior of the building.
NONCONFORMITY - A use, structure, lot or dimension in conflict with the
regulations of t~ls Ordinance.
o Existing on the effective date of this Ordinance, or
17
-1
j
-i
j
J
-1
-1
I
0
0
Existing at any subsequ.ent amendment of this Ordinance, or
Created by variance. Specifically, the following types of
nonconformities are distinguished:
NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE - A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or extent of use
provisions in a zoning ordinance or amendment heretofore or hereafter
enacted, where such structure laWfully existed prior to the enactment of
such ordinance or amendment or prior to the application of such ordinance
or amendment to its location by reason of annexation. Such nonconforming
structures include, but are not limited to, non-conforming signs.
NON-CONFORMING LOT - A lot the area or dimension of which was lawful
prior to the adoption or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district hi which it is located by
.reasons of sue~ adoption or amendment.
NON-CONFORMING USE - A use, wheth~r of land or of structure, which
(fpes not comp1y with the applicable use provisions in a zoning ordinance or
-~
~p1endment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully in
~'.dstence prior to the enactment of such ordinance or amendment, or prior
to the· application of such ordinance or· amendment to its location by reason
-of annexation.
-~.;,. - ··O•P EN SPACE~ Predominantly und,veloped land which should remain
permanently open to serve public purpose.
ORDINANCE - Shall refer to Individual Ordinances enacted by the City of
Hazleton, Luzerne County.
OWNER - The owner of record of a parcel of land.
PARKING GARAGE- A building or structure provided for the general public
designated for short-term temporary parking of vehicles. Vehicles shall be
limited to currently registered and inspected vehicles.
PARKING LOT- A lot provided for the use of the general public designated
for short-term temporary parking of vehicles. Vehicles shall be limited to
currently registered and inspected vehicles.
18
PA_BKlNG SPACE - An open space with a dustless all-weather surface, or
space In a private garage or other structure, or; an area of at least 9 x 18
feet in size, for the storage of one automobile, accessible from a public way.
PLANS- Drawings which show the iocation, character, and dimensions of
the proposed occupancy and related roadway f~~tures, including layouts,
profiles, cross-sections, drainage and other·details as specified in the
Hazleton Subdivision ·and Land Development Ordinance.
o Final Plan - A complete and exact subdivision and/or land
developmem plan, including all supplementary data specified in
the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
o Improvement Construction Plan - A complete and exact
subdivision and/or land development plan the sold purpose of
which is to permit the construction of only those Improvements
required by the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance,
as an alternative to guaranteeing the completion of those
·improvements ·by a corporate·· bond or other s"'rety.
o . L~t Add-On Plan - A complete and exact subdivision plan
including all supplementary data specified in the Subdivision
~nd Land Development Ordinance. ·
o ··Preliminary. Plan· -·A subdivision and/or ·rand development plan
including all required ~upplementary data specified In the·
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, showing
approximate locations • . . . ·
o Record Plan - A Final Plan which contains the original
endorsement of the City. and the Luzerne County Planning
Commission, which Is intended to be recorded with the Luzerne
County Recorder of Deeds.
o Sketch Plan - A plan showing the. tentative street traffic pattern
and/or lot layout, to be used for Informal discussion with the
City staff prior to preparation of the preliminary and/or final .
plan(s). ·
PLANNING AGENCY - A planning commission, planning department, or a
planning committee of the governing body.
19
~
- J
l
-~
-1
- ~
~
;
l
j
·j; PLANNED INPUSTBIAL DEVELOPMENT ."An area of land controlled _by a
single landowner and developed as a single entity for a number of industrial
firms, and planned and approved within -the requirements of the Light
Industrial District 1-1 • ·
PLAT • The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether
prelimin~Jrv ~r final.
PBI~CIPAL BUILDING OR STRUCTURE - A building or structure In which is
cQnducted the principal use of the lot on which the building or structure is
located. ·
f731NCIPAL USE - The primary use of a building, s~ructure or lot.
~ .
..
eeopeary LINE - A recorded boundary of a lot. However, any property line
\iyhlch abuts a •street" or other public or quasi-public way shall be measured
from the right-of-way.
r.
rJIBLIC GROUNPS
o Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas
and other· public areas;
o Sites for schools, sewage treatment. refuse (llsposal and other
publiCly owned ~r operated facillt~ea; and
o Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
PUBUC HEARING ... A form~l meeting held pursuant to public notice by the
governing body or planning agency, intended to inform and obtain public
comment, . prior to takl~g action in accordance with this act.
PUBLIC MEETING - A forum held pursuant to notice under the act of July 3,
191l18 (P.L .. 388, No. 84), known as the •sunshine Act".
. .
PUBLIC Nonce ... Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Such notice
20
shan state theme and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the
matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
mor~ than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days from the date of the hearing.
PUBLIC SEWER * A system of providing sanitary sewage· collection and
treatment which is owned and/or operated by a Municipal Governing Body
and/or an Authority. ·
PUBLIC USES * Public and nonprofit seml*public use of a welfare and
educational nature, such as schools, parks, churches, cemeteries, historical
restorations, fire stations, municipal .. buildings, essential public utilities,
nonprofit recreational facilities, .and .easements for alleys, streets and public
utifity right~of-Ways. Private schools shan·not be considered public uses,
per se •
.. PUBLIC WATER - A system providing potable water which is owned and/or
operated by a ·Mun_iclpal Governing Body and(or an Authority.
BEAR YARD (See Yard)
BEAR YABP LINE (See Yard Une)
BIG.HJ-PE-WAY·-- The total width of any land reserved or dedicated as a
street, alley, pedestrian way, or for other public or private use.
ROOMING HOUSE - A building containing a single dwelling unit and guest
rooms, wher$ lodging Is provided with or without meals for compensation.
The term "Rooming .House" includes the term "Boarding House•.
SERVICE STADON - '-and and structures used or designed to be used for
the supply of fuel for motor vehicles and which· n:-av include facilities used
or designed to be used for cl.e aning or se.r vicing motor vehicles.
SETBACK- The required horizontal distance between a setback line and a
prC)perty or street line.
21
- J
f
- J
j
-l
j
< -,
-'l
~
-! t
~
-l
l
-]
i
0
0
0
0
Front - The distance between the street right-of-way line and
the .front setback line projected the full width of the lot.
Commonly called •tront yard•.
Rear- The distance between the rear lot line and the rear
setback line projected the full width of the lot. Commonly .
called .. rear yard •.
Side - The distance between the side lot line and the side
setback line projected from the front setback line to the rear
setback line. Commonly called .. sid~ yard ...
Line ... A line within a property and parallel to a property or
street line which ·delineates the required minimum distance
between a structure and that property or street line.
~HOPPING CENTER. DESIGNEDo
An area which Is designed to accommodate retail trade ·and
personal services within a single land holding in such a way as
to provide combined parking facilities for the expected
customers of the various stores, combined loading facilities for
these stores pedestrian circulation near the stores and· at the
approaches to them and a singie maintenance system.
o A shopping area where the stores do not necessarily face front
on the- street but rather grouped together to affo.-d maximum·
proximity to each other, or
o Where more than six (6) stores are provided on the same lot.
SIQE YA_Rp - (~ee Yard)
SIQE YARD LINE ... (See Yard Line)
SIGN - A device for visual communication that is used to bring the subject
to the attention of the public, but not including lettering or symbols that are
22
;:· ..
an integral part of another structure or flags or other insignia of any
government, government agency, or of any civic, charitable, religious,
fraternal, or similar organization.
0
0
0 .
Advertising Sign - A sign whose major purpose is for directing
attention to a business commodity, service, or entertainment
conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than upon the same lot,
·such as billboards.
Business Sign - A sign directing attention to a business or
profession conducted on the same· lot or, as incidental to a
. business, to products sold upon the same lot.
Temporary Sign .. .;. Temporary signs permitted ·by this Ordinance
include ·signs that:
Offer premises for sale, rent, or development.
,.Advertise the :ser.Vices .of· building trades· engaged in
· · construction or ·alteration of the premises upon which the
sign. is located, or
A~vertise a specl~l even~.
Temporary signs shall be removed upon occupation of
premises, or within seven (7) calendar days after work has
been completed or, closing has taken place, or the event
advertised has taken.place.
SPECIAL EXCEPIIQN - A use permitted in a particular zoning district
pursuant to the provisions of Articles VII and VIII.
STORY- That portion of a building located between the surface of any floor,
and the next floor above it; if there Is not more than one floor, the space
between any floor 1 and the ceiling next above it shall be considered a story •
23
-I j
-l
~ -j
J
j
-~ 1
j
-~
l
1
I
STREET- Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, parkway, lane,
alley, viaduct and any other ways used. or in~ended to be used by vehicular
traffic or pedestrians whether public or private.
STREET. CENTER LINE OF.- The center line of a street which is usually
equidistant from both street lines.
STREET LINE - A boundary of a publicly ·used way as shown on the tax
map 1 and 8 lot line separating a street from other land •
STBUC'fURE - Any man-made· object having an ascertainable stationary
location on in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
$SJBPIVJSION - The division or redivislon of a ·rot, tract or parcel of land by
any means Into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land
including ct1anges in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether Immediate or
fpture, or lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees,
transfer of ownership or build~ng or lot development. Provided, however,
-mat the subdivision by l~ase of land for agricultural purposes Into parcels of
more than ten acres, f!Ot Involving any new street or easement of access or
any rasfdenti~l dwelling, shall be exe~pted~·
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED ~ Where, In the judgment of the municipal
englneer~·afleast· 90%- (based on the cost of the required Improvements for
whiCh financial security was posted pursua"t to Section 509 of the PA
MPC) of those lm.provements required as a condition for final approval have
been compl,ted In accordance with the approved plan, so that the project
will be able to be used, occupied or operated for its intended use.
mAILER ~ SMALl UDLIJy - Any trailer usu~lly drawn by a passenger auto
used for the occasional transportation of personal effects.
1LS.E- The specific purpose for which land or a structure is designed,
arranged, intended. occupied or maintained.
24
- ·.:.r
o Accessory Use - A use customarily incidental ~nd subordinate
to the principal use or building and located on the same lot with
this principal use or building.
o Principal Use - The main or primary use of property or .
structures, measured in terms of net floor area, or where no
net floor area exists, measured in terms of net land area.
VARIANCE - Relief granted pursuant to the provisions of Articles VI and IX.
YABP - An open, unoccupied space, other than a courtyard, on the same lot
with a. building, unobstructed artificiaily from the ground to the sky.
0 Minimum Dimensions - The least distance at any point,
measured at grade from arid parallel to a lot line to the building
line.
o Front - An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a main
building, e~anding the full Width of the lot and situated
be.tween the street' right-of-way line and the front of the
buil~ing. The depth of the front yard shall be measured
between the front line of· the building and the street right-ofway
lie pr lot line, which ever is closer to the· front line of the
building. Porches or decks, whether enclosed or unenclosed,
shall b~ considered as.part of the main building and shall not
project Into a required front yard.
o Rear - An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a main
building ~.xtending the full width of ~he lot and situated .
between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building
projt:tcted to the side lines of the lot. The depth of the rear
yard shall be measured between the rear line of the lot and. the
rear line of the building. Porches or decks, whether enclosed
or unenclosed, shall be considered as part of the main building
and may project to within 50 percent of the required rear-yard
setback.
25
-J
-i
J
'
-~
J
- j
0 . Side - An open unoccupied space on the same lot with the
building situated between the building and the side line of the
lot and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. Any lot
line not a rear line or a front line shall be deemed a side line.
Porches or decks, whether enclos~d or unenc_losed, shall be
considered as part_ of the main building and shall not project
into the required side yards.
j YABP LINE - A line drawn parallel to its corresponding lot line at a distance
- i
f
l
-l .
specified as the _required depth of yard in each respective case.
0 Front - A nfront yard line" bounds the front yard and Is parallel
to the front lot line.
o Rear -·A ••rear yard line" bounds the rear yard and is parallel to
the rear lot line.
· ·o Side - A ••sJda yard line• bounds the side yard and is parallel to
the side lot line.
ZONING QISmrCT - A geographic subdivision of and within the City of
Hazleton as delineated on an Official Zoning Map for which the requirements
of an Ordinance governing the uses, densities, yards, etc •• are uniform
herein. ·
lONINf.l MAP - The Master Zoning Map of the City of Hazleton as
maintained In the City Office. "
ZONING OFFICER ."The person appointed by the Mayor, who Is in charge
with the administration and enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance.
ZONING PERMIT .. A permit issued by the Zoning Officer stating that the
purpose. for which a building ot_ land Is to be used Is in conformity with the
uses permitted and all other reqt,.drements· under this Ordinance for the zona
in which It Is located or is to be located.
ARTICLE II
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION 1 - SIAI£MENT OF INTENT
In addition to the general goals listed in the preamble and Article I established in
this regulation are intended to achieve the following:
a) To provide sufficient space, appropriately located, for residential
development to meet the housing needs of the present and expected
future populations of the City, within the range of house types
·anticipated.-
b} To assure light, ·air and pri~~cy, as far as possible, by controlling the
spacing and height of buildings and other structures.
c) To protect residential areas against hazard~ of fires, offensive noise,
vibration, smoke, odors, glare·or·other objectionable Influences.~
d) To prevent congestion, as far as possible, by regulating the density of
popu,lation and the bulk of buildings, and by provldlng for off-street
parking. · ·
e) To protect residential neighborhoods, as far as possible, against .
heavy traffl~ or through traffic. ·
fJ To make possible provision of those public and private educational,
recreational, health and similar facilities serving the needs of nearby
residents, which perform most effectively in a residential environment
and do not 'create objectionable influences. .
g) To promote the most desirable use of land and direction of building
development in accord with a wall-considered plan, to promote· stable
residential. development, to protect the character of any. district. and
its. peculiar suitability for particular uses, to conserve the value of land
and buildings, and to protect the City's tax revenues.
27
- ~ I
-- 1
-j
_,
j
SECTION 2- R-1 ... LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DI~BICT
- l 2.1 Purpose
j
-1
j
-l
l
_,
2.2
2.3
The R-1 Residential District is composed of low density residential areas of
the City and open space where similar residential development Is likely to
occur. The purpose of this district is to permit residential development .at a
low density; to provide standards which will encourage the installation of
public facilities and the preservation of ·permanent public open space; to
exclude activities of a commercial or Industrial nature, and any activities not
compatible witn residential development; and to otherwise ~reate condition
conducive to carrying out these and other.broad purposes of this ordinance.
~rmlttad Uses and Use· by Spacial Exception
~- . . The chart on the following page refers to· the permitted uses and uses by
~pecial exception in a R-1 District. .
_.:f!
Ac!=euory- Use•
Only the following ·accessory uses.shall be permitted:
' '
a. · Customary accessory uses in residential areas, but excluding home
occupations except by special exception.
2.4 Public Utilities
All uses In this District providing private or public restroom facilities will be
served by public wat~r and public sewage disposal.
2.5 Area and Bulk Requirement~
The chart on the following page refers to the minimum area and bulk
requirements.
o Lot width - Lot width refers to the minimum width at the
building setback line, not at the right-of-way line. Refer to the
28
chart for minimum lot width for specific uses.
o Yards - Each corner lot shall have a minimum of a 35 foot front
yard for each yard which abuts a street.
o Lot Coverage - Lot coverage refers to al~ buildings and
$tl'uct"'res- on the lot including accessory structures, which
Include utility sheds; -with the e;xception of swimming pools,
sidewalks, gro'-'nd-level patios, and ground-level drivew~ys
provided, however that said driveways and patios do not
contain a permanent structure.
0 Height- No building shall be- erected to a height in excess of 35
feet; provided, however, that this height. may be increased by 1
foot for each additional foot that the width of each yard
exceeds the minimum required, to a maximum of 35 feet.
29
~!~~
·---...
•.
. --r- ~~
Use
Nu.mba'
2
Pllf'Jil~__,_,
~ ... ,.,.,
cO - -·-- M ------
'R.·l R~idmtlal c
District
PEKMIITEDUSIS
.,...,~.,~ ............ .->,.
-------·--.-----~~---.-------~~---------------------
front J Rear f Side
Yd Yard 'Yud
Lot
Size
lACRE
Street
front.~ae
Builc:UIIa
Height
35F1'
-
J.of
Lot
eoveraat
~
SECTION 3 8·2 -- MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
3.1 Purpose
The purpose of the R-2 Rasidenti_al District is to provide for the orderly
extension and expansion of areas that offer residential neighborhood at a
medium density; ·to carefully control the types of housing; to ensure
compatibility with existing houses; to carefully protect the areas from uses
that may not be fully compatible.
3.2 Permitted Uses and Use By Special Exception
The chart on .the following page refers to the permitted uses and uses by
special exception in an R-2 District.
3.3 Accessory Uses
Only the following accessory uses -shall be permitted:
a. - ·-. Customary··accessory uses in--residential areas, excluding home
·occupations except by special .exception.
3.4 Public Utilities
. . . .
All use intended for human use or occupancy must be served by public
water and/or by a private water arid sewer system which meats DEB
approval.
3.5 Area and Bulk Requirements
The chart on the following page refers to the minimum area and bulk
requirements. ..
o Lot width -·Lot width refers to the minimum width at the
building setback line, not at the right-of-way line. Refer to the
chart for -minimum lot width for specific uses.
o Yards - Each corner lot shall have a minimum of a 35 foot fi'ont
yard for each yard whic~ abuts a street.
31
·-· -- .--.., . 'l . --- ... , _______ ~ ...,. Wd I t:r''"m=:t .__. l ><:·~-... ~ .. -
2 UUNULII.IIAMILY liliMI• I I ISR I 25FT ·- • -• --·.. • BACH END r---.-..-.~ ,.~ 8_'-f . ." : .- ,., ~fiT/ 3SF:f I . 40S
DWIWNOUNIT
15.FI' I 25FT lOFTON l.OOOSQFI' 30FT/ 35FT I BA.CHBND PBRUNIT DWBLUHOUNIT 40S IEIOHTUNJTSI I I -- -4 -5 Ci ·- ... _- ------ ------------ - -- --- - --- --- - ------ ---- .. ...... ---· -·- -. -- -- .......---- . --- . .col.
I I
'. ''
···;
. , ..
4.1
4.2
o Lot Coverage- Lot coverage refers to all buildings and
structures on the lot including accessory structures, which
include utility sheds, with the exception of swimming pools,
sidewalks, ground-level patios, and ground-level driveways
provided, however, that said driveways_ and patios do not
contain a permanent structure.
o Height - No building shall be erected to a height hi excess 9f 30
feet; provided, howeyer, that this height may ·be increased by 1
foot for each additional foot that the width of each yard
exceeds the minimum required, to a maximum of 35 feet.
SECnON 4 .. 8-3 - HIGI:I DENSITY RESIDENDAL DISmiCT
Purpose
The. purpose of the R-3 .. Residentlal D.istrict is to recognize the older and
denser residential sections of the City; to.provide a variety of· housing types
at higher densities; to make. sure that the varied housing types are ·
compatible with- the existing housing; to work to encourage affordable
housing, es,:;ecially for young families and senior citizens; to make sure that
they City• a street systeni, ·community facilities and services are fully able to
handle moderately dense growth; to exclude activities which are not
compatible with residential development.
Permitted Uses and Use by Special Exception
The chart o~ the following page refers. to the minimum area and bulk
requirements.
4.3 Acca~sory Uses
Only the foll~wing accessory uses ~h-11 be permitted:
a. · Customary accessory uses in residential areas, including home
occupations.
33
-, .l
-J 4.4 Area and Bulk Requirements
-. j
1
~1
1
The chart oil the following page refers to the minimum area and bulk
requirements.
.-::
34
- l - .... .~ ...................... lP.''"' I= 2 'fl ...... =...,
,{
JV (" J -.v ,..,
Rl-:''fiR£MF.NT VII.I.AGE. lUO Ff 4~
.-.:· .·
_J
I
- l
J
_j
l -]
1
-i'
i ;
-l
l
-I
.. . ,..
0
0
0
0
6~-1· Purpose
Lot width - Lot width refers to the minimum width at the
building setback line, not at the· right-of-way line. Refer to the
chart for minimum lot width for specific uses.
Yards - Each corner lot shall have a minimum of a 35 foot front
yard for each yard which abuts" a street.
Lot Coverage - Lot coverage refers to all buildings and
structures on the lot Including accessory structures, which
include utility sheds, with the exception of swimming pools,
sidewalks, ground-level patios, and ground-level driveways
provided, however, that said driveways and patios do not
contain a permanent structure.
Height - No building shall be erected to a height in excess of 35
feet; provided, however, that this height may be Increased by 1
foot for each additional foot that the width ·of each yard
exceeds the minimum required, to a maximum of 35 feet •
SECTION 6 .O-S - OPEN SPACE DISTBICT
The purp9se of the O-S Open Space District is to reserve or conserve
undeveloped land for recreational and conservation purposes and to
discourage the scattering of commercial, industrial, residential and other .
urban type uses throughout predominately forested areas, areas with steep
slopes and/or rural· areas of the City where pubHc services are neither
presently available nor anticipated in the immediate future; to provide for the
regulation of housing density in such areas; to encourage the preservation
of natural amenities; to prot«;~ct watershed areas, natural drainage channels,
and water courses; and to otharwtae create ·conditions conducive to carrying
out the purpose-of this Ordinance.
&.2 Permitted Uses and Uses by Special Exception
The chart on the following page refers to the permitted and special
36
exception uses in a O-S District.
5.3 Area and Bulk Requirements
The chart on the· following page refers to the minimum area and bulk
requirements. ·
37
~
Use I O·S Open-space Distrld I front J Rell' I Side I BuDding
PERMl'ITED USFS \'ud Yard Yud Height
RECREATIONAL CABINS,
1 I TENTS, SHBL TERS, 1
40·FJ' 140FT I' 20FT I I I 5 5
35FT 5, acres 175fFr acre& 175Fl
2 I ·r A liDr"Dn• , .., ..., I too Frl soFr I soFT I I I 5 5
35FI' acres 175Fr acres I 1?5 fT I acres I 175 F'
...... ,.,....,.,. "';\
~·~,
~,.~
~'""""""""'"'~. m.n_ • .,,.~ ... ,,
0111-~........,.~ .... -.,·.-~~ ·~
~~
: ...... , ......... ,."'
o Lot width - Minimum of. 150 feet at the setback line and 150
feet at the right-of-way line. Lot width requirements on the
foflowing chart which are greater than 150 feet refer to both
the minimum street frontage at the right-of-way line and the lot
width at the building setback line.
o Yards - Each corner lot shall have a minimum of a 40 foot front
yard for each yard which abuts a street.
o Lot Coverage - Lot coverage refers to all buildings and
structures on the lot including accessory structures, which
include utility sheds, with the exception of swimming pools,
sidewalks, .ground-level.patios~ and ground-level driveways
provided, however, that said driveways and patios do not
0
contain ·a permanent structure. ·
Height -. No building shall be ·erected to a height in excess of 35
. feet;. provided,· however, that this height may be increased by 1
·foot for·each.additional foot that the width of each yard
exceeds·the minimum required, to a maximum of 35 feet.
39
_j
- 1
l
l
- ii
1
- 1
_J
- lj ~
- .i~
~
-)'
ARTICLE Ill
OFFICE AND .COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
SEcnON 1 SIAUMENT Of INTENT
In addition to the general goals listed ·in the preamble and Article I, the Districts
established In this Regulations are Intended to achieve the following:
a.
b.
·- •·
·,- ·
c.
_!t ' ..
,,
~.
-~
d.
e.
To provide sufficient space In appropriate locations for all types of
commercial and service activities anticipated.
To protect commercial development against intrusive uses· which are
Incompatible with it and against objectionable influences such as
noise or glare anc:f from hazards of fire.
To protect both commercial development and nearby residential areas
against congestion by regulating the Intensity of neighborhood retail
development and by providing for off-street parking and loading
facilities. ~ -- .
To provide appropriate space, and in particular sufficient depth for the
requir~ments of present·day mercha~dising, including the provision of
off-street parking space in areas to which large numbers of shoppers
coma by auto_mobile and to encourage the natural tendency of
neighborhood development to concentrate In uninterrupted retail
frontage, to the mutual advantage· of both consumer and mercha~ts.
To promote the most desirable use of land and direct building
development in accord _with a well-considered plan, to promote
stability of commercial development, to strengthen the economic base
. of the City to protect the character of comm(trcial districts and the
peculiar suitability of partl~ular areas for particular uses, to conserve
the value of land and buildings and to protect the City's tax revenues.
40
...
SECTION 2 0 -- PBOFESSIO_NAL OfFICE AND ·COM,...ERCIAL OEfiCE DISTRict:
2.1 Purpose
2.2
2.3
It is the purpose and Intent of this Article to provide reasonable standards
for the harmonious development of business and professional offices, and
other uses and accessory uses; regulate the density of population; provide
for the public convenience and avoid undue congestion In the streets·;· and
to otherwise create conditions conducive to carrying out these and the other
broad purposes of this Ordinance.
Procedural Requirements
Development in the 0 District shall be subject to the provisions and
requirements for land developments _as .delineated in the City of Hazleton
Subdivision and land Development Ordinance regardless of the number of
lots subdivided •
. .
Permitted Uses and Uses by Sp.eclal Excepdon
The following chart refers to the permitted and special exception uses In an
0 District.·
2.4 Accesaory Uses
Only the following accessory uses shall be-permitted:
a. Customary accessory uses in office districts.
2.5 Area and Bulk RequirementS
The chart on the following page refers to the minimum area and bulk
requirements. ·
o Lot Width - The lot width shall be the minimum as defined on
the chart for permitted uses in 0 District. The street frontage
pertains to the minimum required at the right-of-way line and
building setback.
41
J
_!
- j
s
I -I
1
I -1
l
-l
l
......•..
( . .,._
. ,.
~~-
0
0
Yards - The yards shall be those as required in the chart for
permitted uses in an 0 District. A corner lot shall have a
· minimum of a 35 foot yard for each yard which a·but a street.
Interior Yards· (Open space between buildings) shall be
provided as follows:
a. When front to front, .rear to rear, or front to rear, parallel
buildings shall have fifty (50) feet between faces for ·one story
in height, plus five (5) feet for each additional story. If the
front or rear faces are obliquely aligned, the above distances
may be decreased by as much as ten (10). feet at one end If
increased by similar or greater distance at the other end.
Where service drives or bank grade changes or collector walks
are introduced in this space, the yard distance shall be at least
· twenty-five (25) feet •
42
'
2
3
4
s
6
7
I
0 - ProreuiODII Office
Dillrict
Pennillecl Uaes
t.tBDICAL AND SIWILAR
LABOIATOIIBS AND CUHICS
BUSINBSS AND OFFICE
MACHINE ltBPAIR, SALIS A IUVICBS
.11tBPJtODUCTION, ART,
. PHOTOGIW'IIY AND STI!NOORAPHIC
IBRVICES
ADVII\TISIHO AOBHClES
BMPLOYt.tJINT AGINCIES
UKIAL SBR'YICBS
MORTUARY OR UNDERTAKING
I
Front
Y1rd
35FT
35FT
35FT
3SFT
:JSFT
15FT
35FT
35FT
.
SOFT
I •
. ~·
30FT 15FT·
30FT 15FT
I 30FT I ·ISFr I
30FT .ISFT
30FT . ISFT.
lOFT ISFT .. ·
30FT 15FT
30FT 15FT
50FT
Lat
Size
IS.OOOSQFT
IS,GOOSQ FT
IS,GOO SQFT
15.000 SQ FT
15.000 SQ Fr ·
15,000 SQFT
IS.OOOSQ FT
II
Street
75FT
75FT
75FT
75FT I
75FT
7SPT
. 75FT
75PT
Fl'
Duildiag
35Fr I
35FT
35FT
35FT I
35FT
35FT
35FT
1SFT
lSFr
35FT
Sof
Lot
7SS
7SS
7SS
751
1S"
151
7SS
7SS
lSI
l$
0 0
Reserved for Chart on P. 34 of Zoning Ordinance
(Page 229 in Zoning Book)
This is blank
43
b. Between end walls of buildings a yard space of twentyfive
{25} feet for each one-story building, plus five (5)
feet for each additional story~ shall be required.
o Bufferyards - Where non-residential uses are planned adjacent
to Residential or Open Space Districts, landscaping and
bufferyards shall be provided in accordance with Article V,
SeCtion 2.12 of this Ordinance.
0
. .
Lot Coverage - Lot coverage refers to all buildings on the lot
including all accessory structures such as utility sheds, patios,
swimming pools, tennis courts, parking lots and driveways.
For all permitted ·uses the principal accessory buildings shall not
cover more than 50%. The remaining permitted coverage shall
Include parking lots, driveways, etc •. and shall be less ~han or
equivalent to the maximum permissible lot coverage. A
minimum of 25% of the lot area shall be landscaped with
grass, trees and shrubbery.
o Height - No· building shall be erected to a height in excess of 35
feet; provided, however, that this height may be increased by
one foot for each additional foot that the width of each yard
excee~s the ininim~m required.
o Off-Street Parking - Parking space, off-street, shall meet
regulations as .set forth In Article V, Section 2.9 and 2.10
herein.
o Streets
a. Plans for streets, drives, service acce$s, parking· and
walks and all such facilities shall be reviewed and
apprqved and all such facilities shall be designed.and
ins~alled in the manner prescribed by the. City Subdivision
and Land ·Development Ordinance for dedication, anc:J
amendments thereto, regardless of whether they are to
be presertted to the City for dedication or not.
44·
_l
1 _a
;'
!
~ -i
b. Suitable access for fire fighting equipment, refuse
collection, and where necessary, snow removal, shall be
provided.
SEcnON 3 CC -· CENTRAL COMMERCIAL OFFICE DISTRICT
3.1 Purpose
The purpose of the CC -· Central commercial Office District is to provide for
a commercial and commercial/residential mix in the downtown; avoid
commercial uses Incompatible with pedestrian environment; to minimize
traffic congestion on the streets. provide for public conveniences, and fulfill
the other broad purposes of the Ordinance. ·
3.2 @rocedural Requirements
3.3
Qevelopment in· the CC -- Commercial District shall be subject to the
provisions and requirements for land developments as delineated in the
Hazleton Subdivision and Land Development Ordinances regardless of the
mumber of lots subdivided.
·Permitted Uses
In the CC District, land or buildings may be used by rlgtltfor only the
following uses:
o Retail sales of good or groceries
o Business or personal services. including hair cutting and styling
o Financial institutions
o Offices
o Community service facilities including libraries, community
recreation centers. and post offices
45
o Business machine shops, sales, and services
o Movie or performing arts theater
o Custom printing and copying, not including printing of an
industrial scale
o Professional studio
o Standard or fast-food restaurant
o Ex~rcise club
o Dance. photography, artisan, or craft studio
.0 House of Worship_
o Private Schools, including trade schools _
o Parking lots or-garages
3.4 Accessory Uses
Only the following accessory uses shall be permitted:
o Accessory buildings and uses customerily incidental to and
associated with permitted uses.
3.6 Use By Special EXception
The following uses may· be permitted as a special exception when
authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board:
o Public utility uses
o Apartments (see • Apartments located in a Commercial District•
in Section 82.2)
46
-':
J 0 Taverns
0 Transportation (p~ssenger) terminal
0 Memb~rship club or lodge
0 Video arcade
0 Service station (automobile)
0 Hotels and Motels
0 Rooming house
0 Child day c~re center
3.6 Specifically Prohibited Uses
o Adult bookstore, adult m~vie theater or cabaret
o Auto, boat, or mobile/manufactured home sales
o Vehicle washing facility
3. 7 Area and Bulk Regul,tlons
o Lot Area "':' A lot area not less than four thousand five hundred
(4, 5001 square feet shall be provided.
a Lot Width ~ Minimum of 20 feet at the building setback line.
o Coverage - No maximum coverage.
o Yards - Ya.rds of the fo~lowlng minimum depth and widths shall
provide:
a. Front yard setback - ten ( 1 OJ feet
47
3.8
b. Side yard setback· five {5) feet
c. Rear yard setback- ten {10} feet
o Height - No building shall be erected to a height in excess of 45
~eet; provided, however, that this height may be increased by 1
foot .for each additional foot that the width of each yard
exceeds the minimum required.
o Bufferyards * Landscaping and bufferyards must be provided In
accordance with the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
Parking and Loading
Because minimum parking requirements for most uses in the C-C Business
District are provided .by municipal public parking, off-street parking is not
required for any· permitted use except the following:
1. Hotel,·motel, or boarding· houses;
2. Dwelling units;· and
3. Buildings i_nvolving more than 15,000 square ft;tet of total floor area,
not including areas intended for the parking and r:novement of
vehicles.
Parking for a hOtel, motel, boarding house, dwelling units, or buildings
'involving more than 15,000 square feet of total floor area shall be provided
as required in Article V, Section 2.9 of this Ordinance.
Loading and Unloading- No use shall be permitted in the CO District that
would require ·severe and substantial obstructlcm of traffic on public .streets
for loading and unloading. This shall not include routine deliveries to retail
sales. personal service, and similar uses.
No new off-street parking shall be permitted within 20 feet of the existing
right-of-way of an arterial street, except as part of a multi-level parking
garage.
48
J .i
SECTION 4 CH ·- COMMERCIAL HIGHWAY DISTRICT
1' 4. 1 Purpose
The purpose of the C.H Commercial Highway District is to provide
reasonable standards for the provision of Highway oriented commercial uses
along. the roadside In areas where a nucleus of such uses already exists and
where, due to the character of undeveloped land, the desfgnatlon of
highway commercial uses Is feasible. The standards of this district are.
designed to minimize the access roads. from major thoroughfares, to
minimize traffic congestion and to provide bufferyards and screen planting
where such uses adjoin differing land use types.
4.2 Procedural ~equirements
.Development in ·the C·H District shall be subject to the provisions and
requirements fo.r land developments as delineated In the Hazleton City
Subdivision and land Development Ordinance.
4.3 ·permitted Uses
o Gasoline service stations and car washes
o Automobile/vehicle service and repair areas, sales and
installation of parts, accessories and replacement equipment
o Automobile or trailer sales when the lot. is Improved with an
automobile or trailer display building having not less than 1600
square feet devoted exclusively to the display of automobiles or
trailers
o Business s~rvices
o Department stores
o Hotels, motels, and convention centers
49
o Houses of worship
o Mortuary or undertaking establishments
o Nursing or convalescent homes
o Personal service shops, such as barber shops,_ beauty shops,
health clubs
o · Private schools, including child day care centers
o Railway or bus passenger and taxi stations
o Retail businesses, such as variety sto~es, apparel stores, drug
~tares, grocery and supermarkets, liquor stores, antique shops,
gift shops, flea ·markets, auction halls, mini markets, excluding
the sale of gasoline, music shops, book and stationary,
magazine stands, candy and tobacco shops.
o Retail establishments primarily dependent upon drive-in or incar
services
. . .
o Restaurants, tearooms, cafes, drive-in and fast food restaurants
o Shopping ce"'ter, shop~;~lng plaza or mall ·
o Specialty shops such as baking, confectionery, dressmaking,
~yeing, laundry, shoe repair. printing and copying services,
.tailoring and similar shops and. services
o Mobile home sales when the lot is improved with a building
containing an office, display room and appurtenant facilities
having an area of not less than 1 000 square feet
4.4 Accessory_ Uses
Only the following accessory uses shall be permitted:
50
-!
J j
3
J
l
~
i
J !
~
·~ '
a. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to and associated
with permitted uses.
4.5 Use By Special Exception
4.8
0
0
0
Mobile home parks
Kenn~ls and Animal Hospitc;~ls
Public utility use
Area And Bulk Regulations
·~ ..
o ·lofAtea .:. A. lot area not less than tWenty thousand (20,000)
square feet shall be provided~
0
Lot Width - Minimum of 80 feet at the street right-of-way line
and 1 00 feet at the setback line.
Coverage -.The principal and accessory buildings on any lot
shall not cover more than 50% of the area of such lot. Not ·
l~ss than 15% of the. lot-shall be landscaped with a vegetative
material. This landscaping shan Include shrubs, ornamental
trees and shade trees to be placed to .enhance the appearance
of the building and parking area. The 1"5% landscaping shall be
a minimum requirement and shall not be Included as any
required buffer area.
o Yards - Yards of the following minimum ·depth and widths shall
be provided; however, no case shali yard depth be leas than
60% of the right-of-~ay of the street on which they abut. No
merchandise, including cars and vehicles for sale or display
shall be placed in any yard.
a. Front yard depth- thirty (30) feet.
b. Side yard width- ten (10) feet. excepting that no side
yard shall be required when two or more commercial
uses adjoin side to side provided that mutual agreement
51
in writing by the two or more adjoining property owners
is recorded at the Recorders Office of Luzerne County;
and pro,vided that there is a vehicular access of at least
twenty (20) feet in width through an open and
unobstructed passage at grade level at intervals not
fT.IOre than four hundred (400) feet apart from a street to
all yards of the lot.
c. Rear yard depth • thirty (30) feet. ·
d. Landscaping and bufferyards shall be provided in
accordance. with Article V, Section 2.12 of this
Ordinance. Such bufferyards may be coterminous with
any required yard In this District, and in case of conflict,
the larger yard requirements shall apply.
o Height • No· building shall be erected to a height in excess of 35
-feet;- provided;-:however~ that this height may be increased by 1
· -. foot for: each ~additional foot ~hat the width of each yard
. exceeds the minimum require~.
4. 7 Off-Street Parking and i.oadlng Space
Off-street parking and loading space, pedestrian walkways, and motor
vehicle access shall be provided in accordance with Article V, Section 2.9
and Section 2.10 of this Ordinance. No storage, loading, unloading spaces
shall project into ~ny required yard space; nor shall merchandise or vehicles
be displayed in any yard are~.
52
-I
-i
-I
-I
-1
-·i
ARnCLEIV
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION 1 STATEMENT OF INTENT
In addition to the general goals listed in the preamble and Article I, the districts
established in this regulation are intended to achieve the following:
a. T~ provic:Je sufficient space, in appropriate locations, to meet the
City's anticipated future needs for Industry and related activity, with
due allowance for the need for a range of choice of sitE!$.
b. · To provide, as far as possible, that land most suitable for Industry and
.:: related activities will be available to them by prohibiting the use of.
such land by ~ew residential· development, and at the same time, to
protect residences by ~eparatlng them fro~ manufacturing activities.
Qt, To encourage industrial development which Is free from hazards of
fire, offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odors, glare or· o~her
objectionable effects. · ·
d. To protect-Industry and related development against congestion, as
far as Is possible and appropriate to each district, by limiting the bulk
of buildings In relation to the land around them and to one another,
and by providing the off-street parking and loading facilities ·such
development requires.
e. To promote the most desir~;~ble use of land and direction of building
development In accord with a well-considered plan to promote. stable
industry and related development, to strengthen the economic base of
the City, to protect the character of particular Industrial areas and
their peculiar .sui~bllity to particular uses~ to conserve the value of
land and buildings, and to proteCt·the City's tax revenues.
53
.<
SECTION 2 1~1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
2.1 Purpose
The Industrial District is hereby established as a district in which the
regulations are imended to permit and e·ncourage Industrial development
that will be so located and designed as to constitute a harmonious ~nd
appropriate part of. the physical development of the City, and otherwise
fUI:.ther the purposes of this Ordinance as set. forth in Article I. In promoting
these and the gen.eral purposes of the Zoning Ordinances, the specific intent
of this Article is:
(1) To encourage the construction o~ and continued use of the land for
industrial purposes;·
(2) To prohibit any use which would substantially Interfere with the
development, continuation or expansion of Industrial uses in the
District; ·
{3) To establlsl1 reasonable standards for buildings and other .structures,
the areas and dimension of yards and other open spaces, and the
prov~ion of facilities and operations of industries to minimize air
pollution, noise, glare, heat.; vibration and fire and safety hazards.
2.2 -Procedural Requirements
Development In the 1·1 District shall be subject to provisions and
requirements for land developments as delineated in the City of Hazleton
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
2.3 Planned Industrial Development
This District requires all uses. in the 1-1 zone to be developed within a
•Planned Industrial Development• except as described In Article IV - Section
2.4. A planned industrial development proposal shall be reviewed by the
Planning Commission who shall provide advice to the Zoning Hearing Board.
The City Council may provide advice to the Zoning Hearing Board. The
54
-1
-I _,,
-l
-1
-1
l
-l j
-1
-~
Zoning Hearing Board shall then approve, disapprove, or conditionally
approve the application.
A Planned Industrial Development shall consist of the following:
(aJ Development Tract Area - Ten ( 1 OJ acres minimum.
(b) Lot size within the- development shall be a minimum of 2 acres and a
minimum width of 200 feet. · ·
(c) All buildings must be set back at feast fifty (50) feet from any
property line and one hundred (1 OO)"feet from a. str~et line.
: '
(d) Landscaping and bufferyards shall be provided In accordance with the
Hazleton subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
(e) Access shall be via an arterial street or collector street as designated
by the City Comprehensive Plan. Traffic routes ~nd exists shall be far
er:-ough from houses so that ttu.;k noise and vibration will be ·
minimized.
(f) Satisfactory provision shall be made to minimize harmful or
unpleasant effects (noise. odors, fumes, glare, vibration, smoke, vapors and gases~ eiectrical er:nisslo_ns and industrial ~stes).
(g) Appearance should be harmonious with adjoining propenies. This
feature Includes but Is not limited to: landscaping. enclosure or
principal and accessory uses. height control, sign control, building
coverage. and architectural controls.
(h) The standards in Section 2.21 of Article V shall be provided and
evaluated _In the approval process for Planned Industrial
Developments.
2.4 Small Lot Exceptions
A lawfully existing lot of less than ten acres that was a lot of record prior to .
55
·.·
the adoption ·of this Ordinance, the following uses may be developed as
permitted by right outside of an approved planned industrial development:
0 Health club
0 Offices
0 Veterinary hospital
0 Public utility
0 Emergency services station
0 Plant nursery
0 Financial institution, with or without drive-thru se..Vice
0 Membership club or lodge
0 Public or private recreationa-l area
2.5 Permitted Uses
The following uses are· permitted by right in a planned Industrial
development in the 1-1 Light Manufacturing District:
o Offices and administrative activities
o Health clubs
o . Recycling collection center ·
o Plant nursery
o Commercial communications tower
o Industrial laundries
56
_j
I
-~
J
~
J i
-;
0 Financial institutions, with or without drive-through service
0 Wholesale sales
o Research, engineering, or testing laboratory
0 Testing and repair of manufactured products
0 Industrial storage as an acce~soty use
0 Industrial outdoo~ storage as an accessory use
o Manufacture and assembly· of microelectronic components
0 Building contractor's headquarters and storage
o Photofinlshlng ·labs
o Packaging and bottling operations, with or- without on·lot retail
sales
o Manufacture and assembly of $lectrical and electronic
machines, supplies, and equipment, finishing, grinding,
polishing, stamping~ or heat treating of products
o Manufacture of textiles; apparel, shoes, and apparel
accessories ·
o Manufacture of foQd products (but not including a
slaughterhouse, meat packing plant, stockyard, animal
husbandry r or animal feed· mill)
o Crystal manufaCture and testing
o Welding
57
o Sales and rental of industrial equipment, other than vehicles
primarily intended for use on public streets
o Manufacture of transportation equipment
o Manufacture of manufactured or modular housing
o Manufacture of paper and cardboar~ products (but.not
including paper mills)
· o Manufact~re of glass and glass products
o Finishing of previously prepared resin, vinyl, polymer, plastic, or
rubber products
0 Manufacture of leather, clay and pottery products
o Warehousing, storage, and distribution
o Manufacture of fabricated metal and/or plastic products (except
ammunition or explosives)
o Manufacture. of pharmaceutical ...
o ~etail sales or personal services uses. provided that not more
than five percent of the total floor area of any building is used
for the total of such uses
o Building materials sales
o Manufacture of natural and/or synthetic rubber products
o Child Day Care centers
2.6 Prohibited Uses
58
-I
_J
-1
l g
-j '
f -l
j
No structure or portion thereof shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered
or converted for any· of the following purposes: ·
-.·
.0 Manufacturing of gunpowder, fireworks, rockets, projectiles or
similar explosives excepting the manufacturing of component
parts thereof which have not been assembled shall be
permitted. No quantity of explosives in excess of 1000 pounds
shall be stored or used at any one property.
o Tanning or storage of hides, stockyards and similar uses are
prqhibited.
0 The disposal of hazardous waste as defined in the Solid Waste
Management Act, Act of July 7, 1980, P.L. 380, as amended,
suppiem~nted or revised. ·
2. 7 ~ccasaory Uses
'•.
Oniy the following accessory uses shall be permitted:
o . Customa,.Y accessory and incidental ~ses related to permitted
uses.
o Restaurant, day care,· or cafeteria facilities for employees use
only and their Immediate family.
o Medical facilities for employees.
o Fire apparatus and emergency equipment areas.
2.8 Usa By Special Exception
o Public utility uses
2.9 Area And Bulk· Regulations
59
o ·Minimum Tract Size - A tract not less than ten ( 1 OJ acres for a
Planned Industrial Development.
o Lot Area - A lot not less than 43,560 square feet or 1 acre
shall be provided for uses permitted outside a planned industrial
development,. unless a large lot is required by Section 42.8 or
Artic;le VIII for a specific use.
o Lot Width- Minim~m of one hundred (100) feet at the street
right-of-way line and the setback line for uses permitted outside
a planned industrial development.
0 Coverage • The· principal and accessory·buildings, storage
yards, off-street ·parking lots, .loading and unloading docks,
shalt not :project" into ·the·req1,1lred yard spaces as set forth
below. All·open·space·other·than the parking and loading
spac.es ·and access ·drives ·shall be covered with a ·vegetative
materlat. Maximum coverage .shall not be in excess of 75% of
the lot area.
o Yards- Yards of the following minimum depths-and widths
shall be provided for uses permitted outside a planned industrial
development. However, in no case shall the front, side or rear
yard depths be less than sixty (60) percent of the legal right-ofway
of the street or streets on which the lot abuts. ·
o Front yard depth - thirty (30) ·feet;
o Side yard. width - thirty (30) feet;
o Rear yard depth • thirty (30) feet.
o landscaping and buffer yards shall be provided in accordance
with Article V, Section 2.20 of this Ordinance. Such buffer
yards may be coterminous with any required yard in this
District, and in case of conflict, the larger yard requirements
shall apply.
60
_;
l
~l
_J
I _f
'
'i'
-l t
l
j
-j
-· J
_)
0 Building Height: Forty (40) feet maximum. (This may be
increased one foot for each· additional foot that the widths of
both side yards and [not or] the depth of the rear and front
yard exceeds the mhiimum requirements up to a maximum of
60 feet in height.)
2. 10 Off-Street Parking And Loading Zones
Adequate off-street parking and loadiog ·zones shall be P.rovided on the lot
for all employees and visitors in accordance with this Ordinance. (See
Artiple V, Section 2.9·for Off Street Parking Regulations and Article V,
Section 2.1 o for Loadlr:~g Space Regulations). ·
2.11 ~cation
lbe site .shall adjoin at. least one (1) of the arterial or minor collector streets
a~ indicated in the Comprehensive Plan or be reasonably, near, so that the
a~cass drive or drives can be satisfactorily arranged to avoid traffic on local
r~....s. idential stree-ts.
SECTION 3 1-2 -- GENERAL INQUSTBIAL DIUBICT
3.1 Purpose
The· purpose of the General Industrial District 1-2 is to provide sufficient
space for Individual industries in the City; to Insure avallabil,ity of land most
suiUible for Industrial and related activities; to protect residential
developments from industrlal.encroachment; and to ensure that industi1es
are reasonably free from offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odor, glare,
hazards or fire. or· other objectionable effects.
3.2 Procedural Requirements
Development In the 1-2 District ·shall be subject to provisions and
requirements for land developmer)ts as d~lineated In the City of Hazleton
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
61
.·· ..
3.3 Permitted Uses
o All permitted uses in the 1-1 Light Industrial District, except that
· no use is required to be within an approved Planned Industrial
Development
o Coal storage
o . Gas manu~acture, storage
o Manufacture of heavy mechanical equipment or machinery
o Manufacture of.heavy electrical equipment or machinery
0 Bulk manufacture of chemicals that are not identified as
hazardous by·the PA ·oepartment of Environmental Resources
or U.S •. Envlronmental Protection Agency
Q . Manufacture of ·plastics,' polymers, resins and vinyl
o ~anufacture of gypsum, concrete or plaster products
o Manufacture of abrasive or nonmetallic mineral products
3.4 Accessory Uses -
o · All accessory ~ses permitted In the 1-1 District ·
3.5 Use By Special Excepdon
o Mineral extraction
o Soli~ waste disposal tecility
o Ma~ufactura ·of p•lnts, varnishes, enamels and sotV~nts ·
o Junkyard or scrap nietal storage
62
1
-j
f
-~
0
0
0
Manufacture of primary metal products (as opposed to
fabricated)
Tire retreading
Slaughterhouse, meat packing plant, stockyard, animal
husbandry or animal feed mill
-~
- J 3.6 Area And Bulk" Regulations
3.7
All of the area and bul_k regulations of individual lots in the 1-1 District shall
also ~pply to Individual lots· in the 1-2 District, except that there Is no
mJnlmum tract ·size. Also, Articie V, s·actlon 2.20, ·setbacks from
Dwellings and Residential Districts• shall also apply to the 1-2 District.
·.1"
O;tf-8treet Parking And Loading Zones
Adequate ·off-street parking and loading zonas shall be· provided on the lot
fqr all employees and· visitors In accordance with this Ordinance (see Article
V., Section 2._9 for Oft Stre~ Parking Regulations and Article V, Section
2~ 10 for Loading Space Regulations).
3~8 Loc;atlon
The site shall adjoin at least one (1) of the arterial or minor collector streets
as Indicated in the Comprehensive Plano~ be reasonably near so that the
access drive or drives can be satisfactorily arranged to avoid traffic on local
residential streets.
63
ARTICLE V
SIGNS AND SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
·SECnON 1 SIGN ftEGU~ADONS
1.1 General Rules
· The following sign regulations shall be observed in all districts:
a. No signs e~cept those of a dufy constituted gqvernmental body,
including traffic signs and similar regulatory notices shall_ be allowed
without blocking vision. of vehicular traffic and not In the .
municipalities right of .wav.
b. The following shall not be subject to these regulations:
o · Signs, of a .dufy .. constituted ·government.
o Flags or emblems of a political, civic, philanthropic, educational
or ·religious· organization. ·
o Signs identifying architect, engineer or contractor when placed
on a construction site and not exceeding 12 square feet In area
only during the construction proc~ss.·
o Name plates ·less than on-half square feet in area.
o S.igns not exceeding two sq. ft. in area used for the
identification, protection, or operation of public utility facilities.
o Political signs.
o Real estate sale signs.
64
1. 2 Bllsiness Sign Reguhitions
The following requirements shall be observed as specified for each district.
1.2. 1 BusiBess ~igns in Re•idendal ~istricts
Only one sign. not to exceed two square foot in area, shall be permitted for
each home occupation. -
1.2.2 Business Signs in Commercial Districts
The follow1ng shall be observed:
- : 1.2.2.1;;· Parallel Signs
$igns mounted parallel to a wall shall not project more than 24 inches
therefrom and shall conform to the foHowilig maximum regulations:
Permitted Qistdct jo Which Peanftlad
a.
b.
c.
Area
Height
. (1)
80 sq. ft.
100 sq. ft.
Sign may not extend
within 1 Inch from-curb line
or roof line (height)
(2) Height of signs· 6 feet
6 feet
Number Permitted 1 per premises
1.2.2.2 Projecting Signs -
cc
CH
All C Districts
cc
C-H
All C Districts
Signs attached to a wan· at an angle 90 degre• with the surface of such
wall shall not project more than sbc: feet therefrom and shall conform to the
as·
following maximum regulations:
District jn Which Permitted
a. Area 36 sq. ft. on each face
36 sq. ft. total or 18 sq.
ft. on each face
b. Height
c.
(1) Top of Sign - 6 ft .. above roof line
(2) Height of signs 5 feet
· 6 feet
Number Permitted 1 per premises in lieu of
parallel signs, or shared
in area and other
re·quirements with
parallel signs
1.2.2.3 Free Standing Signs
C-H
C-C
CC and CH
cc
C-H
CC and CH
Signs which ar:e self-supporting, free-standing structures not attached to
any wall shall be located at least ten feet from any lot line and shall conform
to the following maximum regulations:
a.
b.
c.
District in Which Permitted
Area 24 sq. ft.
Height
(1) Height of 15 feet_
(maxiinum) si.gn
(2) From -curb minimum 2
ft. level to bottom of sign
Number Permitted 1 pe~ building
66
CH
··CH
CH
CH
.J
--:
1.2~3 Business Signs in Industrial Districts
The following shall be observed:
1.2.3.1 Parallel Signs
Shall conform to the following:
a.
b.
Area 160 sq. ft
Height
(l ) From curb 4 ft. (min.)
level to bottom of sign
(2)· Sign may not extend above
the roof line
District jo Which Permitted
1-1 and 1-2
1-1 and 1-2
1-1 and 1-2
c. Number Permitted 1 per building 1-1 and 1-2:
1.2.3 .. 2. · Projecting Signs
Shall not be permitted.
1.2.3.3. Free Standing Signs
a.
b.
Area 30 sq. ft.
Height
( 1 ) Heigh~ of sign 18 feet
c.
(2) From curb leva'
to bottom of 4 feet sign
Number Permitted 1 per lot
1.3 Advertising Sign Ragulatlgna
67
Plstdct In Which Permitted
1-1 and 1-2
1-1 and 1-2
1.;1 and 1-2
1-1 and 1-2
1.3.1 Advertising Sign In Residential Districts
Advertising signs shall not be permitted in Residential Districts except Real
- Estate signs and Construction sign during construction period.
1.3.2 Advertising Signs In Commercial and Industrial Districts
The following shall be observed:
1.3.2. 1 Parallel Signs
Parallel signs shalf· conform to the following:
a. Area 6 sq. ft.
b. Height
(1) height of sign 6 feet
(2) From curb level to
·bottom of 6 feet sign
c. Number Permitted 1 per lot ·
1.3.2.2 Free Standing Signs .
See parallel signs
1.3.2.3 Billboards
Djstrjcts jo Whjcb Ptrmjtted
CC, CH and 1-1 ~ 1-2
cc, CH and 1-1 I 1-2
CC, CH and 1-1, 1-;2
CC, CH and 1-1 I 1-2
Billboards shall be permitted only· in 1-1 and 1-2 Districts~ shall conform as to
size to nationally accepted standard dimensions, and be located either on· a
vacant lot or on lots developed to less than two-thirds of the permitted lot
coverage. ·
1.4 Temporary Sign Regulations
The following shall be observed in all districts:
68
l
_l
J
.J
-~'
!
Temporary Signs- Temporary signs may be erected in addition to the
permanent signs permitted by this ordinance, subject to the following
requirements: -
{a) The regulations r~garding the type, location and_ size of a temporary
sign shall be the same as those applied to a permanent sign contained
in this Article. ·
{b) One temporary sign is permitted on each street frontage of a lot for
every 200 feet of street frontage regardless of the number of
occupancies. The total area of such signs shall not exceed the
maximum permitted under (a) above.
(c) A temporary sign may be erected for no~ longer than one month.
Temporary signs may not be erected on any property more frequently
than three times per calendar year. No temporary sign may be placed
on any property unless at least 60 consecutive days have passed
since a temporary sign was last ~rected on the propeny.
(d) Lights for temporary signs which are located in any residential zone or
within 75 feet of a. residential zone shall be extinguished ~etween the
hours of 9:00 o'clock p.m. and 7:00 o"'clock a.m.
(e) No temporary sign shall be erected unless the property owner or
lessor has registered it wi~h the City and recel~ed the appropriate
permit. · ·
1 ~B Illumination of Signs
a) Flashing and intermittent lights are permitted only in Commercial or
Industrial zones~
b) .A sign may be illuminated only if the lighting is so screened that it is
not directed or reflected toward any adjacent residence, or :so It does
not obstruct the vision of motorists.
69
.. ,.
·-··
c) Signs which are illuminated ·in the colors, red, green or amber, either
by colored bulbs or tubing, or which produce high reflection through
the use of special preparations such as fluorescent paint or glass,
may not be located within a radius of two hundred (200) feet of a
highway traffic light or similar safety device.
d) Lighted signs and billboards, not iii':Jminated from within,_shall utilize
top ·~ounted shielded light fixtures only.
1.6 Bunting • Pennants
Bunting and pennants are permitted only to announce the opening of a new
business or industry, or in connection with a civic event, and must be
removed after thirty (30) days.
1. 7 Termination of Enterprise
Upon termination or abandonment of a commercial or industrial use, all
signs pertaining to the enterprise must be removed.
1.8 Projecdon of Signs
No sign may project:
(a) Over a public sidewalk Wi~h a height level from curb level to the
bottom of the sign of less than 10 feet.
(b) Over a public hi_ghway or street unless specifically authorized by other
City or State regulations.
{c) More than twenty-five (25) feet above the ground except for an
attached sign which may project six (6) feet above the roof of a
building providing the sign so placed does not project more than
thirty~five (35) feet above the ground.
70
SECTION. 2 SUPPLEMENTARY REGJ.ILATIONS
2. 1 VIsibility At lntersecdons In All Districts
On a corner lot, nothing shall be erected, placed, or allowed to grow in a
manner which obscures vision above a height of two and one-half (2 1/2)
fe't measured from the centerline grades of the Intersecting streets and
within. the area bo~nded by the street lines of such corner lots and a line'
joining points. on these street lines twenty-five feet from their intersection.
2.1.2 Public Utility Poles
. .
~ublic utility poles are excluded from the regulations specified in Article V,
Section 2.1.
2.2 Stripping of Topsail,. Excavation of Clay, Sand, Gravel or Rock
The following· shall apply to all districts:
2.2.1 Removal of Topsoil or Sod
Topsoil or sod may be removed only under the foll9wlng conditions:
(a) As part of the construction or alteration of a building or the grading
ln.cidental to such building.
(b)· In connection with normal·lawn preparation and maintenance on the
lot from which such topsoil or sod is removed.
(c) In connection with the construction or alteration of a street.
2.2.2 Removal of Mineral Material
The·removal or sale of clay, sand, gravel, rock or other mineral shall be
p~rmitted only under the following conditions:
(a) As part of the construction of a building or the construction or
alteration of a street.
71
(b) The surface of any lot shall not be graded to a level below that of
adjoining streets.
(c) Excavation shall not be conducted in any way which will leave loose
boulders exposed.
(d) Commercial mining or stripping operations shall, further, conform to
all requirements of ~he City· of Hazleton Ordinance No. 1458, Section
1 through SeCtion 6, dated November 21, 1950 or as subsequently
amended.
2.3 Projections into Required Yards
Only the following structures shall be permitted in any required yard:
(a) An open trellis, flagpole, unroofed steps, unroofed terrace, or
recreation or drying yard equipment shall be permitted with no
restrictions.
(b) An open fire escape may project not more than 8 feet into any yard.
2.4 Accessory. Uses and Structures .
2.4.1 Accessory Structures, Attached
A permanent-roofed accessory structure, attached to the ·principal building,
is considered a part ~f th~ principal buildi~g for all regulatory purposes.
2.4.2 Accessory Structures, Nonattached
A permanent-roofed accessory· structure, standing apart from the principal
structure, is permitted in rear yards. For all other requirements, a
nonattached structure is considered a part of.the principal building.
2.4.3 fences and Walls
No fence or wall {except a retaining wall or a wall of a building permitted
72
under the terms of this Ordinance) shall be erected to a height of more than
three (3) feet in a front yard area. Similarly such fences or walls shall not
exceed six (6) feet in ·height in side and rear yards in residential zones and
eight (8) feet in side and rear yard areas in any other zone.
2.4.4 Satellite Dish Antenna
Any accessory structure other than an antenna used for reception of regular
AM-FM signals, capable of receiving, fQr the sole benefit of the principal
use, radio or television signals from a transmitter or transmitter relay located
in _planetary orbit shall be subj~ct to the following constraints: ·
0
0
0
Such devices shall not be placed within any required setback
area.
Satellite dish antenna must be located in a side or rear yard
only, except that satellite dish antennas of less than 3 feet in
diameter may be roof-mounted.
. .
A ground-mounted dish antenna _on any residential lot cannot
exceed .. an overall diameter of twelve ( 12) feet or a·n overall
·height of fifteen (15) feet. ·
0 Only one ( 1 J antenna is p~rmitted per building lot.
2.4.5 Swimming Pools/Garden Pools
( 1 ) Location and setback - The pool shall observe the side yard and front
yard setbacks for the ~ppropriate district. The -~~tback from the rear
property lines shall be a minimum· of 10 feet fof all districts. The
setback shall include the deck, pad, or apron around the pool.
(2) Fencing/gate requirements - Every outdoor swimming pool or garden
pool shall be completely surrounded by a fence or wall not less than
four (4) feet In height, which shall be so constructed as not to have
openings. holes, or gaps larger than six (6) inches in any dimension; ·
and if a picket fence is erected or maintained, the horizontal or
73
vertical dimension of space between pickets shall not exceed six (6)
inches.. A dwelling house or accessory building may be used a.s part
of such enclosure. All gates or doors opening through such enclosure
shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device for
keeping the gate or door securely closed at all times when not in
actual use, except that the door of any dwelling which forms a part of
the enclosure need not be so equipped.
. .
(3} All above ground pools with a water depth of 18 inch~s or greater
shall have access by a removable ladder. Such pools shall be
constructed so the top of the pool shall be at least four (4} feet above
the ground level~ If a deck or steps are constructed, then a four (4)
foot fence shall enclose the pool.
2.5 Unenclosed Storage
2.5.1 ·Recreational Vehicles; Trailers, Trucks and Boats
In the R-1, R-2 and R-3 zones unregistered vehicles, recreational vehicles
and trailers, and trucks·with .a vehicle rating over one (1) ton shall not be
stored for a period in excess of three (3) days In the area between· the street
line and the line formed by the front wall of the principal building extended .
the full width of the lot. On-street parking of unregistered vehicles,
recreational vehicles and trailers, and trucks with a vehicle rating over one
( 1) ton must be removed after three (3) days. ·
2.5.2 Outdoor Stockpiling
In all zones, no outdoor stockpiling of any material or outdoor storage of
trash is permitted in front yards.
2.5.3 Trash or Junk
Except as provided in·Article VIII, Section 2.14 or other City Ordinances, the
accumulation of trash or junk out-of-d.oors for a period in excess of fifteen
(15) days is prohibited in all zones.·
74
J
J
_..'-.
_j
j
2.5.4. Utility Sheds
Utility sheds may be erected in accordance with the following provisions:
0
0
A utility shed shall not be erected except in the rear yard of a
dwelling. ·
A utility shed shall be erected not less than the side yard
setback ot" the property and not less ·than 10 feet from· rear
property line.
o A utility shad shall not have a ground floor ~rea exceeding onehundred
forty-four (144) square feet nor a height In excess of
ten (10) feet from.floor to peak.
0 Only one ( 1) utility shed Is to be allowed in conjunction with an
existing garage in the rear yard area.
2.6 · ·Mobile Homes
}n.
The following provisions shati regulate the location, placement, use, size and
type mobile homes allowed within the City.
(a) No mobile home shall be used outside of a permitted mobile home
park, regulated by Article VIII, Section 2.19, to provide living quarters
or spa~e for the conduct of business, e~cept that it may be used
temporarily for office pu{poses during the construction of a principal
building or a road, on the issuance of a temporary permit by the
. Zoning Officer.
(b) · Except for trailers offered for sale on trailer sales lots, the parking of a
mobile home outside of a permitted mobile home park in any district
for 48 hours or mora, shall be prohibited.
{c) Small utility or vacation type trailers are excluded froni the provisions
of regulation (b) as stated above.
75
-5··,·: .
·~ ·, .. _.
{d) Trailer parks where permitted shall observe the following
requirements:
o No trailer park shall have an area less than five acres, nor an
average gross a~ea per trailer of less than 3,000 square feet •.
Every trailer shall be supplied with a potable water service and
shall be connected to a sanitary sewer and an approved
sewage disposal system.
o A safe, usable recreat~on area shall be conveniently located in
every trailer park and shall contain a total area equivalent to an
a~IQwance of 300 square f~et per trailer, which shall not be less
than ten percent of the gross area of the tra,ler park.
0 No trailer shall be located less than 50 feet from any abutting
·property. ·
o The trailer park shall be permanently landscaped and
maintained in good condition.
o Trailer sales are prohibited in trailer parks llnless special permit
is granted.
2.7 Garages
In a re~idential area, whe~e a dweliing already exists, an application for the
construction of a garage for the use of the occupants,. for r$sldential . .
parking, will be allowed. To accomplish this end, the maximum lot coverage
may be increased by 1 0 percent _over the maximum lot coverage allowed in
that area.
2.8 Conversion of Existing Homes Into Apartmen-ts
Existing homes .or buildings may be converted into apartments In all zoned
areas except an R-1 area. However, a spacial permit must be obtained from
the Zoning Hearing Board for any and all such conversions. ·
76
J
l
J_
_j 2.9 Off·Street Parking
' -I
2.9.1 Size of Parking Space
Eac;:h parkin.g space shall be at least 9 feet by 18 feet in size. Where five (5)
or more parking spaces are required, the total parking area including
passageways and driveways must average two hundred fifty (250) square
feet per required parking space.
2.9.2 Spaces Required
For each ·building erected or enlarged, off-street parking spaces must be
provided on the same or nearby premises in accordance with the following
schedule:
ty:paofUg
Dwelling, except multi·famlly
Multi-family dwelling
Hotel~ motel, tourist home,
boarding home
Office bu~Jding
Retail store or shop
Eating establishments
Bowling alley
Other recreational establishments
77
Minimum of One
parking Space for Each
1/2 Dwelling unit
1/2 dwelling unit (I.e.
Guest sleeping room; and
.employee on maximum shift
300 sq. ft. of gross
floor area (minimum 5 spaces)
300 sq. ft. + employee
on maximum shift
3 seats
1/5 lane (i.e. 5 spaces
per lane)
1 00 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Type of uae
Taverns, bars, nightclubs and
other similar uses
Automobile repair, gasoline
station
Professional office of
physician and dentist
School: Elementary
Other schools
Hospital, medical center
or sanitarium·
Utility sub:..station, utility company
Auditorium, church, theater
and. other such places of
public assembly
Industrial establishments
Warehouse distribution
Funeral homes
78
Minimum of One
earking Space tor Each
2 seats but not less than
1 space per 100 sq. ft. of
gross floor area and 1 per
2 employees
400 sq. ft. of gross floor
and ground area devoted to
repair and service facilities
200 sq~ ft. of gross
floor area
Staff member plus one
Space for each 20 students
3 beds
800 sq. ft. of floor area
3 seats
1 . 5 employees on major
shifts (minimum 1 space
for each 5,000 sq. ft. of
gross floor area) ·
1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor
area and each 400. sq. ft. of
office sales or visitors' space
1 00 sq. ft. of gross floor area
_j
l
J
_j
Type of Use
Club, IQdges and other similar places
Drive-in establishments
Child care home,
Child day ·care center
2.9.3 Location
Minimum of One
Parking Space for Each
100 sq. ft. of gross floor area
50 sq. ft. of building plus
1 per each 2 employees
Employee plus one (1) space
for each four (4) c~Jidren to
be served by the facility
The pa~king ·area must be on the sanie or nearby premises. If on nearby
premises:
(a) The nearest point of the parking lot shall be not further than the
following distances to the nearest point of the property served: one
hundred ( 1 00) feet in the case of a commercial use, two hundred.
(200) feet In the case of a residential use. and three hundred (300}
feet in the case of industrial use.
(b) The parking area must remain under control of the owner or operator
of the use to which the parking area Is appurtenant.
2.9.4 ~yout
The parking area must be arranged so there will be no need for motorists to
back over public rights-of-way, and where a parking area abuts the right-ofway
line of a public street, pipe railing, post and chain barricade, raised
curbs or equally effective devices must line the public right-of-way except at
access points.
79
2.9.5 Paving
All parking areas and access drives for multi~family, commercial and
industrial uses including the driveway between the street line and cartway
must be paved with concrete or a bituminous paving material.
2.10 Loading Space
2.10.1 Size and Surfacing·
The loading space must be not less than twelve (12} feet wide and fifty (50)
feet long. It must be surfaced so as to be available in all weather.
2.10.2 Spaces Required
Off-street loading spaces must be provided for each building erected or
enlarge~ In accordance with the followi.ng schedule: ·
Type of Usa·
Commercial establishment
Factory; warehouse
2.10 .3 ·Layout
Minimum of One
l'arkln~ Space for Each
10,000 sq. ft. of gross
floor area or major
· fraction, in excess bf
first 3,000 sq. ft.
Establishment, plus an additional·
space for each 10,000 sq. ft. of gross
floor area or major fraction, In excess
of first 7.~00 sq. ft.
The loading area must be arranged so that there will be no need for
motorists to back over public rights-of-way and must not be located in the
front yard area.
80
-f
~
_l
-i
2. 11 Access Drives
~ 2. 11.1 Width
Within ten (10) feet of the street right-of-way line. access drives may not
exceed twenty feet in width or ·be less than ten ( 1 0) feet.
2. 11.2 Number
The number of access drives may not exceed two (2) per lot on any one
street frontage. The Zoning Hearing Board may giant permission by Special
.Exception for additional access drives ·where required to meet exceptional
circumstances and where frontage of unus·uallength exists.
2. 11.·3 Offsets
·Access drives may not cross the street rlght-of~w.ay lines:
(a} Within forty (40) feet of_the street right-of-way line of an intersecting
street.
(b) Wlthhi five (5) feet of a fire hydrant.
(c) Within twenty-five (25) feet ~f another access drive on the same
property where lot width permits.
(d) Wlth~n thr~e (3) feet _of a property line.
2. 11.4 Sight Distances~· Slope, Cuts
An. access drive must be located In safe relationship to sight distance and
barriers to vision. The drlv_, may not exceed a slope of five (5) percent
within twenty-five (25) feet of the street right-of-way line. Where a drive
enters a bank ·through a cut, unless a retaining wall Is used, the shoulders of
the cut may not exceed·fitty (50) ·percent In slope within twenty-five.(25)
feet of the. po~nt at·which the drive Intersects the street right-of-way. The
height of the tiank must not exceed three (3) feet within twenty (20) feet of
81
the street.
.
2.11.5 Construction ....
~-
Access drives shall be constructed as follows:
(a) Entrance to the street shall be an angle of seventy· five (75) to one
. hundred five (105) degrees with the intersecting street.
(b) The driveway from the cartway shall be paved with concrete or a
bituminous ·paving -material.
(C)
(d)
All curb cuts shall be properly ·constructed to the· satisfaction of the
City Engineer when curbing is provid~d: if curbing is not provided,
· then an- adequate .drainpipe shall·be installed under a driveway ~here
·. itcr.osses,-a .street gutter-or drainage ditch, as detiined _by the City
Engrneer. _ . - · .
. -
Each driveway shall be constructed with adequat ovisions for
,drainage.
2.12 Landscaping and Buffer. Yards
Landscaping and bufferyards meeting the requirements of Section 605 of
the Subdivision Land Development Ordinance shall be put in place to~ provide
adequate ·buffers betwee~ differing land uses and along streets. ,~
2.13 Illumination
: ' When the property on- which any activity is conducted is illuminated at ·
night, such illumination shalf b~ so designed and ·located that the light
sou~ces are shielded from adjoining residences and stree!,! I"~ shall not ~e
o_f excessive brightness nor cause a glare hazardous or .noxious to
pedestrians or drivers at-or beyond the lot boundaries~ All outdoor light
fixtures used for street, parking or other area type lighting shall_ be shielded
in such a manner that tlie edge of the shield shall be level with or below the
light sources, so that.direct light emitted above the horizontal is eliminated.
82
I
-- j
_j
I
_j
j
_J The use of white strobe lighting for smokestacks, chimneys and radio,
communication and television. towers is prohibited. ·
~
1 2. 14 Drainage
~
~ 2.14.1 Adequate Drainage Required
' l
No principal building may be erected, structurally altered, or relocated on
l land which is not adequately· drained at all times.
1
-··
2. 14.2 Building Restricted Adjacent to drainage Channels and Watercourses
No ~uilding which is permanently attached .to the ground may be erected,
J.tructurally altered or relocated on land which is subject to flooding as
(lefined by the 100 year flood plain or delineated by soils subject to flooding
as specified in Table 6, Engineering Interpretations, Luzerne County Soil
.survey prepared by United States Department of Agriculture, Soil
.Conservation Service.·
2. 14.3:; Dralriage Upon ·streets
In order to prevent improper surface water drainage upon streets, each
building erected, structurally altered, or relocated, and its driveway,. must be
at a grade. in satisfactory relationship:
o With the existing street grade, or
o With the establi$hed street grade where none is establis.hed
.,
2.1:4.4 Drainage Upon Adjoining Properties: Slopes
In order to. protect adjoining property owners, and to aid in preserving and
protecting the natural beauty and character of the landscape, no change In
the existing topography of any land may be made which would:
o Result"in a slope of more than seventy (70) percent within
twe~ty 120) feet of a pr«;»perty line.
83
~... .
o Alter the existing drainage or topography in any way so as to
adversely affect adjoining properties.
lri no case may any slope exceed the normal angle of slippage of the
material involved. All slopes must be protected against erosion.
2.14.5 Obstru~tion to Drainage Prohibited
The damming, filling, or otherwise Interfering with the natural flow of a
surface watercourse is not permitted without approval of the City.
2.15 . Number of Principal Uses on a lot
Jn an A-1, R-2 or R-3 residential zone, not m9re than one (1) principal use
shall be permitted upon a lot except by Special Exception. · ·
2.16 Street Acces9
The lot·of any dwelling hereafter erected ·shall abut a public street unless
otherwise authorized. by Special Exception. Said street shall have a
minimum right-of-way of fifty (50} feet except for adopted streets .
. .
2.17 Minimum Habitable Floor Area
AJI dwelling units must conform to the minimum habitable floor area
following: · ·
(a} Single-family Dwelling; Seven Hundred (700) square feet.
(b) Apartment, including Multi-Family Conversions: Four Hundred (400)
square feet. · ·
(c) Studio Apartments (1 person): Two Hundred (200) square feet.
2.18 Other Improvements .
2.18.1 Water Supply
Uniess a safe water supply is provided, a use certificate shall not be issued
84
J
l
-\
for any principal building involving human use or occupancy. For any
private water supply for a principal building involving human use and
occupancy, satisfactory evidence to this effect must be submitted to the
City. If water is to be provided by means other than by private wells owned
. and maintained by the individual owners of lots within the subdivision or
development, applicants shall present evidence to the governing body or
planning agency, as the case may be, that the subdivision or development is
to be supplied ~y a certificated public utility, 8 bona fide cooperative
association of lot owners, or by a municipal corporation, authority or utility.
A copy of a Certificate of Public Convenience from the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commlssipn or an application for such certificate, a cooperative
agre~rnent or a comry~itment or agreement to serve the area in question,
.whichever Is appropriate, shall be acceptable evidence.
2.18.~.: Grading Requirements
·No cut shall exceed a ratio of two ·(2) to one (1) or fill, a ratio of three (3) to
·one (1) on any ·rot ·unless. satisfactory erosion controls approved by the City·
i'lanning. Commission are· employed or· unless· a retaining wall subject to the
.. requirements of Anicle V, Section 2.18.3 is supplied.
2. 18.4 Sidewalks
Concrete sidewalks are required In all residential and commercial zones in
acccirdanc•·with the Hazleton City Street and sidewal~ ordinance.
Sidewalks shall not tie constructed within three (3) feet of a property line.
2.19 Demolition
Demolition of any structure must be completed within three (3) months of
the issuance of a permit. Completion consists of tearing the structure down
to grade, filling any resulting cavity to grade and removing all resulting
materials from the lot. A structure m.:~y be panty demolished only If a
building remains and the demolition of the part is completed as required In
the previous sentence. All evidences of the structure Which was
demolished must be removed from the exterior surfaces of the remaining
building.
85
' .;-:...
2.20 Setbacks From Dwellings and Residential District
Landscaping and bufferyards shall be provided in accordance with the
Hazleton Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance in instances where
differing land use types are constructed adjacent to each other or where a
subdivision or land ~evelopment is constructed on a zoning boundary.
2.21 Standards For Approval of a Planned Industrial Development
To assure that the intent and requirements of this District are complied with,
review and approval of a Planned Industrial Development shall be required
as a special exception use. · ·
A. Minimum Trac.t Size- Ten acres of land area within the City.
B. Site Plan - A generalized preliminary site plan is required in
accordance with the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
C. Information - The applicant shall .present whatever information is
available on the ·types of tenants or uses that are in:tended or
expected in .different porti~ns of the development. •
D. Relationship to Surroundings - The applicant sh~l1 show how the
development will be coordinated with access and utilities of other
portions of the 1-1 and 1-2 Districts and with Interstate 81 and areas
zoned for industry in adjacent municipalities. ·
E. Open Space and Landscaping- The application shall show an overall
plan of open spaces and landscaping. This plan shall be carried out
through a system. of deed restrictions .on each lot.
F. Access-
1. Cgordjoated Access - Any Planned Industrial Development shall
make the abs.oJute .maximum use possible of interior streets, as
opposed to numerous driveways entering onto an arterial
street. Deed .restrictions shall be placed on any Individual lots
86
--,
~
~
H.
I.
J.
that abut an arterial street to require access to the interior
street system only.
2. Access to Other Than ·Arterial Streets - Based upon any
PennDOT review comments, the Comprehensive Plan and
reviews by the Planning Commission, City Council, Police Chief,
and City Engineer, the Zoning Hearing Board may require that a
Planned Industrial Development not have any direct access that
would involve left-hand turns onto and off of an arterial street
(except at an intersection planned for or with an existing traffic
signal) if reasonable access could be provided off of and onto a
collector or suitable local street.
3. Easement& for Access - The Zoning Hearing Board inay at the
time of approval of ~ planned industrial development require a
lot or tra.ct to grant an easement for vehicular traffic to
adjoining tracts to allow an efficient interior access system.
Staged Construction - If development Is to occur in progressive
stages; each stage shall be planned and occur so that the purposes
and requirements of this Ordinance are fully complied with at the
completion of each stage.
Lot Regulations - Any lot proposed to be created presently or in the
future within a planned business development, shall be capable of
complying with the lot and area regulations of this District.
Information on Covenants - A Planned Industrial Development should
include a reasonable set of deed restrictions or covenants imposed by
the developer on each lot. Thes~ covenants should cover types of
uses, maintenance of lots, and industrial operations with a. proper
means for enforcement. The covenants should also be written to
carry out the purposes and w:-equlrements of a Planned Industrial
Development. The general substance of these covenants should be
presented before a Planned Industrial Development is approved.
Highway Access Points- The minimum distance between access
87
;.~.:.-·.
points within a planned industrial development from the development
to an arterial street shall be 500 feet.
88
I
i
_J' ARTiCLE VI
MODIFICATIONS AND NONCONFORMITIES
SECTION 1. MODIFICATIONS
j 1. 1 Setback Modifications · -i
j
1.1.1 Front Setbacks From Major Thoroughfares
For the purpose of protecting residential use from adverse influences of
traffic and for the purpose of protecting major thoroughfares for their traffic
functions, an new buildings· along these thoroughfares must be set back at
least fifty (50) feet from the right-of·way line of the thoroughfare. Major
thoroughfares are or will be any street or road so designated by the City·
Planning Commission or as specified in the City of Hazleton Comprehensive
Plan.
1. 1.2 Front, Side and Rear Setback of Buildings In Developed_ Areas
. . .
Where at least two. (2) adjacent buildings within one hund~ed f1 00) feet of a
property are set back a lesser distance than required, the average of the
lessef" distances becomes ·the required minimum setback for the property.
1. 1.3 Setback on Corner Lots
In the case of corner lots,· two (2) front yards shall be provided (the second
of which will exist In lieu of one ( 1 ) side yard.
1. 1.4 Excapdo~s for Accessory or Appurtenant Structures
All _yards ~nd open areas shall be maintained with no portion of such area
utilized for building or structures. The following structures and uses shall be
the only exceptions to this: ·
Permanent-roofed accessory structures allowed in rear yards (52.4).
Access Drives
89
1.2
Antennas
Arbors and/or trellis
Awnings
Barbecues and/or outdoor fireplaces
Chimneys .
Cornices and/or gutters
Decks and Patios
Driveways
Fences and/or retaining walls
Fire Escapes
Flagpoles and/or clothesline
Poles, gardens and/or cultivated fields
Gr~unds used for games
Lamp post
Mail box
Outdoor furniture
Playground equipment
Ponds and/or streams
School bus shelters
Sidewalks
Steps
Telephone booths
Temporary structures
Tree wells
Utility meters
Modfflcadon of .M.xlmum Height Restrictions
The height· regulations do not apply. to the following projections provided
that the height of any such ·projection above its base shall not be greater
than the shortest distance measured along a horizontal plane from such
base to any lot line: ·
o Structures such as chimneys, standpipes, flagpoles, television
antennas "(for permitted uses in the C-C, C-H, J-1 and 1-2 zones
only) or radio towers.
90
J
J
_j
.J
l
-~
j
0
0
Stru~tures on buildings such as clock or bell towers, church
steeples, cupolas, water tanks, and other mechanical
appurtenances, if such structures, at any level, do not cover
more than twenty-five (25) percent of the roof on which they
are located.
Parapet walls or cornices used solely for ornamental purposes if
not in excess of five (5) feet.
1.3 Solar and Wind Energy Facilities
(a)
..
Solar Energy Systems.- Solar energy systems shall be permitted relief
frQm previously stated limitations to the following extent:
1. Setbacks
o Architectural features needed for .the operation of active or
·passive solar energy systems, including, but not limited to,
canopies, eaves, overhangs, detached solar collectors,
reflectors, piping and movable ia:wsulatlon may be permitted to
extend up to ten (.1 0) feet into required yard areas when these
devices are a function~l component of the space heating or
. domestic hot water system of the principal building lot.
o The r~r or side yard set~acks required may be reduced to zero
In order to ·allow th& sitting of solar energy systems, provided
that:
No portion of the structure or architectural features
project over the property lines.
Exposure protection between structure is provided
according to the specifications of all applicable fire and
safety regulations guaranteeing emergency access, light
and ventilation. ·
The placement of all structures, building materials, and
91
.·.--.·
finished wall. construction along the lot lines, does not
interfere with traffic along adjacent or intersecting rightsof-
way or with the site distance at intersections.
No other design can be shown to meet the requirements
of the Zoning O-rdinance and provide the same solar
energy utilization.
Existing solar energy systems will not be substantially
.impaired by shadowing more than ten (1 0) percent of the
collector area between 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. on a
. clear wint~r solstice (December 21st) day.
2. Building Height
0 Solar energy collection equipment, solar energy reflectors, or
solar energy storage ranks extending no more than ten (10)
feet above the highest point of the roof.
3. Lot Coverage
Q . Solar collectors and/or solar energy systems shall not be
included In their lot coverage calculations provided their
installation will not create adverse storm water problems and
will not significantly detract from the groundwater recharge
potential of the immediate vicinity.
4. Wind Energy Systems
o Wind energy systems shall be. permitted relief from previously
stated limitations to the following extent:
1. Setbacks
o The setbacks·from any lot line must be equal t the height
of the tower, plus the length of the longest extension of
the rotor plus ten ( 1 0) feet.
92
_j•
>
-f
!
;
2.
3.
Building Height
o The height is not restricted unless there is an adverse
effect upon the character of the neighborhood or
television interference or significant amounts of noise are
generated by the uriit.
0 · Climbing access to the tower is secured from use by
unauthorized persons.
1.4 Buildings Under Construction
If the construction is completed by one (1) year after the effective date of
..this Ordinance, a building, the foundation of which was completed before
"i{he effective data, may be constructed without being bound by the
·requirements of this Ordinance. In like manner, a building, the foundation of
which was completed before an amendment, may be constructed if the
constr~ction is completed within one ( 1) year after the amendment.
1.5 Subdivision ·of Developed Lots .
No lot may be formed from part of a lot occupied by a building unless each
newly~created lot will meet all the applicable provisions of this Ordinance,
except where a new lot Is formed from a lot with an existing approved
nonconformity and no new nonconformity Is created In any lot by the
formation of the new lot. · -
1.6 Statu• of Subdivision or Land Development Plan
From the time an. application for. approval of a subdivision or land
development plan, whether preliminary or final, is duly filed as provided in
the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, and while such
application is pending approval or disapproval, no enactment or amendment
of the Zoning Ordinance shall affec~ the deci~ion on such application
adversely to the applicant and the applicant shall be entitled to a decision in
93
accordance with the provision of the Zoning Ordinance as it stood at the
time the application was duly filed. In addition, when a preliminary
application has been duly approved, the applicant shall be entitled to final
approval in accordance with the terms of the approved preliminary
application as hereinafter provided.
However, if an application improperly and finally denied, any subsequent
application shall be subject tc;t the intervening change in the Zoning
Ordinance.
When a preliminary or final subdivision or land development plan has been
approved or disapproved subject to conditions acceptable to the applicant,
no subsequent enactment or amendment in the Zoning Ordhiance or Plan
shall be applied to· affect adversely the right of the applicant to commence
and to compl·ete any asp.ect of the approved development in accordance
'· ,:· with ·the terms of such approval within three years from such approval.
Where final approval is preceded by preliminary approval, the three year
period shall be counted from the date of the preliminary approval.
1. 7 Lots of Record
On a Jot where adjacent lots or land were· not owned by the said lot owner
pr owners, both on the effective date of thi~ Ordinance and on the date of
the request for the erection of 8 building or otherwise, which does not fulfill
the r13gul~tions for the minimum lot area and/or lot width or depth for the
zone in which it is located, a building may be ereCted, altered or used and
any conforming or permitted use may be established, providing the setback
requirements conform with the average established by existing uses in the
neighborhood, excepting, however~ those lots covered under Article VI,
Section 1.6 hereof.
SECTION 2 NQNCQNFORMITIES
2.1 Statement of Intent
o The zoning distric~s established by this Ordinance are designed
to guide future use of land in the City by encouraging the
94
- i
'
~
-j
,·.
0
0
development of desirable residential, commercial and
manufacturing areas, with appropriate groupings of compatible
and related uses, to the end promoting and protecting the
public health, safety, comfort, prosperity and other aspects of
the general welfare.
To achieve this end, lawful existing uses which would be
prohibited or restricted under the terms of this Ordinance, or
future. amendments, and uses which do not conform to the
character and regulations of the zoning district in which they
are located must be subject to certain limitations. The
regulations set forth below are intended to provide a gradual
remedy for the undesirable conditions resulting from
indiscriminate mixing of uses, and to afford a· means whereby
nonconf~tming uses can be gradually eliminated and
reestablished in more suitable locations within the City. . .
. Similarly, buildings or other structures which do not comply
with one or more of the applicable district requirements as to
lot width, minimum lot area and yard spaces, lot coverage, or
building height are deemed to be nonconforming.
o To avoid undue hardship, nonconforming uses of land,
buildings, and structures shall generally be permitted to remain;
the purpose of regulating nonconforming Is to restrict further
tnvestment, when economically reasonable, in such
nonconforming uses; exceptions shall be made in these
Instances where extensive Investment is involved to avoid any
unnecessary harassment in the use of such facilities.
o To avoid any undue hardship, nothing in this Ordinance shall be
deemed to require any change in. plans, specifications
construction or intended use of any building or structure for
which plans, spe.cifications, and contract negotiations, or
construction started. prior to the effective date of this
Ordinance, or amendments thereof.
95
2.2 ld&':Jtification and Registradon
o The owner of the premises occupied by a lawful nonconforming
use existing on the effective date of this Ordinance shall secure
a certificate of nonconformance which shall be for the purpose
of insuring the owner of the right to continue the ·
nonconforming use.
o An ·application for a certificate of nonconformance shall be
made to the Zoning Officer by the owner of any property
which, at the time of the effective date of this Ordinance, does
not conform to the provisions or this Ordinance. Such
application shall be made within ninety (90) days after the
effective date of this Ordinance, and the certificate of
nonconformance shall set forth in detail all of the
nonconforming· conditions of said property and shall include a
sketch of the land and improvements covered by the certificate
of" nonconformance. ·This sketch may be either on the back of
the· certificate of nonconformance c:;r may be a map or sketch
attached to ·the ce11;ificate of nonconformance. If desirable or
required, photographs may also. be made a part of the record.
o All forms for applications and certificates on nonconform~nce
shall be supplied by the Zoning Officer on request.
Nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures shall be
identified and registered· by the Zoning Officer.
o Failure of an owner to secure a certificate of nonconformance
by timely application shall create a presumption that the
nonconforming use of his building did not exist on the· ~ffective
date of this Ordinance.
2.3 No~conformlng Uses
2.3.1 Continuation
Lawful uses located either within a building or other structure. or part
96
-J
_J
1
_j
;
1
--1 .
)
'
thereof, or on the land, or in a combination of both, which at the effective
date of this Ordinance or subsequent amendments thereto, become
nonconforming may be continued so long· as they remain otherwise lawful,
subject to the following regulations: ·
2.3.2 Expansion and Alteration
Nonconforming land ~se shall not be expanded or altered to occupy a
greater area .of land than was occupied at the effective date of this
Ordinance, or amendments the.reto, except that additional land may be
acquired to provide off street parking, loading and unloading facilities, and
to Improve safety co.n c:t~ions tn a location. .
fa) Expansion of the nonconformity shall be confined to ttie lot on which
it is located on the effective date of this Ordinance or any amendment
thereto creating the nonconformity.
fb) The total of all such ~xpanslons or alterations of use shall not exceed
... , an additional thirty·f"IVe (35) percent of the area of those buildings or
structures d_evoted to the nonconforming use as ·they existed on the
date on Which such buildings or structures fir~t became
noncoriformlties.
(cJ Provision for access drives, off~street parking and off-street loading
shall be·conslstent with standards required by this Ordinance.
(d) P.rovlsion for yards,. building height and building area shall be
consistent with the standards required for permitted ui•s in the zone
in which the nonconformity In question is located.
(e) Appearance should be harmonious with surrounding properties. This
feature Includes but is not" limited to: landscaping, enclosure of
principal and accessory uses, height control, sign_ control,
architectural control and maintenance in good condition of all
Improvements and open spaces.
~(f) landscaping and bufferyards shall be provided in accordance with the
97
Subdivision .and Land Development Ordinance.
{g) The expansion shall not create new dimensional nonconformities or
further increase existing dimensional nonconformities.
2.3.3 Replacement
o · Upon application for a Special Exception, the Zoning Hearing Board
may approve the replacement of one nonconforming· use by another
nonconforming use provided however, that the proposed
nonconforming use will have no more adverse effect upon adjacent
property than the existing nonconforming use ... The evaluation of
adverse effect shall include, but shall not be limited to the following:
(a) Signs and lighting
(b) · Extent and appearance of structures
(c) Traffic generation and movement
(d) Parking and loading
(e) Emission of. noise~ odors, fumes~ glare, :vibration,·· smoke,
vapors, gases, wastes, or storm water runoff
(f) Fire, explosion or other hazards
o Upon application fqr a Special Exception, the Zoning Hearing Board
may approve the replacement of one dimensional nonconformity by
another dimensional nonconformity provided however, that the ·
proposed nonconforming use will have no more adverse effect upon
adjacent property than the existing nonconforming use. The
evaluation of adverse effect shall include, but shall not be limited to
the following:
(a) Signs and lighting
(b) Extent and appear~nce of.structures
(c) Traffic generation. and movement
(d) Parking and loading
(e) Emission of noise, odors, fumes, glare, vibration, smoke,
vapors, gases, wastes, or storm water runoff
(f) Fire, explosion or other hazards
98
J
i
_j
~ .
1
0
2.3.4 Moving
Upon application for a Special Exception, the Zoning Hearing
Board may approve the replacement of one dimensional
nonconformity by another dimensional nonconformity provided
that such-replacement does not create new dimensional
nonconformities or further increase existing dimensional
nonconformities.
Nonconforming uses of land, shall not be moved in ~hole, or in part, to any
· portion of the land plot not occupied by such use at the effective date of
this Ordinance, and amendments thereto.
2.3.6 Restoradon
tn the event that any nonconforming· use of land in any district is destroyed,
or partially destroyed by fire, explosion, or other disaster, or otherwise
~~maged to.the extent of 75% or more, or an appraised replacement value
.,. the. improvements, facilities, apparatus equipment ilicluding vehicles, and
stored materials, such nonconforming use shall termh1ate at the time of
destruction and th~ land shall revert to conforming uses under the
regulations of this Ordinance, and amendments thereto.
2.3.601scontinuance
. .
In the event that a nonconformlng use is discontinued, the following
provisions shall apply. · · ·
o When non<:onfor_ming use of land ceases, and operations
discontinued for a period. of 12 calendar months, or more, the
subsequent us.e of such land shall revert to conform to the
regulations of this Ordinance, and amendments thereto.
· o .If a. nonconforming use ·of a. building or part thereof ceases and
discontinues operati·ons for a perlo_d of more than twelve
calendar months, any subsequent use of such building or part
thereof shall conform to the regulations specified in this
99
Ordinance.
2.3. 7 Reversion
No nonconformity sl)all, if once changed to conform to the regulations of
this Ordinance, be changed back again to a nonconformity. This section
shall not preclude a property owner from applying for, or securing, a
variance or specie;~ I exception pursuant to the requirements of this
Ordinance.
2.4 Nonconforming Bu~ldings and Structures
2.4. 1 Continuation
o Buildings in existence on the effective date of this Ordinance
and which do not conform to the area and bulk regulations of
·this Ordinance. applicable to the districts in which they are
located, may be continued, so long as they remain otherwi~e
lawful,-subject to the following regulations_:
2.4.2 Expansion and Alteradon
o Nonconforming buildings and structure_s shall not.be expanded.
nor altered to occupy a greater area than was ~ccupled at the
effective date of this Ordinance, except where substanti~l
investment ill buildings and str~ctures would place undue
financial burden on the owners.
o E~pansion or alterati~n shall be permitted to eliminate undue
financial burdens, prevent loss of employr:nent, and
employment-opportunities; provided such expansion or
alteration generates no nuisance_·factors such as excess noise,
odorous fumes,·fire hazard, or health hazard, and any such
expansion or alterati~n shall be a continu~tion of existing
buildings and structures; and be so constructed as to maintain
the aesthetic values of the location.
100
-~'
~
·a The Zoning Hearing Board may permit the expansion or .
alteration of il nonconforming structure in accordance with the
provision of Article VI, Section 2.3.2.
2.4.3 Moving
. .
Sho~ld any nonconforming building or ·structure be moved, in whole or in
part, for .any reason, for any distance whatever, It shall thereafter conform
to the regulations. for the district In which It is located after it is moved.
2.4.4 Restoration
..,.
0
. . .
When a nonconforming· building, or st~ucture is destroyed,
partially destroyed "by fire, explosion, or other disaster, Is ·
otherwise damaged to the extent of 75% of the appraised
replacement value of such building or structure, such
nonconforming building, or structure shall not be restored, or
rebui~t, except In such manner as to conform to the regulations
of this Ordinance,· and amendments thereto .
. o . When a nonconforming buildi.ng or structure is partially
destroyed by fire, explosion, or other disaster to less than 75%
of its appraised replacement value, It may be restored to its
original use, but in accordance with the codes of the
Ordinance. ·
2.4.6 Discontinuance
If a nonconforming building, or structure remains unused, or unoccupied for
a period of 12 calendar months, or more without being properly maintained
for further original uses such ·building, or structure, shall be made to
conform to t~a regulations of this ordinance, and amendments thereto.
2.4.6 Reversion ·
No nonconformity shall, If once changed to conform to the regulation of this
Ordinance, be changed back again to a nonconformity. This shall not
101
preclude a property owner from applying for, or securing, a variance or
special exception pursuant to the requirements of this Ordinance.
2.5 Nonconforming Lots of Record
o In any district, in which single-family houses are permitted,
notwithstanding the minimum lot area and minimum lot width
limitations imposed by other provisions of this Ordinance, a
single~f~mily hou•e and customary accessory buildings ~ay be
erected on any single lot of record lawfully in existence at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance,
provided that al required yards and setbacks are complied with
and the minimum lot area and minimum lot ·width are each a
minimum of 70 percent of what would otherwise be required.
o In any district in wh_lch single-family detached houses are not
. permitted; ·notwithstanding the minimum lot area and minimum
·lot ~.idth requirements ·of this or~inancel only one principal
use •. which.shall be :permitted· by r_ight use in that district and its
. . :customary accessory uses ·may be erected on a single lot of
record lawfully _In existence at the effective. date of adoption or
amendment of this Qrdinance, provided that all required yards
an setbacks are complied with and .the minimum lot area and
minimum lot width are each a minimum of 70 percent of what
would otherwise .be required.
o For approval of a principal use or building on a nonconforming
lot, the following conditiof)s shall be met:
The no.nconformity shall not have been self-created
·Contiguous nonconforming lots under common
ownership shall.be considered one lot.
2.6 Nonconforming Signs
2.6.1 Continuance
102
j
_j
Signs, in existence at the effective date of this ordinance or amendments
thereto, shall be subject to the following regulations:
2.6.2 Moving
No nonconforming sign shall be moved to another position on the bui~dlng or
lot on which ·It Is located after the effective date of this Ordinance or
amendment thereto~ unles~:S ·it can be made to conform to all the regula~ions
of this Ordinance. ·
2.6.3 Structural Alterations
~ nonconforming sign on a nonconforming use may be continued,. but the
area of such sign or signs shall not be increased and such. sign or signs shall
qot be structurally altered, except where safety requires it.
·,~.
2.6.4 Restoration
'"'.!:'
~-- . . . ~P.- the event that any nonconforming sign Is damaged to the extend of 25
percent of its cost of replacement, at the time of destruction, such sign shall
.. not be restored nor replaced.
. .
2.6.5 Signs of Discontinued Uses
Whenever any use. of building or structure, of land, or of a combination ~f
buildings, structures and land, ceases, all signs accessory to such use shall
be deemed to become nonconfQrmlng and shall be removed within ·three
calendar .months.
2.6~6 Discontinuance of Signs
All presently existing signs which conformed to the Zoning Ordinance prior
to the effective date of this Ordinance, but which fail to conform to the
provisions of this O.rdinance, shall be deemed nonconforming and shall be
removed at .the owner's expense within five years of such effective date,
except freestanding signs, which are nonconforming only because of height.
103
.. ·
Any property owner for each piece of property has the option to continue to
use one presently existing sign that Is .not conforming per lot with the
present ordinance, provided that the one nonconforming sign was registered
by its owner as nonconforming with the Code Enforcement Office of the
City of Hazleton, Pennsylvania. The property owner may repair and
maintain this one nonconforming sign, but not change its physical size or
any written message or logo thereon. This one nonconforming sign Is
permitted to exist only so long as it is related to the specific use of the
property on which it is located. · · ·
104
ARTICLE VII
ZONING HEARING BOARD
SECTION 1 poWERS AND DUDES • GENERAL
1 1.1 Membership of Board
-~
---~
The rnemb~rship of the Board shall, upon the determination of the governing
body, consist of either three (3) or five (5) residents of the Municipality
appointed· tiy the Mayor. ·
The term of office of a three (3) ~ember board shall be three (3) years and
·shall be so fixed that the term of office of one (1} member shall expire ea~h
year. The terms of office of a five (5) member board shall b8 five (5) years
and shall be so fixed that the term of office of one member of a five
member board shall expire each year. If a three (3 mem~er board is
changed to a five (5J member board, the members of the existing three (3)
member board shall continue in office until their term of office would expire
under prior law. The mayor shall appoint twQ (2) additional members to the
Board with terms scheduled ·to expire .In accordance with the provisions of
this Section. The Board shall promptly notify the mayor of any vacancies
which occur. Appointments to fl. II vacancies shall be only ·for the unexpired
portion of the term. Members· of the Board shall hold no other office in the
Municipality.
The mayor may appoint by resolution at least one (1) but no more than
three (3) residents of the municipality to serve as alternate members of'the
board. The· term ·of -office of an alternate member shall be three years.
When seated pursuant to the prQVIsions of Section 906, of Act 170 an
alternate shall be entitled to participate· in all proceedings and discussions of
the board ·to the ·same· and full exte~t as provided by law for board
me~bers, including specifically the right to cast a vote as a voting member
duri~g the proceedings, and shall have all the powers and duties set forth in
this. act and as otherwise municipality, ·including membership on the
plannin.g commission and zoning offic~r. Any alternate may participate in
any proceeding or discussion of ~he board but shall not be entitled to vote
as a member of the board nor be compensated unless designated as a
105
voting alternate member.
1.2 Organization of Board
The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers who shall serve
annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For the conduct of any
hearing and. the taking of any action, a quorum shall be not less than a
majority of all members of the Board, but where two (2) members are .
disqualified to act in a particular matter, the remaining member may act for.
the Board. The Board may appoint a hearing officer from its own
membership to conduct any hearing on its behalf and the pa·rties may ·waive
further action by "the .Board as provided in Article VII, Section 2. The Board
may make, alter, and ·rescind rules and forms for its ·procedure, consistent
with ordinances of the laws of ·the Commonwealth. The Board shall keep
full public records of its business and stiall submit a repoit of Its activities to
the governing body once a year.
1.3 Powers
The Zoning Hearing Board. h~s the following power:
(aJ Interpretation • To interpret any provision of this Ordinance including
zone boundaries. .
(b) Special Exception- To hear and decide special exceptions upQn which
the Board is required to pass under this Ordinance as per Section
74.0 following. · · · ·
(c) Appeals • To· hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there Is error
in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the
Zoning Officer in. the enforcement or interpretation of this Ordinance.
(d) Variances -·To authorize, upon application,. in specific this Ordinance
as p~r cases a variance from the te~ms ~f Section 73.0 following.
(e) Rehearing- To grant the rehearing of a case 'it it appears there has
been a substantial change in the facts as evidence of th~ case as
106
-i
_J
I
'
(f)
presented at the initial hearing.
Challenge to the Validity of the Ordinance or Map - The Board shall
hear challenges to the validity of the Zoning-Ordinance or Map except
as indicated in the Pennsylvania Municipalities planning Code Sections
1003 and 1104 (1)(b}. In all such challenges the Board shall take
evidence and make a record thereon as provided In Article VII,
Section 2.0. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Board shall decide
all contested questions and shall make findings on· all relevant issues
of fact which shall beco·me part of the record on appeal to the court.
(g) Unified Appeals ... Where the Board has jurisdiction over a zoning
---;.~-" matter, tJ'le board shall also hear all appeals which an applic~nt may
-1:::.:::: elect to bring before it with respect to anv City Ordinance or .
-~'( requirement pertaining to the same developmen~ plan or development.
In any such case the Board shall have no power to pass upon the
nonzoning issues, but shall take evidence and make a record thereon
as provided In Article VII, Section 2.0. At the conclusion of the
hearing~ the board ·sh.all make findings .on ·an relevant Issues of fact
which shall" become part of the record on appeal to the -court.
In exercising the powers above, the Board, in· conformity with the provisions
of this Ordinance, may reverse, affirm, or modify the order, requirement,
decision, or dete.rmination ~ppealed requirement, decision, or determination
appealed from or requested, and may make any order, requirement, decision
or determination as out to be made. .
1.4 ·aoard _Calendar
Each application or appeal filed in the proper form with the required data,
must be. numbered serially and be placed upon the calendar of the Board by
the Secretary. Applications and appeals ~ust be assigned for hearing in the
order in which they appear on the calendar. However, for good reason, the
Board may order the advance of the applic~tlon or appeal. The Board must
fix a reasonable time for hearings.
107
SECTION 2 PUBLIC HEARINGS
2.1 Notice; Conduct of Meeting
Notice. shall be given to the public, the applicant, the zoning officer, such
other persons as the City shall designate by ordinance and to any person
who has made timely request for th~ same. Notices shall be given at such
tim~ and in such manner as ·shall be prescribed by ordinance or in the
absence of ordinance provision, by rules of the Board. The City may
establish. reasonable fees, based ·on cost, to be paid by the applicant and .by
person requesting any notice not required by ordinance. In addition, to the
notice proVided herein, notice of said hearing shall be co.nspicuously posted
on the affected. tract of land.
The hearings shall be conducted by the. Board or the Board may appoint any
~ember as a hearing officer.· The decision, or where no decision is called
for, .the findings shall be made by the Board, but the parties may waive
decision or findings by the Board and accept the d~cision or findings of the
decision or findings of the hearing officer as final. Formal rules of evidence
shall not ap.ply, but irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious ~vidence may
be excluded. · ·
The Board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or
indirectly, with any party or his representatives In connection with any Issue
Involved· except upoo notice and opportunity for all parties to paitlcipate,
shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda, or
other materials unless the parties are afforded. an opportunity to contest the
material so .noticed and shall not 111spect the site or its surroundings with
any party or his representative unless all parties are given an opportunity to
be present.
2.2 Representation; Statements
Parties to the hearings shall be the City; any parson affec~ed by the
application who has made timely appearance of record .before the Board,
and any other person including civic or community organizations permitted
to appear by the Board. The Board shall have the power to require that all
108
-1
-I i
_,>j
1
'
~arsons who wish to be considered parties enter appearances in writing on
forms provided by the Board for that purpose.
The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall be
afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and argument and
cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues. ·
Statements are to be made in the followJng order or as the Chairman may
direct: ·
(a) Applicant or appellant.
(b) Zoning Officer and other Officials .
. . 1c) A~y private citizen.
-; ·.- .~·The applicant or appellant must be given an opportunity for rebuttal.
2.3··-· _Witnesses
- lo-. ,;. -..
"f:,• .. :·(l'he chairman or acting chairman of the Board. or the Hearing Officer _
· presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
documents and papers, included ·by the parties.
2.4 Decision Procedure
The ~ard or the hearing officer. as the case may be, shall render a written
decision or, when no decision is caJied for, make written findings on the
application within forty-five (45) days after the last hearing, before the
Board or Hearing Officer. Where the application is contested or denied,
each _decisio~ shall be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions
based there qn together with ·the reasons thereof. Conclusions based on
any provisions of. the Pennsylvania Municipalities .Planning Code ·or of any
ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied
on and the reasons why the :conclusion Is deemed appropriate in the light of
the facts found. If the hearing is conducted by a Hearing Officer, and ther&
has been no stipulation that his decision of findings are final, the Board shall
make his report and recommendations available to the parties and the
109
parties shall. be entitled to make written representations thereon to the
~oard prior to final decision or entry of findings and the Board's decision
shall be entered no later than forty-five (45) days after the decision of the
Hearing Officer. Where the Board fails to render the decision within the
period required by this Subsection, or fails to hold the·required hearing
within sixty (60) days. from the date of the applicant's request for a hearing,
the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant
unless the applicant has agree diri writing to an extension of time. ·when a
decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of the failure
of the Board to meet or render a decision as herein provided, the
municipality shall give public notice of said decision within ten (10) days in
the same manner as provided in. Articl~ VII, Section 2. 1. Nothing hi this
Section shall prejudice the right of any party opposing the application to .
urge that such decision is erroneous.
A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for I of the
findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him no
later than the day following its date. All other persons who have filed their
name and .address .with the-Board .shall be provided by mail or otherwise,
brief notice of the· decision or find.ings and a statement of the plact at which
the ·full decision or findings may be examined.·
Whenever the Board imposes a condition or conditions with respect to the
granting of an application or appeal, this condition must be stated 'n the
order of the Board and in the permit issued pursuant to the order by the
Zoni.ng Officer. "This.permit remains valid only_ as long as the condition or
conditions upon which it was granted or the conditions imposed. by this
Ordinance are adhered to.
2.5 Records .
The B~ard or the Hearing Officer, as the case may be, shall keep a
sta~ographic record of the proceedings, and a transcript of the proceedings
and copies of graphic or written material received in evidence shall be made
available to any party· at cost.
110
l
l
3.1
SECTION 3 l{ABIANCES
Filing of Variances
An application may be made to the Zoning Hearing Board for a variance
where It ls_alleged that the provision of the Zoning Ordinance Inflict
unnecessary hardship ·upon the applicant. Th~ application must be on a
form provided for that purpose by the Zoning Officer. It must be filed with
the Board and copies given to the Zoning Officer and City Planning
Commi.sslon. The applicant must provide all the information requested on
'the form, together with any other Information and data that may be required
··'to advise the Board of the variance, whetner such information is called for
by ·the official form or not. · ·
~::-Unless otherwise specified or extended by the Board, a variance authorized
. · · · Tby the Board expires if the applicant falls to obtain a building permit or use
· ·' · t·".Ce~ificate within six ( 6) months from the date of authorization of the
·. ·'\variance.
3.2 Standards for Variance
Where there Is unnecessary hardship, the Board may grant a variance in the
application of the provision of this Ordinance provided that the following .
finds are made where relevant in a given case:
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including
·irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or shape, or
exceptional topographical or other physical conditicms peculiar to the
particular property and ·that the unnecessary hardship is due to such
conditions and not the circumstances or conditions generally created
by the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance In the neighborhoqd or
district II') which the: property is located.
(b) That because of .such physlcQI circumstances or conditions, there is
no possibilitY that the property can be developed in strict conformity
with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and that authorization of
111
a variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the
property.
{c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant.
(d) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character
of the neighborhood or district in which the property is located, not
substantially or permanently Impair the appropriate use of
development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public
. welfare. ·
(e) That thfil variance, If aut~orized, will represent the minimum variance
that will afford relief and will represent the least modification possible
of the regulation in issue.
3.3 Conditions
In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable condition
and safeguards as it considers necessary to implement the purposes of this
Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 4 SPECIAL EXCEPDONS
4.1 Filing of Special Exceptions
Ft;tr any use permitted by special exception, a .special exception must be
obtained from the Zoning Hearing Board. in addition to the information
required on the building ·permit application, the ·special exception ~pplication
must show:
(a) Ground floor plans and elevations of proposed structures
(b) Names and addresses of adjoining o~ners ·
Unless otherwise specified or extended by the Zoning Hearing Board a
special exception auth~rized by the Board expires if the applicant fails to
obtain, where required to do so, a building permit or use certificate within
112
i
--- ~ _,
-J
l - ~
six (6) months of the date of the authorization of the special exception.
4.2 Temporary Special Exception
A temporary special exception must be obtained from the Zoning Hearing
Board for any nonconformity which is, or will be, seasonal or is, or will be,
in the public interest. -The Zoning Hearing Board may grant a temporary
special exception for a nonconforming use or structure; existing, or new,
which: -
(a)
(b)
·--~ ~~. (C) .
Is beneficial to the public health or general welfare, or
Is necessary to promote the proper development of the community, or
Is seasonal in nature
The temporary special exception may be Issued for a period not exceeding
one (1) year, and may be renewed for an aggregate period not exceeding
-three (3) years. The nonconforming structure or use must be completely
, .-.'~ removed upon the expiration of the special exception without cost to the
City. -
4.3 Referral To Planning Commissl~n
. .
All applications for a special exception shall be referred to the City Planning
Commls•lon for a report for land development, subdivision or encroachment
only.
.-
4.4 Conditions
The Zoning Hearing Board, in pass,ng upon special exception applications,
may attach conditions considered necessary to protect the public welfare
and the Comprehensive Plan, including conditions which are more restrictive
than those established for other uses in the same zone.
4.5 Application of Use and Lot Area Requirements
The use and lot requirements as set· forth in thi$ Ordinance must be foHowed
by the Zoning Hearing Board. Where no use or lot requirements are set
113
forth for the particular use, the Board must pose extent of u~e requirements
as necessary to protect the public welfare and the Comprehensive Plan.
4.6 General Standards
A special exception ·may be granted when the Zoning Hearing Board finds
f~om a preponderance 9f the evidence produced at the hearing that:
(a) The proposed use, including its nature, intensity and location, is in
harmony with the orderly and appropriate development of the zone;
and
(b) That adequate water supply, sewage disposal, storm drainage can be
provided for snd fire and police protection are or can be provided for
the use; and ·
(c) That the use of adjacent land and buildings will not be discouraged
and the value of adjacent land and buildings·wm not be impaired by
the location,· natura and height of buildings, walls and fenc::es; and
(d) That the use will have proper location with respect to existing or
future streets giving access to it, and will ·not create traffic
congestion or cause industrial or commercial traffic to use residential
streets; and · ·
(e) That the specific standards set forth for each particular use for which
a special exception may be granted have been met.
The application for. a special exception shall have the burden of proof, which
shall include the. burden. of going forward with the evidence and the burden
of persuasion on an questions of fact which are to be determined by the
Zoning Hearing Board.
4. 7 Special Standards
In addition to the general standards for all special exceptions as contained in
Article VII, Section 4.6 the specific standards for particular uses as listed in
114
I .... ,
_J
''
1 -:
Article VIII must be met prior to the granting of a special exception.
. ..,..
115
ARTICLE VIII
STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
SECTION 1 REQUIREMENT OF SPECIFIC STANDARDS
In addition to the general standards for all Special Exceptions as contained
in Section 4.0, the specific standards for the particular uses allowed by
Special Exception are set forth in this Article. These standards must be met
prior to the_ granting by the Zoning Hearing· BOard of a Special Exception for
such uses in applicable zones.
SECTION 2 SPECIAL EXCEPTION STANDARDS
2. 1 Accessory Commercial Use
In office centers which contain not less than 25,000 square feet, the
following defined commercial accessory uses are permitted with board
_ approval, provided ·that such uses shall not have exterior signs and shall not
hicluda··the outdoor ·storage of materials, equipment, or merchandise, and
total ·area devoted to such commercial use shall not exceed twenty (20)
percent of the to~al gross floor area.
1. Eating facilities
2. Delicatessens
3. Pharmacies
4. Newsstand, stationery or book store
5. Gift Shop
6. Automatic laundry or dry cleaning shop or pick-up
7. Barber or beauty shops
2.2 Ap~rtments Located in a Commercial District
In a c~c zone and subject to the requirements of that zone except as herein
modified or provided.
116
j
1
_j
.>
•• ::>"
o Submjssjon Regujremeot
0
0
A photograph, model, or architectural rendering of the
type of any building or exterior alteration proposed.
A sketch of the lot in question showing all lot lines and
indicating the open area to be reserved under this
Section.
Supplemental $tandards
All dwelling units shall have means of outside access
that is separated from access provided for commercial
-and office uses.
. .
Each floor containing apartments shall have a minimum
. of two fire safe exits and comply with all current codes ..
The Zooing Hearjog Board shall consider the following:
Whether the proposed use will be compatible with the
. character of any surrounding residential ne-ighborhood.
· Whether the building will have adequate ingress, egress,
and public safety.
- Whether the parking requirements of Article V, SeCtion
2.9 can be met. .·
o Minimum habitable floor area of 600 square feet per dwelling
unit, unl~ss a large~ floor area i~ established by another City
ordinance.
o Any exterior fire escape shall not be located on the front of the
building. ·
117
2.3 Bed and Breakfast Inn
In R-2 and R-3 zones and subject to the requirements of these zones in
which focated.except as herein modified and provided:
(a) The length of stay for each guest sh~ll not exceed fourteen ( 14) days.
(b) Each residence providing bed and breakfast accommodations must be
served by public water and sewer.
(c) A minimum of one (1) parking space must be provided for each guest
room.
(d) A sign of not more than two (2) square feet may be erected to
advertise ·such accommodations. The sign may be illuminated only by
indirect iightilig. · ·
(e) Bed ·and breakfast operc;~tions shall be conducted so as to be clearly
Incidental. and. accessory to ·.the primary use of the site as a singlefamily
dwelling.
(f) The inn must comply with local regulations regarding applicable
permits, including but not limited to, fire, health, and building codes
and ADA.
2.5 Cemetery
In R-1, R-2 and R-3 zones and subject to the requirements of the ~one in
which IQcated except as herein modified and provided:
(a) Assurances must be provided that water supplies of surrounding
properties will· not be contaminated by burial activity within the
proposed cemetery.
(b) No burial. plots or facilities are permitted on floodplain land.
118
-~
- l
j
-~
2.6 Child Care Home/Center
In R~ 1, R-2 and RM3 zones an" subject to the requirements of the Zone in
which located except as herein modified and provided:
(a) The use shall meet all reqtiirements for certification by the State of
Pennsylvania where required. Proof of such certification, and any
recertification shall be provided to the City.
(b) Outdoor play areas shall be sufficiently enclosed so as to protect the
neighborhood from inappropriate noise and to provide for the health
and_ safety of the children as determined by the Zoning Hearing Board.
·~b) A~ least one (1) off-street parking space for each person employed.
2. 7 Convenience Store
__ ;·.Jn an 0 zone and subject to the requirements of the zone in which located
··-except as _herein modified and provided:
(a). . Minimum lot area - Twenty Thousand (20,000) sq. ft.
(bJ Minimum lot width- Two Hundre~ (200) feet.
(c) Maximum lot coverage- Fifty (50) percent.
(d) At least one (1) parking space for every one hundred (100) sq. ft. of
retail store.
(e) Access drives must be located as follows:
Minimum offset from intersection of street right-of-way lines:
forty (40) feet
Side lot line offset- Ten (10) feet
MlnlmLJm width M Fifteen (15) feet.
Maximum width:. Thirty-five (35) feet
119
Minimum separation of drives of same lot - Twenty;_five (25)
feet
Access onto a State highway must be approved by PennDOT
(f) Except along access drives, a concrete curb eight (8) inches in height
must be placed along all street right~of-way lines.
(g) Building area should be setback at least thirty-five (35) feet from front
property line and fifteen (15} feet on each side and rear.
2.8 Domiciliary Care Unit (Personal Care)
1. Applicant must secure certification with the Luzerne Area Agency on
the Aging or any other· official social agency.
2. The dwelling must be inspected by the Fire Chief and the Chief shall
submit a .written report to the Zoning Board with recommendation for
3.
· fire· safety .equipment and any necessary recommendation to insure
adequate fire protection.
The maximum number of unrelated persons who are eighteen years of
age and above who a;~r.e disabled physically, mentally, emotionally or
aged, shall not exceed two per dwelling unit (room).
4. The Use/Occupancy .permit shall be renewed annually, following ·an
inspection by the Fire. Chief and Zoning Officer to assure compll~nce.
2.9 Drlve~Thru facility For Any Use
Any drive-in windows and waiting lanes shall be located .and have capacity
for sufficient numbers of vehicles, to ensure that traffic conflicts and
hazards· are ~voided ·within the site and along the streets adjoining the use.
2.10 Group Homes, Half-Way Houses
Subject to the requirements below, group homes or half..;way houses may be
authorized only in the R-3 Residential Zone.
120
~
~J
i
~ -i
I
'j
~l
l l
~·
~
~;
J
J
-.
_j
' '
-
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
.. ,.
·:t
·l(e)
.... ~,
-:!t:.··
A minimum of 360 square feet. of habitable floor area must be
provided for each occupant, including any staff. · ·
A common kitchen and dining facility shall be provided and no
cooking or dining facilities shall be provided in individual rooms or
suites. This provision is not intende4 to .require any kitchen ·and
dining facilities if an affili~ted Institution provides them elsewhere.
All group quarters and group homes shall be connected to public
water and public sanitary sewage facilities.
All group homes and Jlalf-way houses shall comply with the Federal
Life Safety Code, the rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Labor and Industry~ and all other applicable building,
safety, and fire codes of the federal, state, or local government.
Group homes shall be registered and licensed by either the Federal
Government or the Commonwealth of pennsylvania and shall be In
cc;»mpliance with all appllcabJe rules and regulations of the licensing
body.
(f) A group home or half-way house shall not be located within 2000:
feet of any other group home or half-way house.
(g) Off-street parking shall be provided for all group quarters or group
homes· based upon one (1) parking space for each four (4) occupants.
2.11 Home Occupations and Professions
Subject to the requireme11ts below, the following home occupations and
profe,sions may be authorized only in a dwelling unit in a residential or
apa~ant or ·office zone.
Fine arts studios, photography, privata Instruction, clergy, physician,
dentist, lawyer, engineer, accountant,· architect, barber and beauty shop,
dressmaking, steno service, ~onsulting. or similar occupations, but
excluding the following occupations or uses which shall include but are not
121
limited to commercial stables or kennels, real est~te or ir:-surance offices,
commercial merchandising or retail activities, and any occupation that may
customarily require the use of a panef truck or a delivery truck or similar
vehicle.
(a} Employees- No person other than a resident of the dwelling unit may
practice the occupation. No more than two (2) persons
shalf be employed to provide secretarial, -clerical or other
assistance.
{b) Coverage - Not more than thirty (30) percent of the ground floor
area of a dwelling unit may be devoted to a home
. occupation or profession.
{c) Appearance The character .or ext~rnaf appearance of the dwelling unit
CdJ Parking -
·must be that of a dwelling. No display of products may
be shown so as to be visible from outside the dwelling.
A name plate not larger than two (2) square feet in area
is· permitted. It may be. illuminated only by indirect ·
lighting~
Besides the required parking for the dwelling unit,
additional off-street parking is required as follows:
1) Three_(3) space for home occupation and one (1)
. space for each nonresident employee, and
2) Two {2) additional spaces for physician, dentist,
barber or beauty shop.
2.12 Hospital, S~llled Health Care Faclilty
In R-3 and R-2 zones and subject ·to the requirements of the zone in which
located except as herein modified and provided:
(aJ Lot area - o·ne (1) acre minimum .
(b) Lot width- Two hundred (200) feet minimum
122.
J
J
J
_.;.
(c) Setbacks - All buildings shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from all
property or street lines.
(d) Access shall be via an arterial or collector street as designated by the
City Comprehensive Plan.
(e) Parking - One (1} off street parking area for each employee and one
( 1) space for every 2 beds. · ·
2.13 House· of Worship
In any Residential zone and subject to the requirements of the zone in which
located except as herein modified and provided:
(a)
......... i.
.,
'.1-.
Side setback- Minimum side setbacks of fifteen (15) feet (each) must
be provided .
· Access shall be via an arterial or collector street as designated by the
City Comprehensive Plan.
(c) Psrklng - One (1} off-street parking space for every four (4) adult
. members.
2.14 Junkyard, Scrap ~eta.l Storage (Recycling Canter~
In· an 1-2 zone and subject to the requirements of that zone except as herein
modified and provided: ·
(a} -Lot area - Ten ( 1 0) acres minimum
(bl Lot ·width- Three hundred (300) feet minimum_·
(c) Setbacks- Any area \JS&d for this purpose must be at least seventyfive
(75) feet from· any propei-ty line and one hundred (100) feet from
any street ·nne. _ · .
(d) The area to be used must be completely enclosed with a six (6) foot
high fence so constructed as not to have openings greater than six
(6) inches In any direction. ·
(e) Must comply with the applicable or~inances and all other applicable
State regulations. -
123
>.·
(f) Six (6) foot fence surrounding property.
2. 15 Kenne~s and Animal Hospitals
In C-H zone is subject to the requirements of the zone in which _located
except as herein modified and provided.
(a) Lot area • One C 1 J acre minimum
(b) Setbacks- All buildings, dog runs, fenced enclosures and similar
structures shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from all property or
street l.ines.
2.16 Medical Clinics and Facilities
In ·R-3 zones and subject to the requirements of that zone except as herein
modified and provided:
(a) Lot area - One (1) acre minimum
{b) Lot width - Two hundred (200) feet minimum
(c) Setbacks- All buildings shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from all
property of street. lines.
(d) Access shall be via an arterial or collector street as designated by the
City Comprehensive Plan.
(e) Public sewer aod public water approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources must be utilized.
(f) Appe~rance shall be harmonious with adjoining properties. This
feature Includes ~ut ·Is .no~ limited to: landscaping, height control, sign
control, building· coverage, and architectural controls.
(g) Buffers and screens shall be provided as necessary to adequately
protect neighboring properties. This includes~ but is not limited to,
124
l
-l J
-J
~
\
- '" :~
l
fences, walls, planting and open spaces.
(h) Accessory services, including laboratories and pharmacies for the use
of patients visiting medical practitioners in the clinic rnay be permitted
as part of the clinic facility, subject to the following specific
conditions:
1) All entrances to parts of the building in which these accessory
services are provld_,d shall be from within the building and any
direct access from the street is prohibited. ·
2) The hours during which these services are provided shall be the
same as those during which medical practitioners are receiving
3)
patients. ·
Signs or other evidence advertising or indicating the provision
of these services visible from outside the building are
prohibited; except that there may be erected one sign not
exceeding two (2) square feet in area attached to the building,
any Illumination thereof being white, non·flashing and limited to
an enclose.d lamp design.
. .
2.17 Membership Club or Lodge
These uses are restricted to those not conducted primarily for gain, although
a restaurant may be operated primarily to serve members and· their guests.
No ·permanent .sign •dvertising the sale of food or beverages ,will be
permitted. Structures hereafter converted or erected for such. use are
subject to all applicable. regulations for· the District in which the facility Is to
be located.
2.18 Mobile ·Home Park
In a C-H commercial zone and subject to the requirements of the zone in
which located except as herein modified and provided:
(8) The minimum tract area shall be ten ( 1 0) acres.
125
·:
(b} Public sewer and public water approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental resources must be utilized,. and each lot
must be not less than. five thousand (5000) square feet in area and
not less than fifty (50} feet wide at the building setback.line.
· (c} Regardless of lot size, the side yard distances measured from outside
each mobile home to the lot line shall not be less than thirty (30) feet
in total and no one side yard distance less than twelve ( 12). Front
yards shall not be less than.ten (10) feet and in no case, shall the
distance between any two (2) mobile homes be less than thirty (30)
feet.
(d) The Zoning Hearing Board may require suitable screen planting, or
may restrict the proximity of mobile homes or other improvements to
adjoining properties, or may attach such other conditions or ..
safeguards to the use of land for a mobile home park as the Board
may deem necessary to protect the general welfare.
(e) A· mobile home· park and $xtension thereof .shall also ·comply with aiJ
·: applicable State and/or municipal regulations now in effect or
. hereafter enacted.
2. 19 Motels, Hotels and Convention Centers
(a) · Accessory Us,;sa Psrmi.tted
An auditorium, restaurant, tavern, and/or gift shop operated In
connection with a hotel or motel as a c~early accessory use shall be
permitted. · · ·
(b) Area and Bulk Regulations
The maximum impervious coverage shall be 65 percent, unless a
more restrictive requirement .is stated in a district.
(c) Each unit shall have its own ·toilet and bathing or shower facilities.
126
-;
2.20 Multi-Family or Two-Family Conversion, Rooming House
In an R-3 zone and subject to the requirements of that zone except as herein
modified and provided: ·
(a) Lot area- Ten thousand (10;000) square feet minimum
. (b) Lot width· Seventy-five (75) feet minimum
(c} Side set~acks • Fifteen (15). feet (each) minimum
2.21 Garden Apartments
- ·:;~In an R-2 zone and subject ·to the requirements of that zone except as herein
·· .: .. · modified and provided:
..
~ (a) Lot area- Ten Thousand (10.000) square feet minimum
-~:~(b) Lot width- Seventy-five (75) feet minimum
. ::141 ..
(c) Side Setbacks- Fifteen (i 5) feet (each) minimum
(d) Height modifications- Buildings greater than thirty (30) feet in height
are permitted only if each of the setback requirements is increased _by
one foot for each foot by which the height of the building exceeds
thirty (30) feet •.
(e) Paved area - Thirty (30) ·percent maximum
(f) Density requirement - the maximum number of dwelling units per
gross ~ere of _land permitted for this use Is fifteen (15).
(g) Design standards - AU of the applicable General Provisions listed In
article I of this ·Ordinance shall be enforced. This Includes but is not
limited to all provisions listed as applying to apartments and multifamily
~uildlngs and structures regardless of the zone referred to In a
particular section.
127
(h) Consideration shall be given to traffic problems. If the nature of the
multi-family development is such that it wifl generate a high Volume of
vehicular traffic then access should be via an arterial or collector
street as designated by the City Comprehensive Plan.
{i) Parking - Two (2) off-street parkin·g per unit.
2.22 Parks, Community Centers and Other Open Space with Appurtenant
Buildings
In R-1, R-2 and R-3 zones and subject to the requirements o~ the zone in
which located except as herein modified and provided:
(a) Consideration shall be given to traffic problems. If the nature of the
park or open space area is such that it will generate a high volume of
vehicular traffic then access should be via an arterial or collector
·street as .designated by the City Comprehensive Plan.
2.23 Public Buildings
In any Residential zone and subject to the requirements of the zone in which
located except as herein modified and provided: .
(a) Consideration shall be given to traffic problems. ·If the nature of the
park or open space area is such that It will generate a high volume of
vehicular traffic, then access should be via an arterial or collector ·
street as designated by the City Comp~ehensive Plan.
(b) Side setback- Minimum side setbacks of fifteen (15) feet (each) must
be provided.
(c) Parking- One (1) off-street parking per public employee.
2.24 Pub&c. U~fllty Buildings
In an R-3, CC, CH, 0 or 1-1-zone and subject to th$ r~quirements of the
zone in which located except as herein modified and provided:
128
-,
'
(a) In an R-3 zone, the permitted building shall not include the storage of
vehicles o~ equipment used in the maintenance of any utility or
equipment used in the maintenance of any utility and no equipment
causing unreasonable noise, vibration, smoke, odor, or hazardous
effect shall be installed.
{b) Unhoused equipment shall be enclosed with a fence or wall not less
than six (6) feet in height which shall b·e so constructed as not to
have openings, holes or gaps larger than six (6) Inches in any
{c)
·s.
dimension.. ·
Housed equipment - When the equipment is totally enclosed within a
building, no fence or screen planting shall be required and the yard
shall be maintained in conformity with the zone in which the building
is located."
2. 25 ·Mineral Extraction
In the 1-2 zone and sub)ect to the requirements of th~ zone except as herein
modified and provided:
:"._:· . .
(a) Machines or oper~tions which cause vlbration_s shall be permitted, but
in no case shall any such vibrations be perceptible along any adjoining
or adjacent property in different ownership or public right-of-way.
(b) Fencing- A six (6) foot fence that completely encloses the portion of
the property in which an open excavation or quarry is located shall be
provided and shall be so constructed as to have openings no larger
than six (6) inches, and if pick,ts are usedr the openings shall not
exceed six (6) inches. Multi-flora planting may be used as fencing
and when used the original. plants must be at least eighteen ( 18)
Inches high and must be placed in a double-staggered row with no
more than three (3) feet between plants.
(c) In addition to the fencing requirements of (b), landscaping and
bufferyards shall be. provided in accordance with th$ City of Hazleton
subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
129
(d) When adjacent to a residential district, no stockpiles, waste piles,
processing or manufacturing equipmant and no part of the open .
excavation or quarrying pit shall be located closer than five hundred
(500) feet to the Residential District.
{e) From the right-of-way line of a public street or highway, no part of a.
quarrying or excavating operation shall be closer than one hundred
(100) feet.
(f) Commercial Use. No part of the quarrying or excavating operation
shall be located closer than ~o hundred (200) feet to a Commercial
District.
(g) .Where a quarry .property abuts another quarry property or an
operating railroad•s right-of-way, no part of th~ opera.tlon shall be
closer than seventy-five (75) ·teet.·
(h) In no case shall any use permanently impede the flow of natural
watercourses.
(i) All ·uses of land or processes which pollute natural watercourses are
prohibited~
(j) All uses of land shall be conducted in a manner which will not allow
water to ·collect and permit stagnant water to remain in quarries or
excavations. . .
(kJ An Operations Plan shall be submitted that contains, but is not limited
to, the following· items;
Ownership and acreage of the land proposed. for use.
Type of resources to be extracted or quarried.
Estimated depth ·of the proposed operation.
Location map at a scale of i inch = 800 feet, or less, which
130
-I
-I .¥,
_,
~
~- .. :,.;... .
~, . ......... .'
0
0
0
0
shall show:
The land area to be excavated or quarried with dimensions and
the total property.
Private access roads and abutting streets and highways.
Abutting and/pr ad]EJcent d.istric~s aod land uses.
Existing watercourses, and proposed alterations to assure
stream quantity and quality.
Fencing and buffer planting. If fencing .is to be vegetation,
details must be given· of the size arid type.
o Title, scale, north arrow, and date.
0 Ownership·.
(1) A Rehabilitation Reclamation Plan shall be submitted that includes, but
is not limited to, the following Items: ·
·An engineering drawing showing-ownership, existing and future
topography, streams, existing roads, buildings, boundaries, and
legal description of the tract.
A description of the location, type, extent, methods, and time
schedule for the operations proposed. -
A drawing showing the location and/or proposed re-location of
land, trees, buildings, structures, public roads, streams,
drainage facilities, and ·utility lines on the tract or adjacent
tr~_cts as rt:'BY require protection, repairs, clearing, demolition or
resto~ation either during or .following the completion of the
operations proposed. ·
A statement describing methods for handling operations with
131
respect to the 110perational Requirements", plus any drainage,
air pollution, soil erosion or other environmental prOblems
created during the operations, including production
transportation, processing, stockpiling, storage and disposal of
byproducts and wastes.
A plan for re-use of the land after completion of the operation
which shall permit the carrying out of the purposes of this
Ordinance and appropriately. provide for any restoration,
reclamation, reforestation of other correction work deemed
necessary.
{m} Within three {3) years after the termination of operations the area
must be rehabilitated to conform with the Rehabilitation/Reclamation
Plan as approved. ·
(n) The following minimum standards must be met in the rehabilitation of
thearea: ·
The entire area disturbed by excavating, quarrying, mining or
·other natural production use shall be planted In such a manner
so as to control soil erosion •.
The e.ntire area stJall be graded wherever necessary to provide
for the conveyance of storm water. Finished grade shall not
have a slope of less than two percent (2%) so as to provide for
natural drainage.
Stockpiles, overburden, refuse, plant facilities or equipment
shall be removed immediately upon the termination of
operations and in no case shall such removal be delayed for
more than six (6) months. ·
Where screen planting and/or f~ncing has been provided, the
same shalt remain where necessary for safety, and shall be
continuously maintained in good repair.
132
_,
i
-J
_,
'
1
(o) All mining or quarrying operations· and reclamation practices shall
conform to the provisions of Act 147 of 1971, the "Surface Mining
·Conservation and Reclamation Act, • as amended: Commercial mining
or Stripping pits shall, further, conform to all provisions of the City of
Hazleton Ordinance No. 1458, Section 1 through 6 dated November
21, 1950 or as subsequently amended.
-1 2.26 Retirement Village
J
. .
' In .R~2, R .. 3, or 0 zones and subject to the requirements of that zone except -1 as herein modified and provided:
-·· Minimum lot area- Five (5) acres minimum.
(bJ Minimum lot width - Two hundred (200) feet maximum.
- ··.-... ·.
·· (c) Maximum dwelling unit density - Sixteen (16} dwelling units per acre.
-::l.d) · Lot coverage ~hall not exceed thirty-five (35) percent. .
...... ·~.;
(e) A maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of the lot area shall be
landscaped with trees and shrubbery •.
(f) Required parking:
Per dwelling unit- one and one-half (1-1/2) spaces.
Personal care and medical care facilities -·One H) space per
f$Cility employee and one (1) space per two (2} beds.
Parking aisles shall be at lease twentv-:-four (24) feet wide.
(g) Public water and sewer Is required.
(h) No structure shall be closer than fifty (50) feet to any lot or street
line.
133
(i) . Buffers and screens shall be provided along the boundary lines and
between dwelling structures as necessary for adequate privacy and
protection. This includes, but is not limited to fences, walls, planting
and ·open spaces. buffers shall not be less than twenty-five (25} feet
in width.
(j) Direct access to an arterial or collector road as designated in the City
Comprehensive Plan.
(kJ All proposed streets and access drives should follow the provisions of
the street design requirements of the Subdivision and Land
Development Or.dlnance (Sections 505-507 and 602-606).
· One ( 1) overhead street lamp per ten { 1 0} parking spaces for
each facility and multi-family dwelling complex. Residential
lighting shall be provided for single-family. detached dwellings.
2.27 S~lid Waste Disposal Area or Facility
In the 1-2 zone and subject to the requirements of that zone except as herein
modified and provided: · ·
(a} Intent- The intent of these· standards are not in.any way to pre-empt
or reduce state regulations, but instead to address local.land use
oriented concerns.
(bJ All solid waste storage, disposal, and Incineration shall be at least
300 feet from.any public .street or exterior lot line·.
(c) All are~s to be used for the storage, d.isposal, or incineration of solid
waste shall be a minimum of 500 feet from any residential district or
publicly owned park, or any existing r~sidential use that the applicant
does 110t have an option to buy, or the banks of any nonintermltteot
creek or river. ·
(d) The site shall contain a ~ufflcient number of access points, each with
a minimum cartway width of 30 feet.
134
-~
(e)
(f)
(g)
,., ... (h)
(i)
n.J
(k)
. (I)
Any burning or incineration shall be carried out in a completely
- encl~sed incinerator approved by DER. Any material to be incinerated
that is to be stored for more than three hours shall be stored in -an
enclosed structure.
The site shall be selected and designed by a registered professional
engineer with proven experience in solid waste disposal planning ·and
operation. The operation and day-to-day maintenance of the solid
waste disposal area shall comply with all applicable state and federal
regulations.
Open dumps and open -burning. of refuse is prohibited.
The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing
Board that the ~xisting street network can handle the additional truck
traffic, especially without bringing trash hauling trucks through or
alongside existing residential or residentially zoned areas.
The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing
~ard that the proposed use would not significantly impact negatively
on dwellings or neighborhoods.
The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing
Board that the use would not be a hazard to groundwater quality or
create noxious smells off of the tract.
A ·chain link or other approved fence With a minimum height of eight
feet shall surround active sQiid waste t;lisposal areas to prevent the
scattering of litter and to keep out children. Earthen berm or
evergreen scree~ing shall be used to prevent-the landfill operations
from being visible from an expressway or arterial streets or dwellings.
A minimum total lot size of 30 acres (which· may include land in an
adjoining municipality) is required for any solid waste facility other
than a-resource r~covery facility or a solid waste transfer facUlty. For
a ·resource recovery facility or solid waste transfer facUlty, a minimum
lot size of ten acres is required.
135
....... ,
(m) Health Hazards- Any facility shall be operated in such a manner to
prevent the attraction, harborage. or breeding of insects, rodents, or
vectors.
(n) Attendant- An attendant shall be present during all periods of
operation or dumping.
(o} Gates- Secure gates, fences, earth mounds, and/or dense vegetation
shall prevent unauthorized access.·
(p} Emergency Access- The operator of the use shall cooperate fully with
local emergency services. This should include practice exercises on
the site and the provision of all information needed by the emergency
·services to .«fetermine .potential hazards. ·Adequate means of
emergency access shall be provided .
(q) Hours of Operation - Applicants are requested to agree to limit the •
hours of operation to between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(r} titter-. The operator shaiLregulady police the area of the facility and
surrounding streets to collect litter that may escape from the facility
- or trucks.
(s) Radioactive and Infectious Materials- No radioactive or infectious
materials may be stored, disposed, or incinerated. Infectious
materials are defined as medical wastes used or created in the
trtatment of persons or animals with seriously contagious diseases.
(t) Staging - No area larger than 40 acres shall be approv~d as a new or
expanded disposal area for a sanitary landfill in any calendar year.
(u) The applicant shall provid~ sufficient information for tlie Zoning
Hearing Board to determine that the requirements of this Ordinance
will be met.
(v} State Requirements - Nothing in this Ordinance i~ intended to
supersede any state requirements. It is th~ Intent of this Ordinance
136
(w)
(X)
J.y)
that when similar issues are regulated on b~th the City and state
levels, tha.t the stricter· requirement shall apply for each aspect, unless
it is determined that an individual state regulation preempts City
regulation in some aspect.
The applicant shall enter into an agreement with the City· specifying
the types and frequencies of environmental monitoring that will be put
into place while the use is under way and afi:er any underground use
area is closed.
A lea~hate treatment system or a. recycling collection or processing
center may. be accessory uses.
Maximum Tonnage - Any re·source recovery facility or solid waste
transfer 'acility shall have a maximum capacity of 300 tons per day
for treating, sorting, and/or disposing of.solid waste.
. .
2. 28 Service Station - (fuel Dispensing Facilities)
- bl a CC z.one and subject to the requirements of that zone except as herein
·modified and provided:·
(a) Buildings must be set back at least thirty-five (35) feet from the street
. line. ·
(bJ Pumps must be set back at least twenty (20) feet from the street line.
(c) Access drives must be located as follows:
Minimum offset from inte_rsectlon of street right-of-way lines:
Forty (40) feet.
Side lot line offset: Ten (10) feet.
Minimum width: Twelve (12) feet.
Maximum width:. Thirty-five (35) feet.
137
Minimum separation of drives on same lot: Twenty-five (25)
feet.
(d) Except along access drives, a concret~ curb eight (8) inches in height
must be placed along all street right-of-way lines-:.
(e) All lights must be diverted toward the gas station or downward.
(f) No outdoor stockpiling of tires. or outdoor storage of trash is
permitted. An area enclosed by a wall or fence, screened from view
of adjoining properties.
{g) · At least ten (10) percent of the lot on which the gasoline station is
situated rnust be devoted to nat~rallandscaping.
(h) Fuel storage tanks shall be.thirty (30) feet from all lots, lines or
streets.
2.29 Tavern
In a C-C zone and subject to the requirements of the zone In which located
except as herein modified and provided:
(a) Off-street parking must be provided in accordance with Article V,
Section 2.9.
2.30 Transportation (Passenger) Terminal
In a C-C zone and subject to the requirements of the zone in which located
except as h•rein modified and provided:
(a) Access shall be via ·an arterial or collector street as designated by the
City of Hazleton Comprehensive Plan.
2.31 Video Arcade .
( 1 ) An amusement arcade or parlor may be established only in
138
-j
-; ·=--.·i~ ~
j
commercial districts.
;~
(2) A code of conduct and hours of operatirrt must be 'submitted by the
applicant and approved by the Zoning .Hearing Boar$! and be .
prominently displayed within the arcade'; Failure to~·abide by such
code of conduct shall be just cause to r~~e the s~eclal exception
permit. · · 1-
,.~· 1 ..
'· ~
i4 .. ~~- : .
139
·::.
ARTICLE IX
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 1 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
1.1 Administration
1.1.1 Zoning Officer
Appointment and Powers of Zoning Officer - For the administration of a
zoning ordinance, a zoning officer, who shall not hold any elective office in
the municipality, shall be appointed. The zoning officer shall meet
qualifications established by the municipafity and shall be able to ·
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the municipality a working knowledge of
municipal zoning. The zoning officer shall administer the Zoning Ordinance
in accordance with its ·literal terms and .shall not have the power to permit
any·construction. or any use or .change of use which does .not conform to
the· Zoning Ordinance. ~oning officers may be authorized to institute civil
enforcement proceedings as a· means of ·enforcement when· acting within the
scope of their employment.
1 . 1 . 1 . 1 Duties
The duties of the Zoning Administrative Officer shall be:
(a) To examine all applications for zoning permits.
(b) To issue permits only for construction and uses which are in
accordance with the regulations of this Ordinance and subsequent
amendments.
(c) To record and file all applications for permits together with
accompanying plans and documents and .keep them for public record.
(d) To issue permits for uses by special permit only after such use or
building shall have been approved by the Zoning Hearing Board in
accordance with the regulation of this Ordinance.
140
-I
(e)
{f)
(g)
To inspect nonconforming uses, buildings, and lots to keep a file of
such nonconforming uses· and buildings· as· a public record; to examine
them periodically, with the view of eliminating nonconforming uses
under the existing laws and regulations; and to issue certificates of
occup~ncy for them.
Upon specific request of the Planning Commission or of the Zoning
Hearing ·Board, present such body facts, records and similar
information on specific request, which will assist such body in
reaching a decision.
To be responsible for keeping this ordinance and the Zoning Map, files
with the City Clerk up-to-date and to include any amendments
thereto.
(~) To recelv.:t all required fees and issue all necessary stop orders •
. ,.~-
ffj . To ex~rc;lse all powers conferred upon Zoning Officer by State Law.
··tr···
1. 1.1. 1 ... 1 Appeal.
Any person aggrieved or affected by provision of this Ordinance or decision
of the Zoning Officer I may 'appeal in the manner set forth in Article IX of the
Pennsy_lvanla Municipalities Pla~ning C~de, Act 170, as amended.
1.1.1. 1 .2 Notlflcadon of VIolation
1f the Zoning Officer shall find that any of the provisions of this Ordinance
are being vi.o lated, he shall no. tify in writing the person responsible for such
violation~ indicating the. nature of the violation ~nd order the action
necessary to correct it." The Zoning Officer shall order discontinuance of
Illegal use of l~nd.· building or structures; removal of Illegal buildings or
structures or of ad<;litions, alterations, or structural changes thereto. order
discontinuance of any illeg~l work being done, or shall take.any other action
authorized by this Ordinance to Insure compliance with or prevent violation ·
of its provisions.
141
1 . 1. 1. 1.3 Forms
The Zoning Officer must provide a form or forms prepared by the City
· Solicitor for:
(a) Zoning permits
(b) Special exceptions
(c) Use certificates
(d) Appeals
(e) Variances
(f) Registration of nonconforming uses and non-conforming structures
1. 1. 1. 1.4 Transmittal. of Papers
Upon receipt of an application for a special exception, variance or a notice
of appeal, the Zoning Officer must transmit to the·Secretary of the Zoning
Hearing Board and to the ·City Planning Commission, copies of all papers
constituting the .record. upon the.-special exception, variance, or appeal.
1.2 Enforcement
This Ordinance shall be enforced by the Zoning Officer and the police
department of the City of Hazleton. Any and-all permits required under this
Ordinance shall be granted in accordance with the· rules and regulations of
this Ordinance only, and/or by written decisions from the appeal agen_cies
established by this Ordinance. · · ·
1.2. 1 Enforcement Remedies _
. .
In case any buildi~g, structure, or land is or is proposed to be erected,
constructed, reconstructed, alterad .. converted, maintained, or used In
violation of this Ordinance, the City Council, or with the approval of the City
Council, the Zoning Officer, .in addition to the other remedies~ may institute
in the name of the munlcipaJitv· any appropriate action or proceeding to
preven-t, restrain, correct; or abate such building, structure, or land or to
prevent In or about such premises ·any act, conduct, business, or use ·
constituting a violation. The City Council or the Zoning Officer may initiate
142
f
-J'
-:''
any prosecution for violation of this Ordinance; should Council disapprove of
a prosecution brought by the Officer, it shall be withdrawn ..
1.2.2 Complaints Regarding Violations
Whenever a violation of this Ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have
occurred, any person must file a written complaint. Such complaint, stating
fully the causes and basis thereof, shall be filed with the Zoning Officer. He
shall record properly such complaint, immediately investigate, and take
action thereon as provided by this Ordlminca.
1.2.3 Penaldes for Violations
Any person, partnership, or corporation who or whl9h shall violate the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof in a
summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$500, unless a different maximum is permitted under applicable State
Law. In default of payment of the fine, such person, the members of
such partnership, or. the officers. of such corporation shall be liable to
.imprisonment for not more than 60 days. All fines collected for the
violation of this Zoning Ordina~ce shall be paid over to· the City.
. '
(b) The owner, general agent, or contractor of a building or premises
w"ere a violation has been committed or shall exist, the lessee or
tenants of the entire building or part of building, and the architect,
engineer, builder, or any other person who knowingly commits, takes
part, or assists in or maintains any such violation may each be found
guilty of ~ separate offense and suffer penalties as· herein provided.
(c) Whenever such· person has been officially notified by the Zoning
Officer or by service of ·a summons in a prosecution or in any other
official manner that he is committing a violation, each day after such
notification shall constitute a separate offense punishable by a like
fine or penalty.
(d) Nothing herein shall prevent the City from taking such other action as
is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
143
SECTION 2 PERMITS AND CEBDFICAIES
2. 1 Zoning Permit
(a) A zoning permit shall be required prior to the erection, construction or
alterat!on of any building, structure or any portion thereof~
Cb) Application for permits shall be obtained from the Zoning ·officer and
returned to the Zoning Officer ·designated by the Council and shall
contain all information required on the form for such officer to
ascertain whether the proposed erection, construction, alteration or
use complies with the provisions of this Ordinance.
(c) Such. permits.·shall.be:granted .. or:refused within 15 days from date of
application.
(d) No zoning permit,shall be·issued, 'except' In conformity with the
. · pro.visions· of this. Ordinance~ ·:and .amendments·.thereto; and/or by
written ,decisions-of the ·.appeal :agencies es.t~bUshed ~by this
Ordinance.
(e) All applications for zoning permits s~all be acco~pani~ by plan~ in
duplicate drawn to scale and showing the following:
1. Actual dimensions and shape of lot to be built upon.
2. Exact size and location on the lot of all buildings and other
structures, if any r and the location and dimensions of proposed
building~ and other structures or alteratiOn$.
3. Existing and .proposed uses, showing number of families the
building is designed to accommodate.
4. Any other lawful Information that may be required by the
Zoning Officer.
One copy of the plan shall be returned to the applicant by the Zoning Officer
144
-1
i
-- l
1
-!
after he shall have marked such copy either approved or disapproved and
attested to same by his signature. The second copy of the plans, similarly ·
marked, shall be retained and filed by the Zoning Officer.
_,J 2.2 Use Certificates and Occupancy ~ermlts
j
l -7
1 -l
l
A use certificate and occupancy permits certifying compliance with this
Ordinance must be obtained from the Zoning Officer for any new structure
as below or .for any change of use of a structure or land ~s set forth below
before such· new structure or use or change of use is occupied or
established:·
(a)
(b)
.;~ .
{c)
td)
(e)
Use of a structure erected, structurally altered or extended, or moved
after the effective date of this Ordinance.
Use· of vacant land except for agricultural purposes •
Any change in a conforming use of~ •tructure or land.
Any change from a nonconforming use of a structure or land to a
f;:Onforming ·use.
Any change in the use of a structure or land from that permitted by
any variance of the Zoning Hearing Board. .
The application for a use certificate must include a statement of the
· intended usa and any existing use of the structure or land. The certificate
continues. in effect as long as. the use of the structuro or land ~or. which it is
granted conforms with this .Ordinance.
2.3 Erroneous Permit
· A zoning p$rmit or other permit or authorization Issued Qr approved in
violation of the provlslons of this Ordinance, is voicl without the necessity of
any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use established
pursuant to such a· permit or other authorization Is unlawful. No action may
be taken by a board, agency, or employee of the City purporting to validate
146
such a violation.
2.4 Sign Permit
(a) A sign permit shall be required prior to the erection or alteration.of
any sign, exc~pt as otherwise provided herein.
{b) Application for such permit shall be made in writing to the Zoning
. Officer designated by Council on the form supplied by the Z.oning
Officer, and shall contain all information necessary for such officer to
determine whether the proposed sign, or the proposed alteration,
conforms to all the requirements of the Ordinance.
(c) Permits shall be granted or refused within 1_5 days from date of
application. · ·
{d) No .sign permit shall- be-:issued· except in conformity with the
regulations of this Ordinance, except· after ·written or~er from the
·zoning Hearing Board or·the Courts.
(e) All applications for sign permits shall be accompanied by plans or
diagrams in duplicate and approximately to sca'e showing the
following:
1. Exact dimensions of lot or buildings upon which the sign is
proposed to be erected. ..
. 2. -Exact size, dimensions and location o~ said sign ot:~lot or
building.
3. Any other lawful information which may be required by the
Zoning Officer. One copy of said plans or diagrams shall be
returne~ to applicant by the Zoning Officer, after he shall have
.marked such copy ·either approved or di~approved. and attested
to same by his signature. The ~econd copy, similarly marked.
shall be retained and filed by the Zoning Officer.
146
_j
J -]
- ~
1 j - l'
- j
- ' _J
2.5 Schedule of Fees
(a) The City Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and
expenses, as· well as a collection procedure, for zoning permits, use
certificates, special_permits, sign permits, variances and other matters
pertaining to this Ordinance •
{b)
(c)
~ffo
.~.
fctJ
:~. ..
~.
. Said schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the Zoning
Officer, shall be appended to this Ordinance, and shal be altered by
resolution by the City Council.
Fees to be paid for sign permits shall e established on a basis of
charger per squ~re foot of sign area. Charges for sign permits shall
be made at a progressively higher rate per square foot as relative size
of sign Increases.
Permits and variances shall be issued only after fees have been paid
in full, and the Zoning Hearing Board shall take no action on appeals
until preliminary c~arges haye been paid In full.
SEcnON 3 AMENDMENTS ·
3.1 Power to Amend .
The regulations, restrictions ·and b~undaries set forth in this Ordinance may,
from time to time, be amended, supplemented, changed or repealed through
amendment by City Co~ncil. ·
Proposed amendments, supplements or changes, or a proposal to repeal this
ordinance or part thereof, must be submitted to the City Planning
Commis~ion for their 'inding b~fore any further public a~on is taken.
The finding of the Planning Commission shall be submitted to Council in the
forn:a of a written report recommending or disapproving the proposed action.
Falh.ire· of the. Planning Commission to submit such report within 60 days
shall constitute approval. · ·
147
3.2
·· ...
No action may be taken to amend, supplement, change or repeal this
ordinance until after a public hearing in -:-elation thereto has been held, at
which parties in interest and citizens shall have opportunity to be heard.
f.t .least 15 ·days notice of the time and place of such hearing and a
description of the general nature of the proposed action shall be published in
a newspaper of general circulation in the City. Notice shall also be mailed to
any civic ass9ciation or association of residents in the City who shall have
registered their name and address for this purpose with the Planning
Commission. ·
Sub.misslon of A~endment Request
Any request for amendment (including supplement, ch~nge, or repeal}
except a_mendments proposed by ·City Council, the City staff, or the
Planning Commission 'hall contain as fully as possible ail the information
requested by the Zo.ning Officer and shall be signed by at least one record
owner of the property in question whose signature shall be notarized,
attesting to the truth and correctness of all the facts and infomiation
presented in the petition for. change and for the purpose of defraying the
cost of the proceedings prescribed herein.. Any petition for amendment ·shall
include the following: ·-
. .
(a) A statement of why the change would be in the best interests of the
City. .
(b) A statement of how the proposal will relate. to the Comprehensive
Plan. · ·
(c) A statement addressing any adverse affects on adjacent residences.
(d) A statement addressing any major traffic access ot c_ongestion
concerns •.
(e) A map showing the proposed· boundaries of-any proposed map
changes, the existing and adjacent zoning and adjacent land uses.
148
l
-1
~
•I
l
- i
- J
3.3
(f) A sketch plan showing proposed uses and buildings on land controlled
by the applicant.
Protest Against Amendments
Any protest against any amendm~nt of this Ordinance, and. amendments
thereto, brought in.the form of a petition signed by 25% of the property
owners, situated within 100 feet of the protest location, shall require the
favorable, affirmative, action of four (4) members of the Hazleton City
Council to become an effective amendment.
3.4 Procedure for Amendment
- i :-T.he following requirements shall be observed in making any amendment to
·:this Ordinance:
- ~
-~.
-··•-
2.
3.
The Council may, upon petition signed by the owners of a majority of
the properties according to frontage in any district or po-rtion thereof,
and may upon its own initiative or upon the recommendation of the
Planning Commission, prepare an ordi_nance amending,
supplementing. or changing the distric;t boundaries or the reg~latlons
herein ~stablished.
Other than recommendations for amendments originating with the
Planning Commission, all proposed a-:nendments, supplements, or
changes or a proposal to repeal this Ordinance or part thereof, must
be submitted to the Planning Commission for their review and
recommendations prior to taking· final action on such requests. The
Planning Commission shall consider whether or not the proposed
change or amendment would be, in. the view of the Planning·
Commission, consistent with and desirable in furtherance of the plan
for fuiure land use.
No_ action to amend or change this Ordinance shall become effective
until after public hearing in relation thereto, at which par~ies in
interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard.
149
!
-j
~--.~· !·.
-- ~;
~·
f,
-j
l
- i 3.5 Publication
4.1
Upon final approval of this Ordinance or subsequent amendments thereto,
adopted in accordance with the above said ordinance shall be forthwith
published in accordance with State Law relating t9 publication of ordinances
prescribing penalties.
SEcnON 4 ADOPDON
Validity
- i Should any provision, section, subsection, clause or phrase of this
Ordinance, or its application be declared or held, for any reason, to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
Ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the part so declared
~~ ~· to be unconstitutional or invalid. ~.:-· r
4.2 Repealer
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the Zoning Ordinance
or Inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed to
the extent necessary to give this Ordinance full force and effect.
150

~·
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
Chapter 213
From the
CODE
l. of the
CITY OF HAZLETON
GENERAL CODE PUBLISHERS CORP.
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
Chapter 213
From the
CODE
of the
CITY OF HAZLETON
COUNTY OF LUZERNE
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
[Printed as last amended 12-16-1993 by Ord. No. 93-28.
Consult municipal records for possible amendments
adopted thereafter.]
GENERAL CODE PUBLISHERS CORP.
72 Hinchey Road
Rochester, New York 14624
1995
Chapter 213
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
ARTICLE I
Title, Purpose, Authority
and Jurisdiction
§ 213-1. Short title.
§ 213-2. Purpose.
§ 213-3. Authority and jurisdiction.
§ 213-4. Territorial limits.
ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 213-5. General usage.
§ 213-6. Terms defined.
ARTICLE III
Procedures and Requirements
§ 213-7. Applicability.
§ 213-8. Regulatory provisions.
§ 213-9. Advisory provisions.
§ 213-10. Submission of plans and
applications for approval.
§ 213-11. Sketch plan.
§ 213-12. Preliminary plan.
§ 213-13. Final plan.
§ 213-14. Referral of the approved final
plan to governing body for
acceptance of streets.
§ 213-15. Approval of plans.
§ 213-16. Recording of final plan.
§ 213-17. Resubdivision.
ARTICLE IV
Design Standards
§ 213-18. Application of standards.
§ 213-19. Location of site.
§ 213-20. General design standards for
site.
§ 213-21. Layout of lots.
§ 213-22. Sanitary sewage disposal.
§ 213-23. Water supply.
§ 213-24. Underground installations.
§ 213-25. Natural gas lines.
§ 213-26. Petroleum lines.
§ 213-27. Utility easements.
§ 213-28. Drainage easements.
§ 213-29. Street design.
§ 213-30. Street names.
§ 213-31. Blocks.
§ 213-32. Storm drainage.
§ 213-33. Building setback lines.
§ 213-34. Dedication of land for
recreational purposes.
ARTICLE V
Required Improvements and
Construction Standards
§ 213-35. Scope.
§ 213-36. Monuments and markers.
§ 213-37. Street construction standards.
§ 213-38. Curbs and gutters.
§ 213-39. Sidewalks.
§ 213-40. Street name signs.
§ 213-41. Landscaping.
§ 213-42. Streetlights.
§ 213-43. Recommended trees and shrubs
for buffer yards.
§ 213-44. Water supply.
§ 213-45. Sewage disposal.
§ 213-46. Storm sewers.
§ 213-47. Fire hydrants.
§ 213-48. Other matters related to
required improvements and
construction.
21301
§213-1 HAZLETON CODE § 213-2
§ 213-49. Completion of improvements or
guaranty thereof prerequisite to
final plan approval.
§ 213-50. Release from improvement
bond.
§ 213-51. Remedies to effect completion of
improvements.
§ 213-52. Offers of dedication.
ARTICLE VI
Mobile Home Parks
§ 213-53. Approval required.
§ 213-54. Application for mobile home
park approval.
§ 213-55. Site location and dimensions.
§ 213-56. Improvements in mobile home
parks.
§ 213-57. Street system.
§ 213-58. Easements.
ARTICLEVIT
Administration, Enforcement
and Penalties
§ 213-59.
§ 213-60.
§ 213-61.
§ 213-62.
§ 213-63.
§ 213-64.
§ 213-65.
§ 213-66.
§ 213-67.
§ 213-68.
§ 213-69.
Administration.
Enforcement.
Violations and penalties.
Fees.
Interpretation.
Amendments.
Modifications.
Conflict with other regulations.
Appeals.
Authority to amend.
Commission records.
Appendix A: Application for
Approval of Preliminary Plan
[HISTORY: Adopted by the City Council of the City of Hazleton 4-29-1993 as Ord. No.
93-10. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Fees -See Ch. 24.
Planning Commission - See Ch. 50.
Building construction- See Ch. 102.
Numbering of buildings - See Ch. 108.
Licensing of contractors- See Ch. 114.
Electrical standards -See Ch. 120.
Mechanical standards - See Ch. 162.
GENERAL REFERENCES'
Plumbing standards- See Ch. 180.
Real estate registry- See Ch. 187.
Sewers- See Ch. 193.
Streets and sidewalks - See Ch. 208.
Trees -See Ch. 223.
Zoning - See Ch. 245.
ARTICLE I
Title, Purpose, Authority and Jurisdiction
§ 213-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the "City of Hazleton Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance."
§ 213-2. Purpose.
The purpose of these subdivision and land development regulations 1s to provide for the
harmonious development of the city by:
21302
§ 213-2 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-4
A. Assisting in the orderly and efficient integration of land developments within the city.
B. Ensuring conformance of land development plans with public improvement plans and
programs.
C. Ensuring coordination of intermunicipal public improvement plans and programs.
D. Securing the protection of water resources and drainageways.
E. Facilitating the efficient movement of traffic.
F. Securing equitable handling of all land development plans by providing uniform standards
and procedures.
G. In general promoting greater health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city.
H. Securing adequate sites for recreation, conservation, scenic and other open space purposes.
§ 213-3. Authority and jurisdiction.
A. No land development of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall be made and no street, sanitary
sewer, storm sewer, water main or other improvements in connection therewith shall be
laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated for public use or travel or for the common use of
occupants of buildings abutting thereon except in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
B. The authority for the control and regulation of subdivision and land development within
the city shall be as follows:
(l) Review and approval by the City of Hazleton Planning Commission. The City of
Hazleton Planning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the "Planning Conunission"
or "Conunission," shall be vested with the review of subdivision and land
development plans and the authority to approve or disapprove all subdivision and land
development plans.
(2) Review by the County Planning Commission. Plans for subdivision and land
development located within the City of Hazleton shall be forwarded upon receipt by
the City of Hazleton to the Luzerne Planning Commission for review and report. The
City of Hazleton Planning Commission shall not approve such plans until the county
report is received or until the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date the
application was forwarded to the county.
§ 213-4. Territorial limits.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all land within the city limits of the City of
Hazleton.
21303
§ 213-5
§ 213-5. General usage.
For the purposes of this chapter:
HAZLETON CODE
ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
B. Words used in the singular number include the plural and the plural the singular.
§ 213-6
C. The word "shall" is to be interpreted as mandatory and the word "may" as direct and
complied with unless waived.
D. The word "person" includes a partnership or corporation as well as an individual.
§ 213-6. Terms defined.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter,
have the meanings given herein:
AGENT- Any person, other than the developer, who, acting for the developer, submits
land development plans to the Planning Commission for the purpose of obtaining approval
thereof.
ALLEY - A minor permanent service way providing secondary vehicular access to
abutting lands.
APPLICANT- A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has filed an
application for development, including his heirs, succf1ssors and assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT- Every application, whether preliminary,
tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior to start of construction or
development, including but not limited to an application for a building permit, for the
approval of a subdivision plot or plan or for the approval of a development plan.
BLOCK- A tract of land bounded on one (1) side by a street and on the other sides
[normally three (3)] by streets, railroad rights-of-way, waterways, unsubdivided areas and
other definite barriers.
BUll...DING SETBACK LINE- The minimum required distance from the front lot line to
any building or structure to be erected on the lot.
CARTWAY- The portion of a street right-of-way which is paved, improved, designated
or intended for vehicular traffic.
CLEAR-SIGHT TRIANGLE- An area of unobstructed vision at street intersections
defined by the center lines of the streets and by a line of sight between points on their
center lines at a given distance from the intersection of the center lines.
21304
§ 213-6 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-6
COMMISSION or PLANNING COMMISSION - The Plalllling Commission of the City
of Hazleton, Pennsylvania.1
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN - The official public document prepared in accordance with
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 170 of 1988, as amended, 2 consisting
of maps, charts and textual material, that constitutes a policy guide to decisions about the
physical and social development of the City of Hazleton, as amended from time to time.
CORNER LOT- A lot with two (2) adjacent sides abutting on streets, which lot has an
interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five degrees (135°) at the intersection of the
two (2) street lines. A lot abutting on a curved street shall be considered a "comer lot" if
the tangents to the curve at the points of intersection of the side lot lines with the street line
intersect at an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five degrees (135°).
COUNTY-Luzerne County, Pennsylvania.
CROSSWALK- A right-of-way, municipally or privately owned, at least twelve (12) feet
wide, which cuts across a block to furnish access for pedestrians to adjacent streets or
properties.
CUL-DE-SAC- A minor street having one end open to vehicular traffic and being
permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
CURB - The raised edge of a pavement to confine surface water to the pavement and to
protect the abutting land from vehicular traffic.
CURB LINE- The outside edge of the cartway.
DEVELOPER or SUBDIVIDER- Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant
with the permission of such landowner who makes or causes to be made a subdivision of
land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT COSTS FACTOR- This figure is a percentage of the total average lot
price that development actually costs on a per-lot basis. The figure would include the costs
for streets, sidewalks, curbing, utilities, etc. This value, expressed as a percentage in the fee
in lieu of land dedication formula, would be established by the City Engineer.
DOUBLE-FRONTAGE LOT-A lot fronting on two (2) streets other than a comer lot.
DRAINAGE FACILITY- Any ditch, gutter, pipe, culvert, storm sewer or other structure
designed, intended or constructed for the purpose of diverting surface waters from or
carrying surface waters off streets, public rights-of-way, parks, recreational areas or any
part of any land development or contiguous land areas.
DRAINAGE RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
A. Land necessary and required for:
(1) The installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches.
1 Editor's Note: See Ch. 50, Planning Commission.
2 Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
21305
§ 213-6 HAZLETON CODE
(2) The preservation of the natural channel of a stream or watercourse.
(3) The safeguarding against flooding from a stream or watercourse.
B. Drainage rights-of-way may form easements.
§ 213-6
DRIVEWAY- A minor vehicular right-of-way providing access between a street and a
parking area or garage within a lot or property.
DWELLING UNIT- Any structure or part thereof designed to be occupied as living
quarters for one (1) family.
EASEMENT- A right-of-way through a parcel of land granted by the owner(s) thereof to
others for certain specified purposes usually consisting of public or quasi-public uses.
ENGINEER - A professional engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania designated by the Planning Commission by resolution to perform all
administrative and/or supervisory duties required by the provisions of this chapter. The
person so designated may be the City Engineer.
FLOODPLAIN or FLOODWA Y AREA - That area along a natural watercourse which is
periodically overflowed by water therefrom and defined by the United States Geologic
Survey and alluvial soils as established by the Soil Conservation Service or the onehundred-
year floodplain as defined by engineering data.
FRONTAGE- The horizontal or curvilinear distance along the street line upon which a
lot abuts.
FUTURE RIGHT-OF-WAY:
A. The right-of-way width required for the expansion of existing streets to accommodate
anticipated future traffic loads.
B. A right-of-way established to provide future access to or through undeveloped land.
GEOLOGICAL HAZARD- Those features inherent in the crust of the earth so as to
cause landslides, soil slump, ground subsidence, rock failure, mud avalanche and similar
undesirable conditions.
GRADE- The slope expressed in a percent which indicates the rate of change of
elevation in feet per one hundred (100) feet.
GUTTER- That portion of a right-of-way carrying surface drainage.
HILLSIDE AREAS - A hillside area, as referred to in these subdivision regulations, is
one having an average cross-slope of more than ten percent (1 0% ).
IMPROVEMENTS- Pavements, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, water mains, sanitary sewers,
storm sewers, grading, street signs and plantings and other items required for the welfare
of the property owners and the public.
LAND DEVELOPMENT - The improvement of one (1) lot or two (2) or more
contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
21306
§ 213-6 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-6
A. A group of two (2) or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether proposed
initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless
of the number of occupants or tenure;
B. The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between
or among two (2) or more existing or prospective occupants by means of or for the
purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or
other features; or
C. A subdivision of land.
LANDOWNER - The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including the holder of
an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option or contract is subject to any
condition), a lessee if he is authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the
landowner, or other person having a proprietary interest in land.
LOCATION MAP-A map showing the site with relation to adjoining areas.
LOT - A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plot or otherwise as
permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
LOT AREA- The area contained within the property lines of an individual parcel of
land, excluding any area within a street right-of-way, but including the area of any
easement.
LOT WIDTH- The required distance between the side property lines measured along the
front setback line.
MINOR SUBDIVISION- A subdivision or land development where the following
conditions apply:
A. There are no new streets in the development;
B. The development does not require additional placement of any utilities, including but
not limited to electric, gas, water, fire hydrants or other utilities; and
C. No other public improvements are necessary for the subdivision.
MOBILE HOME- A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent
occupancy, contained in one (1) unit or in two (2) or more units designed to be joined into
one (1) integral unit, capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at
a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and
assembly operations and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT- A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved with the
necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of
a single mobile home, which is leased by the park owner to the occupants of the mobile
home erected on the lot.
MOBILE HOME PARK- A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has been so
designated and improved that it contains two (2) or more mobile home lots for the
placement thereon of mobile homes.
21307
§ 213-6 HAZLETON CODE § 213-6
MULTIPLE DWELLING BUILDING-A building providing separate living quarters for
three (3) or more families.
OWNER- The owner of record of a parcel of land.
PERFORMANCE BOND - An agreement by and between a contractor and a bonding
company in favor of the City of Hazleton guaranteeing the completion of physical
improvements.
PLAN- The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether sketch,
preliminary or final.
A. SKETCH - An informal land development plan, not necessarily to scale, indicating
salient existing features of a tract and its surroundings and the general layout of the
proposed land development for discussion purposes only and not to be presented for
approval.
B. PRELIMINARY- A tentative land development plan, in lesser detail than a final
plan, showing the salient existing features of a tract and its surroundings and
approximate proposed street and lot layout as a basis for consideration prior to
preparation of a final plan.
C. FINAL- A complete and exact land development plan, prepared for official
recording, to define property rights and proposed streets and other improvements.
PUBLIC GROUNDS:
A. Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other public areas.
B. Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly owned or
operated facilities.
C. Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
RECREATION- Any activity, whether structured or not, in which individuals voluntarily
engage during their leisure. Examples would include:
A. ACTIVE- Sports (individual, dual, team, co-recreational and combative) and
athletics, both land- and water-based.
B. PASSIVE- Arts and crafts, spectating, picnicking, nature study and board games.
C. EITHER, DEPENDING ON SPECIFICS - Dance, drama, music, games, skills,
social recreation, special events, hiking/walking, cycling, hobbies, outdoor
educational activities and cultural activities.
RECREATION, ACTIVE- Any activity that requires some physical exertion on the part
of the participant. See Subsections A and C of the definition of "recreation" for general
examples.
RECREATION AREA ACCESSIBILITY- Any area which can be easily approached,
entered and used by the citizens of a particular residential development, provided that the
area is within six (6) miles of the development.
21308
~
~
'
§ 213-6 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-6
RECREATION AREA, ACTIVE- Any area developed in such a manner as to be
conducive to those activities that fall within the range of active recreation. Examples are
athletic fields and hard-surfaced courts, pools, large dams, bicycle and walking trails, open
turf areas and apparatus areas.
RECREATION AREA, PASSIVE- Any area developed in such a manner as to be
conducive of those activities that fall within the range of passive recreation. Examples are
scenic vistas, natural areas, craft areas, meeting areas, sitting areas, walkways, sunbathing,
gardens, streams and impoundments, social events, picnicking and spectating areas.
RECREATION AREA REQUIRED- The amount of land in any given subdivision that
would be dedicated for recreation were the fee in lieu of land dedication provision not
being utilized.
RECREATION, PASSIVE- Any activity that requires little or no physical exertion on the
part of the participant. See Subsections B and C of the definition of "recreation" for
general examples.
RESUBDIVISION- Any land development which has been approved by the city which
changes or proposes to change property lines and/or public rights-of-way not in strict
accordance with the approved plan.
REVERSE-FRONTAGE LOT- A lot extending between and having frontage on an
arterial street and a minor street with vehicular access solely from the latter.
RIGHT-OF-WAY- Land opened for use as a street, alley or crosswalk.
SETBACK - The required horizontal distance between a setback line and a property or
street line.
A.
B.
C.
FRONT - The distance between the street line and the front setback line projected
the full width of the lot, commonly called "front yard."
REAR - The distance between the rear lot line and the rear setback line projected the
full width of the Jot, commonly called "rear yard."
SIDE- The distance between the side lot line and the side setback line projected
from the front yard to the rear yard, commonly called "side yard."
SETBACK LINE- A line within a property and parallel to a property or street line which
delineates the required minimum distance between a structure and that property or street
line.
SIDEWALK- A paved walkway, continuous for a reasonable distance and an integral
part of the roadway, with or without a grass strip between the curb or cartway edge and
sidewalk, constructed solely for use by pedestrians.
STREET- Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, parkway, lane,
alley, viaduct and any other ways used or intended to be used by vehicular traffic or
pedestrians, whether public or private. "Streets" are further classified as follows:
A. MAJOR ARTERIALS- Limited access highways that are important in the interregional
transportation system, with a major portion of the vehicular movements
being through traffic.
21309
----~~---~
§ 213-6 HAZLETON CODE § 213-7
B. MINOR ARTERIALS -Highways that are important in the regional transportation
system and, while carrying mostly regional traffic, serve some local or township
origins and destinations.
C. COLLECTORS - Roadways serving primarily local traffic and providing the
connection between the residential, commercial and industrial developments and the
minor arterial system.
D. LOCAL ROADS - Roadways serving local traffic and connecting to collectors or
minor arterials.
E. CUL-DE-SAC- A street with an end open for public vehicular and pedestrian
access and the other end terminating in a vehicular turnaround.
STREET GRADE- The officially established grade of the street upon which a lot fronts
or, in its absence, the established grade of other streets upon which the lot abuts at the
midway of the frontage of the lot thereon. If there is no officially established grade, the
existing grade of the street at such midpoint shall be taken as the "street grade."
STREET LINE- A line defining the edge of a street right-of-way and separating the
street from abutting property or lots, commonly known as the "street right-of-way line."
SUBDIVISION- The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means
into two (2) or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land, including changes in
existing lot lines, for the purpose, whether immediate or future of lease, transfer of
ownership or building or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease
of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than ten (10) acres not involving any
new street or easement of access or residential dwellings shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED- A subdivisi,on or land development can be
considered "substantially completed," where, in the judgment of the City Engineer, at least
ninety percent (90%) (based on the cost of the required improvements for which financial
security was posted) of those improvements required as a condition for final approval have
been completed in accordance with the approved plan, so that the project will be able to be
used, occupied or operated for its intended use.
UNDEVELOPED LAND- Land in parcels sufficiently large for future land
development, which land is presently in agriculture, woodland or lying fallow.
UNIT SHOPPING CENTERS/MALL- Shopping and commercial developments
designed as one (1) unit having off-street parking facilities and controlled circulation.
§ 213-7. Applicability.
ARTICLE lii
Procedures and Requirements
From the date of passage of this chapter, the following procedures shall be observed by all
subdividers. All plans shall be reviewed and approved by the City Planning Commission. Any
approval not processed as required hereafter shall be deemed null and void unless such
approval was given prior to the adoption of this chapter.
21310
·.;:,..
§ 213-8 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-9
§ 213-8. Regulatory provisions.
A. Grading. No subdivider or proposed subdivider shall proceed with any grading before
obtaining approval of the preliminary plan from the Commission (see also § 213-48B
herein).
B. Access, drainage, geology and topography. No land shall be subdivided for residential use
unless adequate access to such land exists or will be provided by the subdivider over
improved streets or thoroughfares which are consistent with the design standards
hereinafter set forth. In no event shall land be subdivided for residential use if such land is
considered by the Commission to be harmful to the health and safety of possible residents
and the community as a whole for such use by reason of flooding, mine fires, mine
subsidence, improper drainage, objectionable earth and rock formation, topography or any
other geological hazard or like feature.
C. Conformity with Comprehensive Plan. No land shall be subdivided unless the proposed
subdivision shall be in general conformity with the Comprehensive Plan of the City of
Hazleton and Chapter 245, Zoning, as amended.
D. Recording of deeds. No lots shall be delivered and no agreements for sale shall be made
for lots in any subdivision prior to the approval by the Commission of the final plan for the
proposed subdivision.
§ 213-9. Advisory provisions.
A. Copies of this chapter shall be available at reasonable charge on request for the use of any
person who desires information concerning subdivision and land development standards
and procedures in effect within the City of Ha_zleton.
B. Prior to the submission of the preliminary and final plans for a proposed subdivision, the
subdivider is advised to:
(1) Consult with the Commission and other proper officials of the city to ascertain
conformance of the proposed subdivision with all required local codes, ordinances,
plans, etc., with respect to land use, zoning, design standards, building requirements,
thoroughfares, community facilities, sanitation, water supply, drainage, school and
recreational sites, relationship to the neighborhood and other appropriate elements
forming the character and extent of the proposed subdivision.
(2) Consult with officials of the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development if he contemplates the use of HUD insurance in his development to
assure compliance with HUD qualifying standards.
(3) Submit a sketch plan to the Commission for informal discussion so that any required
changes may be effected in his plans at an early date in order to conserve time, effort
and expense.
21311
§ 213-10 HAZLETON CODE § 213-11
§ 213-10. Submission of plans and applications for approval.
A. Application for approval of sketch, preliminary and final plans for all proposed land
developments lying within the city shall be filed with the Conunission at least twenty (20)
days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting. Such submission of plans shall be
accompanied by a fee as specified in this Article.
B. The initial plan filed with the Conunission shall be considered as a sketch plan. However,
in the case of minor subdivisions, the developer may proceed directly to final plan
preparation in compliance with the requirements. The processing of a minor subdivision
land development shall be consistent with the procedures for processing a final plan as
required in this Article.
§ 213-11. Sketch plan.
A. Where a land development plan includes improvements or in the case of a major
subdivision plan, the developer shall submit a minimum of twelve (12) paper copies of a
sketch plan to the Planning Conunission in accordance with the provisions of this section.
B. Such sketch plan will be considered as submitted for informal review and discussion and
shall not constitute formal filing of the plan with the city.
C. As far as may be practical on the basis of the sketch plan review and discussion, the city
will informally advise the developer as promptly as possible of the extent to which the
proposed land development conforms to the design standards of these regulations (Article
IV) and will discuss possible plan modifications necessary to secure conformance. The
subdivider will at this time be required to submit a preliminary plan for Conunission
review.
D. Sketch plan requirements. The sketch plan shall be drawn at a scale of not more than one
hundred (1 00) feet to the inch. The sheet size shall be twenty-four inches by thirty-six 924
x 36) inches. The sketch plan shall be accompanied by an application for subdivision and
land development approval and shall show the following information:
(1) Name and address of developer, name of municipality, title, north arrow and date.
(2) Tract boundaries.
(3) Number of acres in tract, average lot size, approximate number of lots and anticipated
type of development.
(4) Existing and proposed streets, highways and rights-of-way.
(5) Proposed general lot layout.
(6) All public reservations such as schools, parks, etc. A land development sketch plan
need not be drawn to scale nor are precise dimensions required.
(7) Predominant natural features such as wooded areas, streams, wetlands, etc.
(8) A location map for the purpose of locating other streets, developments, recreation
areas and rights-of-way to better plan the proper locations of the same. This location
map should be at a scale of one (I) inch to eight hundred (800) feet.
21312
§ 213-12 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-12
§ 213-12. Preliminary plan.
A. Number of copies and time of submission.
(1) Where a land development plan includes improvements or in the case of a major
subdivision plan, the developer shall submit twelve (12) clear, legible, black or blue
prints of the preliminary plan, together with twelve (12) completed application forms
to the Secretary of the Planning Commission at least twenty (20) days prior to the
Commission meeting at which consideration is desired.
(2) The Planning Commission Secretary shall transmit a copy of the preliminary plan to:
(a) The Zoning Officer.
(b) Luzerne County Planning Commission.
(c) Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
(d) The City Engineer.
(e) The Mayor.
(f) The City Council.
(3) In addition, the Planning Commission may also forward a copy of the preliminary
plan and notify the following agencies, as necessary for review and recommendation,
in writing, that the preliminary plan has been received and will be considered at its
meeting of a specified date:
(a) One (1) copy transmitted to the local office of the Soil Conservation Service of
the United States Department of Agriculture for review and recommendations
concerning erosion, sediment and drainage control.
(b) One (1) copy transmitted to the local office of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation for review and recommendations where the land development
will front on an existing or proposed state highway or has a proposed street
entering on such a highway.
(c) One (1) copy transmitted to all affected public utilities which shall be requested
to make recommendations as to the suitability of installing underground
telephone, electric, gas, cable television, public water and sewer lines.
(d) One (1) copy transmitted to the public safety officials responsible for police
protection and firesafety.
( 4) A specimen of the application form is contained herein in Appendix A. 3
B. Fees. [Amended 12-16-1993 by Ord. No. 93-28]
(1) Fees, as established by resolution of the Council of the City of Hazleton,4 shall be
paid through the Director of Administration to the City of Hazleton before the
3 Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
4 Editor's Note: The current resolution is on file in the office of the City Clerk.
21313
§ 213-12 HAZLETON CODE § 213-12
submission of preliminary plans to the Planning Commission for consideration by the
Commission. A copy of the receipt, as proof that the fees have been paid, shall form
part of the subdivider's application.
(2) The subdivider or land developer shall certify and agree to pay any fees incurred
which are submitted to the City of Hazleton that are over and above the initial
application fee, including but not limited to any and all engineering costs for review
and inspection which are incurred by the city. All the extra fees will be billed by the
City of Hazleton and shall be paid by the subdivider or land developer within thirty
(30) days of the date of billing. The acknowledgment and certification must
accompany the subdivision application.
C. Scale and size. The preliminary plan shall be at a scale of one (1) inch to one hundred
( 1 00) feet or larger and shall be drawn by a licensed Pennsylvania land surveyor or
engineer. As far as practicable, sheets should be held to the following overall sizes:
seventeen by twenty-two (17 x 22) inches or twenty-four by thirty-six (24 x 36) inches.
Where necessary, in order to avoid sheets larger than above, plans should be drawn in two
(2) or more segments accompanied by a key diagram showing relative location of the
segments.
D. Preliminary plan requirements. The preliminary plan shall include the following
information:
( 1) A location map showing the entire plot and its relation to the surrounding area. The
location map should be at a scale of not less than two thousand (2,000) feet to the
inch.
(2) Proposed title identifying land development, north point, scale and date.
(3) Municipality in which land development is located, tract name and Tax Map sheet,
block and lot number.
(4) Name and address of record owner or owners, or the authorized agent.
(5) Name of subdivider.
(6) Name and seal of registered surveyor responsible for the plan and signature block for
approval by the City of Hazleton Planning Conunission.
(7) Tract boundary lines showing dimensions, bearings and comers; number of lots,
proposed density and minimum lot size.
(8) Acreage of the tract to be plotted to the nearest tenth of an acre.
(9) Sufficient elevations and/or contours to determine the general slope and natural
drainage of the land and the high and low points and tentative cross-sections and
center line profiles for all proposed new streets. Contours shall ordinarily be at
intervals of five (5) feet but may be at lesser intervals in the case of relatively level
tracts.
( l 0) Datum to which contour elevations refer. Where practicable, such data shall refer to
known established elevations.
21314
§ 213-12 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-12
( 11) The location of all existing watercourses, railroads, strip mines, culm banks, tree
courses and wooded areas, bridges, culverts and other significant natural features.
(12) The location of all existing buildings, sewers, water mains, culverts, utility lines, fire
hydrants and other significant man-made features.
(13) The location of all existing and proposed property lines, easements and rights-of-way,
including dimensions.
(14) All existing and proposed streets in or adjacent to or within four hundred (400) feet of
the tract, including name and right-of-way width.
(15) Cross-sections of all proposed streets showing right-of-way width, paved width,
location of curbs and sidewalks and profiles of streets showing grades approved by
the City Engineer. If deemed necessary by the City Engineer, percolation data shall
also be submitted.
(16) Preliminary profiles and other explanatory data concerning the installation of sanitary
and storm sewerage systems and water distribution systems.
(17) Proposed utilities, including sanitary and storm sewers and other drainage facilities;
waterlines and gas mains; and electric and other facilities. Size or capacity of each
and proposed connections to each other shall also be shown.
(18) If water is to be provided by means other than by private wells owned and maintained
by the individual owners of lots within the subdivision or development, applicants
shall present evidence to the governing body or planning agency, as the case may be,
that the subdivision or development is to be supplied by a certified public utility, a
bona fide cooperative association of lot owners, or by a municipal corporation,
authority or utility. A copy of a c~rtificate of public convenience from the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Conunission, an application for such certificate, a
cooperative agreement or a commitment or agreement to serve the area in question,
whichever is appropriate, shall be acceptable evidence.
( 19) Location of all proposed buildings.
(20) Length of new proposed streets.
(21) Numbering of lots within the land development.
(22) Site data, including the number of residential lots, typical lot size, the acreage for
proposed recreation and other public, semipublic or community purposes and the
number and type of dwelling units proposed, if any.
(23) Data relative to the occurrence of flooding, subsidence, landslides, mine fires and
other geological hazards within and adjacent to the tract proposed to be subdivided.
(24) Where slopes in excess of ten percent (10%) occur within the area proposed to be
subdivided, a preliminary grading plan, indicating the general location and magnitude
of the proposed cuts and fills, shall be attached to each copy of the preliminary plan.
(25) Proposed use of land from the City of Hazleton's Comprehensive Plan Future Land
Use Plan and proof of any variance or special exceptions which may have been
granted shall be shown.
21315
§ 213-12 HAZLETON CODE § 213-12
(26) The names of owners of immediately adjacent unplatted land, the names of proposed
or existing land developments immediately adjacent and the locations and dimensions
of any streets or easements shown thereon which abut the land to be developed.
(27) If the preliminary plan covers only a part of the subdivider's entire holdings, a
separate sketch of the proposed street plan for the subdivider's entire holdings shall
also be submitted as per§ 213-11 herein.
(28) A copy of any existing or proposed deed restrictions or protective covenants applying
to the proposed subdivision shall be attached to each copy of the preliminary plan
submitted.
(29) Recreation areas shall be shown on a separate drawing with topos to a scale in
increments of five (5) feet or less.
(30) All public reservations such as schools, parks, etc.
(31) A block measuring three by five (3 x 5) inches, entitled "Luzerne County Planning
Commission Review."
(32) A notarized statement, to the effect that the applicant is the owner of the land
proposed to be developed and that the land development shown on the preliminary
plan is made with his or their free consent.
(33) Certification that the subdivider or developer agrees to pay engineering costs as
provided under Subsection B. [Added 12-16-1993 by Ord. No. 93-28]
E. The preliminary plan may be segmented, if desired, in order to assure readability, e.g.,
utilities information may be placed on separate sheet, etc. Cross-sections and profiles shall
ordinarily be placed on separate sheets.
F. Review of preliminary plan. The Commission shall review the application and, if it
detennines that it is adequate as to form, the Commission shall transmit copies of the
preliminary plan to those officials and agencies specified in Subsection A herein and shall
notify said officials and agencies of the date of the meeting at which the Commission shall
consider the application. All plans, whether preliminary or final shall be reviewed by the
Planning Commission with reference to the following:
( 1) The standards and requirement of this chapter.
(2) Any proposals contained in the City of Hazleton Comprehensive Plan.
(3) Site suitability for the particular type of development proposed.
(4) The availability for necessary services and facilities.
(5) The requirements of Chapter 245, Zoning.
(6) The requirements of any other applicable city ordinance.
(7) The Official Map of the city.
(8) The improvements, design and dedications or reservations required by this chapter.
21316
§ 213-12 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-13
G. Approval of preliminary plan.5
§ 213-13. Final plan.
A. Number of copies and time of submission. The final subdivision plan shall be submitted to
the Commission only after the applicant's preliminary plan has been approved by the
Comnlission. The number of copies and timing shall be the same as for the preliminary
plan(§ 213-12A).
B. Fees. Fees, as established by resolution of the City Council of the City of Hazleton, shall
be paid through the Director of Administration to the City of Hazleton before the
submission of final plans to the Planning Conunission for consideration by the
Commission.6 Certification by the Director of Administration that such fees have been paid
shall form part ofthe subdivider's application.
C. Scale and size. The final plan scale and size shall be the same as for the preliminary plan
(§ 213-12C).
D. Final plan requirements. The final plan shall meet the following specifications:
(1) A location map showing the entire plot and its relation to the surrounding area. The
location map should be at a scale of not less than two thousand (2,000) feet to the
inch.
(2) Title identifying land development, north point, scale and date.
(3) Tract name and Tax Map sheet, block and lot number; municipality in which the land
development is located.
(4) Name and address of record owner or owners to be extracted from the books of the
county recorder and accompanied by an affidavit that the applicant is the owner or
equitable owner ofthe land proposed to be subdivided.
(5) Name and address of owner and subdivider.
(6) Name and seal of registered surveyor responsible for the plan and a certification by
him to the effect that the plot represents a survey made by him and that all monuments
indicated thereon actually exist and that the location, size and material of same are
correctly shown and that all the requirements of this chapter have been met.
(7) Total acreage of the tract, number of lots, density and minimum lot sizes.
(8) Tract boundary lines showing accurate dimensions and bearings, closing within an
error of not more than one (1) foot in five thousand (5,000) feet.
(9) Lot numbers, together with accurate dimensions and areas.
( 1 0) Proposed uses of land and existing zoning classification and proof of any variances or
special exceptions which may have been granted.
5 Editor's Note: See§ 213-15, Approval of plans.
6 Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the City Clerk.
21317
§ 213-13 HAZLETON CODE § 213-13
(11) All dimensions and angles or bearings of the lines of each lot and of each area
proposed to be dedicated to public use.
( 12) Accurate distances and directions to the nearest established street corners or official
monuments. Reference corners shall be accurately described on the final plan.
(13) Accurate and complete curve data for all curves included in the final plan.
( 14) The length of all straight lines, radii, length of curves and tangent bearings for each
street.
( 15) The proposed building setback line for each street. The proposed placement of each
building may be required.
( 16) Location, type, material and sizes of all monuments and lot markers.
( 17) Accurate location of all existing and proposed property lines within the proposed
subdivision boundaries, together with all easements and rights-of-way, including
dimensions.
(18) Accurate location of all existing and proposed streets in or adjacent to the tract,
including names and right-of-way widths with accurate dimensions in feet to the
nearest hundredth and with angles to the nearest one (1) minute of one degree (1 °).
( 19) Names of streets within and adjacent to the land development shall be shown.
(20) Final cross-sections of all proposed streets showing right-of-way width, paved width,
location of curbs and sidewalks and profiles of streets showing grades approved by
the City Engineer.
(21) Final profiles and other explanatory data concerning the installation of sanitary and
storm sewerage systems and water distribution systems.
(22) Location, size and invert elevation of all sanitary, storm and combined sewers and
location of all manholes, inlets and culverts.
(23) Wherever practicable, the names of the owners of any unplatted lands and of any
adjacent subdivisions shall be shown.
(24) Where slopes in excess of ten percent (10%) occur within the area to be subdivided, a
final grading plan, showing the accurate location and magnitude of the cuts and fills,
shall be attached to each copy of the final plan.
(25) A copy of any existing or proposed deed restrictions or protective covenants applying
to the proposed subdivision shall be attached to each copy of the final plan submitted.
These shall be accompanied by an affidavit by the owner that such restrictions, etc.,
are not in violation of any existing local, state or federal laws relating to
discrimination, etc.
(26) Certificate of proposed dedication of streets and other areas to be devoted to public
use.
(27) Certificate for approval by the Commission and Corrunission Engineer.
(28) Other certificates may be required.
21318
§ 213-13 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-14
E. The final plan may be segmented if desired in order to assure readability, e.g., utilities
information may be placed on separate sheet, etc. Cross-sections and profiles shall
ordinarily be placed on separate sheets.
F. Review of final plan.
( 1) The Commission and its City Engineer will examine the final plan to determine the
correctness of its technical details and its conformity with the approved preliminary
plan.
(2) The subdivider shall submit a certificate to the Commission that no lot within the
subdivision shall be sold unless and until all improvements and installations required
under this chapter have been made or installed. No plan shall be finally approved
without the submission of such certificate, and the certification of approval of the
Conunission required on the final plan shall refer to such certificate, the date of its
submission to the Commission and the place where it might be examined.
(3) The subdivider shall also submit to the Conunission a maintenance bond in favor of
the City of Hazleton to guarantee the maintenance and repair of all streets within the
subdivision prior to their official acceptance and dedication by the City of Hazleton.
G. Approval of final plan.
(1) The Conunission, after having determined that the final plan and supporting
certifications are satisfactory, will move to approve the final plan according to
§ 213-15, Approval of plans. Approval by the Commission shall not be deemed to
constitute or effect an acceptance by the public of the dedication of any street or other
proposed public way, space or area shown on said final plan.
(2) Subsequent to the approval of the final plan by the Commission, the subject tract of
land may not be sold, transferred or improved, except in the manner prescribed by the
approved final plan, unless such final plan is first amended with the consent and
approval by the Commission in accordance with the same specification requirements
and procedures set forth in Article V of this chapter.
§ 213-14. Referral of the approved final plan to governing body for acceptance of streets.
A. Subsequent to its approval of the final plan, the Commission shall transmit four (4) prints
of the final plan, together with appropriate certificates of title, to the City Council of the
City of Hazleton for action on any proposed dedications. The City Council shall return
three (3) approved prints of the final plan to the Commission. The Commission shall return
two (2) of the approved prints to the subdivider. Should the City Council not accept the
proposed dedications, the subdivider may amend said final plan and resubmit same to the
Commission for its review and approval.
B. The deed of dedication to the city shall be tendered by the developer only after all
surfacing, curbs, sewers, sidewalks and other required improvements shall have been
installed or constructed and certified as satisfactory by the City Engineer.
21319
§ 213-15 HAZLETON CODE § 213-15
§ 213-15. Approval of plans.
A. At a scheduled public meeting, the Commission shall render its decision on the plan,
whether preliminary or final, and communicate its decision to the applicant not later than
ninety (90) days following the date of the regular meeting of the Commission next
following the date the application is filed, provided that, should the next regular meeting
occur more than thirty (30) days following the filing of the application, the said ninety-day
period shall be measured from the thirty (30) days following the day the application was
filed.
B. Final plan approval shall not be granted until such improvements as required by this
chapter and shown on such final plan have been completed or guaranty posted as required
in Article IV.
C. The decision of the Commission concerning plan approval, whether preliminary or final,
shall be in writing and shall be communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to him
at his last known address not later than fifteen (15) days following the decision.
D. When the plan is not approved in terms as filed, the decision shall specify the defects found
in the plan and describe the requirements which have not been met and cite the provisions
of these regulations relied upon.
E. Failure of the Commission to render a decision and communicate it to the applicant within
the time and in the manner required herein shall be deemed as approval of the application
in terms as presented unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time or
change in the prescribed manner of presentation of communication of the decision, in
which case, failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of presentation of
communication shall have like effect.
F. From the time a plan, whether preliminary or final, is submitted as provided in this chapter
and while such plan is pending approval or disapproval, no change or amendment of the
zoning, subdivision and land development or other city ordinance or plan shall affect the
decision on such plan adversely to the applicant, and the applicant shall be entitled to a
decision in accordance with the provisions of the city ordinances or plans as they stood at
the time the application was duly submitted. In addition, when a preliminary plan has been
duly approved, the applicant shall be entitled to final approval in accordance with the terms
of the approved preliminary plan as hereinafter provided.
G. However, if a plan is properly and finally denied, any subsequent plan shall be subject to
the intervening change in city regulations. When an application for approval of a plan,
whether preliminary or final, has been approved or disapproved subject to conditions
acceptable to the applicant, no subsequent change or amendment in the zoning, subdivision
and land development or other city ordinance or plan shall be applied to affect adversely
the right of the applicant to commence and to complete any aspect of the approved
development in accordance with the terms of such approval within five (5) years from such
approval. Where final approval is preceded by preliminary approval, the five-year period
shall be counted from the date of the preliminary approval. In the case of any doubt as to
the terms of a preliminary approval, the terms shall be construed in the light of the
provisions of the city ordinances or plans as they stood at the time when the plan for such
approval was duly submitted.
21320
§ 213-15 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-15
H. Where the landowner has substantially completed the required improvements as depicted
upon the final plat within the aforesaid time period, no change in municipal ordinance or
plan enacted subsequent to the date of filing of preliminary plan shall modify or revoke any
aspect of the approved final plan pertaining to zoning classification or density, lots,
buildings, streets or installation of improvements beyond the five-year period, a schedule
shall be filed by the landowner with the preliminary plan delineating all proposed sections
as well as deadlines within which applications for final plan approval of each section are
intended to be filed. Such schedule shall be updated annually by the applicant on or before
the anniversary of the preliminary plan approval, until final plan approval of the final
section has been granted, and any modification in the aforesaid schedule shall be subject to
approval of the Commission in its discretion. Each section in any residential subdivision or
land development, except for the last section, shall contain a minimum of twenty-five
percent (25%) of the total number of the dwelling units as depicted on the preliminary
plan, unless a lesser percentage is approved by the Commission in its discretion, provided
that the landowner has not defaulted with regard to or violated any of the conditions of the
preliminary plan approval, including compliance with landowner's aforesaid schedule of
submission of final plans for the various sections, then the aforesaid protections afforded
by substantially completing the improvements depicted upon the final plan within five (5)
years shall apply and for any section or sections, beyond the initial section, in which the
required improvements have not been substantially completed within said five-year period.
The aforesaid protection shall apply for an additional term or terms of three (3) years from
the date of final plat approval for each section.
I. Effect of preliminary plan approval.
(1) Approval of the preliminary plan by the Commission constitutes conditional approval
of the development as to the character and intensity of development and the general
layout and the approximate dimension£ of streets, lots and other planned features.
This approval binds the developer to the general scheme shown on the preliminary
plan.
(2) Approval of the preliminary plan shall not constitute approval of the final plan, nor
does it authorize recording of the preliminary plan or the sale of any lots. However,
such approval does authorize the developer to proceed with the preparation of the
final plan, installation and construction of improvements and/or the posting of a bond
guaranty as specified in this chapter.
J. Effect of final plan approval.
(1) Approval of the final plan by the Commission constitutes final approval of the land
development as to the character and intensity of development and the layout and the
dimensions of streets, lots and other planned features. This approval binds the
developer to the scheme shown on the final plan.
(2) Final plan approval authorizes the developer to proceed with the recording of the final
plan, which must be accomplished before the developer can proceed with the sale of
any lots or the construction of buildings or structures.
21321
§ 213-16 HAZLETON CODE § 213-19
§ 213-16. Recording of final plan.
A. Upon approval of the final plan, the developer shall, within ninety (90) days of such
approval, record such plan in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Luzerne County.
Within thirty (30) days after such recording, the developer shall furnish proof of recording
to the Commission. Should the developer fail to record the final plan within such period,
the approval of the Commission shall be null and void, unless an extension of time has
been granted by the Commission upon written request.
B. The recording of the final plan shall not constitute grounds for assessment increases until
such time as lots are sold or improvements are installed on the land included within the
subject plan.
§ 213-17. Resubdivision.
For any replatting or resubdivision of land, the same procedures and regulation apply as
prescribed for any original land development.
§ 213-18. Application of standards.
ARTICLE IV
Design Standards
A. The following land development principles, standards and requirements will be applied by
the city in evaluating plans for proposed land developments.
B. The standards and requirements outlined herein shall be considered minimum standards
and requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
C. Where literal compliance with the standards herein specified is clearly impractical, the
Commission may modify or adjust the standards to permit reasonable utilization of
property while securing substantial conformance with the objectives of these regulations.
§ 213-19. Location of site.
All land development plans must reflect a location which has given consideration to the
following factors:
A. The location of the land development must conform to the City Comprehensive Plan with
respect to streets, public sites and proposed utilities.
B. The proposed use of land in any land development must conform to Chapter 245, Zoning.
C. Land subject to hazards of life, health or property as may arise from fire, flood, disease,
excessive noise or falling aircraft or which are considered uninhabitable for other reasons
may not be developed unless the hazards have been removed or the plans show adequate
safeguards against them.
D. A land development must be coordinated with existing land development m the
neighborhood so that the entire area may be developed harmoniously.
21322
§ 213-20 SUBDNISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-21
§ 213-20. General design standards for site.
In the layout of any land development, attention must be focused on conditions which can
affect development. These can include the following:
A. In all land developments, developers shall preserve trees, groves, waterways, scenic points,
historic spots and other community assets and landmarks on the basis of city
determination. A grading plan may be required where woods and scattered trees occur. The
grading plan must show:
(1) Accurate location of individual significant trees.
(2) Accurate existing and proposed ground elevations in relation to these trees. Tree
guards during construction and grading and limitation of cuts and fills, both temporary
and permanent, near the trees may be required as necessary to give reasonable
assurance of their continued healthy growth.7
B. Land subject to flooding or other hazards.
(I) Land subject to flooding or other hazards to life, health or property and land deemed
to be topographically unsuitable shall not be platted for residential occupancy or for
such other uses as may increase danger to health, life or property or aggravate erosion
or flood hazard until all such hazards have been eliminated or unless adequate
safeguards against such hazards are provided by the land development plans. Such
land within the development shall be set aside on the plan for uses as shall not be
endangered by periodic or occasional inundation or shall not produce unsatisfactory
living conditions.
(2) Where flooding is known to have occurred within the area shown on the plan, such
area shall be clearly marked "subject to periodic flooding" and shall not be platted in
streets and lots.
(3) No building may be erected in any designated floodplain area as specified by
engineering data regarding the one-hundred-year flood or the alluvial and floodprone
soils as specified by the United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation
Service.
§ 213-21. Layout of lots.
All lots within a development shall conform to the following requirements:
A. All lots shall front on a public dedicated street.
B. Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles to straight streets and on radial
lines on curved streets.
C. Double-frontage lots shall be prohibited except where, in the judgment of the Commission,
they are necessary to separate residences from major traffic arteries or railroads or to
overcome specific disadvantages of topography in hillside areas. Where double-frontage
7 Editor's Note: See also Ch. 223, Trees.
21323
§ 213-21 HAZLETON CODE § 213-24
lots back on a major traffic artery, a planting strip for a screen, at least twenty (20) feet in
width, shall be provided along the back of the lot. The Commission may also require a
twenty-foot planting screen for a double-frontage lot which backs on a railroad or other
disadvantageous use.
D. Comer lots shall provide for equal setbacks on both streets.
E. The depth and width of parcels laid out or reserved for nonresidential use shall be adequate
for the use proposed and sufficient to provide satisfactory space for off-street parking and
unloading.
§ 213-22. Sanitary sewage disposal.8
The applicant shall provide the highest type of sanitary sewage disposal facility. The following
types of sanitary sewage disposal facilities are listed in order of desirability:
A. Publicly owned sanitary sewage system, where plans are approved by the Greater Hazleton
Joint Sewer Authority guaranteeing disposal capacity for the land developments.
B. Privately owned sanitary sewage system used by two (2) or more units of occupancy with
treatment other than subsurface absorption or holding as approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources.
§ 213-23. Water supply.
The land development shall be served by a public or private water supply. Acceptable sources
of water supply shall be:
A. The Hazleton City Authority, per approval of plan based on available capacity.
B. A private water company approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources.
§ 213-24. Underground installations.
In developments of five (5) or more lots, electric, telephone and all other utility facilities shall
be installed underground. The developer shall be required, prior to final plan approval, to obtain
a letter from the appropriate utility company confinning that the developer has entered into an
agreement to provide for an underground electric and telephone system in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission Investigating Docket No. 99, as amended, or has
obtained a waiver from said Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission to allow overhead electric
and telephone facilities.
8 Editor's Note: See also Ch. 193, Sewers.
21324
§ 213-25 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-29
§ 213-25. Natural gas lines.
All natural gas lines must be installed in compliance with the USAS Code B31.8, 1968, as
amended. The minimum distance from a natural gas line to a dwelling unit must be required by
the applicable transmission or distributing company.
§ 213-26. Petroleum lines.
Between a proposed dwelling unit and the center line of a petroleum products transmission line
which may traverse the development, there must be a minimum distance of one hundred (1 00)
feet measured in the shortest distance. In instances such that topographic conditions decrease
the hazards involved or in which it would cause undue hardship in the efficient layout of the
development, the Commission may reduce this requirement.
§ 213-27. Utility easements.
Insofar as practicable all utilities, with the exception of on-site laterals, shall be located in
public rights-of-way. Where this is not possible, utility easements shall be so located as to be
centered on or adjacent to rear or side lot lines to the fullest extent possible. Such easements
shall have minimum widths of twelve (12) feet, or ten (1 0) feet plus the width of the required
pipe or other improvement, whichever is greater. In general, the required pipe or other
improvement shall be located in the center of the easement. Prior to determining the location of
easements, the Commission shall require the subdivider to coordinate his plans with those of
the local public utilities in order to assure the proper location of easements for the installation
of the required services.
§ 213-28. Drainage easements.
Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, a drainage easement or right-of-way shall be
provided. The latter shall conform substantially with the line of such watercourse and shall be
of adequate width as determined by the City Engineer to preserve natural drainage.
§ 213-29. Street design.
A. Street layout.
(1) Alleys shall not be permitted in any districts.
(2) The street layout shall conform to the circulation plan adopted by the Commission.
Where streets in subdivisions are not shown on the circulation plan, they shall
conform to the plan approved by the Commission and shall generally provide for the
continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal streets in surrounding
areas. The grade, location and character of all streets shall also be approved by the
City Engineer.
(3) The design of all streets shall be considered in relation to existing and planned streets;
the topography of the site; public safety and convenience; adequate traffic circulation
21325
§ 213-29 HAZLETON CODE § 213-29
within and near the subdivision and the proposed uses of land in the areas served by
such streets.
( 4) Proposed streets shall be planned with regard to the existing street system, public
convenience in terms of fire protection and pedestrian traffic, probable volumes of
traffic, existing and proposed use of land on abutting properties and future
development extensions of the street system.
(5) Proposed streets which are aligned with existing streets shall bear the name of the
existing street. In the event that a proposed street is not aligned with an existing street,
it shall not bear a name similar to any existing street located within the city and/or the
same postal service area, irrespective of the suffix street, avenue, boulevard, drive,
place, court, etc.
(6) Where a subdivision abuts or contains a railroad or an existing or proposed major
traffic street, the Commission may require marginal access streets, properly buffered
by a planting strip from said railroad or highway, or parallel streets or a series of
culs-de-sac or short loops, reverse-frontage lots or such other treatment as will
provide protection to abutting properties and will result in the reduction of the number
of intersections and the separation of local and through traffic.
B. Street intersections.
(1) The center lines of streets shall intersect as nearly as possible to right angles. In no
event shall the intersection of any two (2) streets be at an angle less than sixty degrees
(60°) except for reasons of topography, as determined by the Commission.
(2) At intersections of streets, the property line comers shall be rounded by arcs with radii
equal to thirty percent (30%) of the right-of-way width or by chords of such arcs, but
shall in no event be less than fifteen ( 15) feet;· excepting that culs-de-sac shall be
provided with radii of not less than twenty (20) feet. Where intersecting streets vary in
right-of-way widths, the greater radii shall be used.
(3) If the smaller angle of intersections of two (2) streets is required to be less than sixty
degrees (60°) by reason of the topography, the radius of arc as determined above shall
be increased by twenty-five percent (25%).
( 4) Street curbs and edges of pavements at street intersections shall be rounded off
concentrically with the adjoining property lines.
(5) Intersections of more than two (2) streets at any one ( 1) point shall be avoided. Where
this proves to be impractical in the opinion of the Commission, such intersections
shall be designed with extreme care for both pedestrian and vehicular safety.
(6) Street jogs with center line offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet
shall be prohibited.
C. Distance between intersections shall be in accordance with the following:
21326
§ 213-29 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-29
Arterial
Type of Intersection
Arterial With
Collector & Local
Collector Collector
With Arterial With Collector With Local
Minimum distance
between center
lines of
intersections (feet)
800
Minimum separation
of center lines for
streets not in
alignment (feet)
D. Reverse curves and tangents.
800 600
Must be in alignment with planned or
proposed street entering from
opposite side
500
200
( 1) Between reversed curves on a tangent of not less than two hundred (200) feet and on
collector and minor streets such tangents shall be not less than one hundred (100) feet.
(2) Reversed and horizontal curves in hillside areas shall not be governed by the above
requirements but shall be determined in each instance by the Commission.
E. Horizontal visibility.
(1) Streets shall be so designed as to permit unobstructed sight distances along the center
lines thereof, measured from a point five (5) feet above the proposed grade, as
follows:
(a) Limited access highways: nine hundred (900) feet.
(b) Other major traffic streets: six hundred (600) feet.
(c) Collector streets: three hundred (300) feet.
(d) Minor streets: one hundred fifty (150) feet.
(2) Proper sight lines must be maintained at all street intersections. Clear-sight triangles
of one hundred (1 00) feet for all collectors, local roads and culs-de-sac and two
hundred (200) feet for all arterial streets [may be reduced to one hundred fifty (150)
feet at the discretion of the City Engineer], measured along street center lines from
their points of junction, shall be provided at all intersections, and no building,
structure, grade or planting higher than three (3) feet above the center line of the street
shall be permitted within such sight triangles.
F. Half, partial, dead-end and cul-de-sac streets.
(1) Half, partial and dead-end streets shall be prohibited except where:
(a) In the opinion of the Conunission they are essential to reasonable development
conforming to the other requirements of this chapter.
(b) The Commission finds it practicable to require dedication of the other half, when
adjoining property is plotted.
21327
§ 213-29 HAZLETON CODE § 213-29
(c) Designed as culs-de-sac.
(2) Whenever a half or partial street adjoins property proposed to be subdivided, the
completion of such street shall be required as part of the plot.
(3) Cul-de-sac streets, permanently designed as such, shall not exceed six hundred (600)
feet in length and shall furnish access to not more than twenty-four (24) dwelling
units.
(4) Cul-de-sac streets shall terminate in a turnaround which shall be generally circular
and shall have a minimum diameter of one hundred ( 1 00) feet overall and eighty (80)
feet to the outer pavement edge or curbline.
G. Street grades.
(1) Street center line grades shall not exceed the following:
Type of Street Minimum Grade Maximum Grade
Major arterial 1.0% 6.0%
Minor arterial 1.0% 6.0%
Collector 1.0% 6.0%
Local 1.0% 10.0%
(2) Grade up to fourteen percent (14%) may be permitted for a distance of less than five
hundred (500) feet on a through minor street where access to the street is possible
over streets with grades of ten percent ( 10%) or less.
(3) Leveling area. Where the grade of any street at the approach to an intersection
exceeds seven percent (7%), a leveling area shall be provided having not greater than
four percent (4%) grades for a distance of twenty-five (25) feet measured from the
nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street.
H. Street right-of-way widths. Minimum standards for street right-of-way widths shall be as
follows:
( 1) Central Business District.
(a) Major arterials: eighty (80) feet.
(b) Minor arterials: eighty (80) feet.
(c) Collectors: seventy (70) feet.
(d) Local roads: sixty (60) feet.
(2) Hillside areas. The following right-of-way standards for hillside areas are set forth
herein merely to guide the Commission and are not intended to be fixed minimums.
The basis for the requirements shall be the actual topography of the land, the location
of the hillside areas and streets with respect to the adjoining loads and streets and the
density of development, particularly in terms of the proposed number of dwellings to
be served by the street.
(a) Minor arterials: sixty (60) feet.
21328
§ 213-29 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
(b) Collectors: fifty (50) feet.
(c) Local roads: forty (40) feet.
(3) All other areas.
(a) Minor arterials: seventy (70) feet.
(b) Collectors: sixty (60) feet.
(c) Local roads: fifty (50) feet.
§ 213-29
(4) Where a street perpendicular (or nearly so) to Broad Street passes through or abuts
both the Central Business District and any other area, the minimum right-of-way
standards set for the Central Business District shall prevail for a minimum distance of
eight hundred (800) feet measured perpendicularly from the zone district lines of the
Central Business District.
I. Street cartway widths. Minimum standards for street cartway widths shall be as follows:
(1) Central Business District.
(a) Major arterials: forty-eight (48) feet.
(b) Minor arterials: forty-eight (48) feet.
(c) Collector streets: forty (40) feet.
(d) Local roads: thirty-four (34) feet.
(2) Hillside areas. The following cartway standards for hillside areas are set forth herein
merely to guide the Commission and are not intended to be fixed minimums. The
basis for the requirements shall be the. same as those used in determining hillside
street rights-of-way as per Subsection H(2) herein:
(a) Minor arterials: thirty-four (34) feet.
(b) Collectors: twenty-six (26) feet.
(c) Local roads: twenty-five (25) feet.
(3) All other areas.
(a) Major arterials: forty ( 40) feet.
(b) Minor arterials: forty (40) feet.
(c) Collectors: thirty-four (34) feet.
(d) Local roads: thirty-four (34) feet.
(4) Where a street perpendicular (or nearly so) to Broad Street passes through or abuts
both the Central Business District and any other area, the minimum cartway standards
for the Central Business District shall prevail for a minimum distance of eight
hundred (800) feet measured perpendicularly from the zone district lines of the
Central Business District.
21329
§ 213-29 HAZLETON CODE § 213-32
(5) Median strips. Median strips shall be placed in streets only where, in the opinion of
the Commission, they are necessary for safety or traffic control. The width of same
shall be in addition to the required cartway widths as hereinabove set forth.
§ 213-30. Street names.
Names of new streets and other rights-of-way in a subdivision plot shall be subject to the
approval of the City Council at the time of acceptance and dedication.
§ 213-31. Blocks.
A. Length, width and shape of blocks shall be detenn.ined with due regard to the following:
( 1) Provision of building sites adequately suited to the specific needs of the uses
contemplated.
(2) Zoning requirements.
(3) Topography.
( 4) Requirements for convenient access, circulation and safety of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic.
B. Block lengths shall generally not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet and, so far
as practical, a minimum length of five hundred (500) feet.
C. Wherever practicable, residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth to accommodate two
(2) tiers of building lots, except where reverse-frontage lots bordering a major traffic street
are used.
D. Interior pedestrian walks may be required where necessary to improve circulation and to
provide access to community facilities. Such walkways shall have a right-of-way width of
not less than ten ( 1 0) feet and a paved width of not less than six (6) feet.
E. In commercial and industrial areas, the block layout shall be designed with reference to
service of the public and with provisions for adequate off-street parking and loading
facilities.
§ 213-32. Storm drainage.
A. General requirements shall be as follows:
(l) Adequate storm sewers, culverts and related facilities must be provided, as necessary,
to:
(a) Penn.it the unimpeded flow of natural watercourses.
(b) Ensure the drainage of all low points along the line of streets.
(c) Intercept stormwater runoff along streets at intervals reasonably related to the
extent and grade of the area drained.
21330
§ 213-32 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-32
(d) Provide adequate drainage away from on-site sewage disposal facilities.
(2) Drainage for city streets shall be designed in accordance with the PennDOT, Design
Manual Part 2, Chapter 12, Drainage Design, and approved by the city.
(3) Storm drainage facilities must be designed not only to handle the anticipated peak
discharge from the property being developed, but also the anticipated increase in
runoff that will occur when all the property at a higher elevation in the same drainage
basin is fully developed.
B. Lots shall be arranged and graded to provide positive drainage away from buildings.
C. Nearby existing facilities. Where adequate existing storm sewers are readily accessible, the
developer must connect his stormwater facilities to these existing storm sewers at the
developer's expense.
D. Open drainageways.
( 1) When open drainage ways are used for the disposal of stormwater, the city shall
review the design of such open drainageways in relation to the following:
(a) Safety. Steep banks and deep pools shall be avoided.
(b) Erosion. Adequate measures shall be taken, such as seeding, sodding, paving or
other measures as necessary to prevent the erosion of banks and the scouring of
the channel bottom.
(c) Stagnation. Design of open drainageways shall not create stagnant pools or
swampy areas.9
(2) Whenever the evidence available to the city indicates that natural surface drainage is
inadequate, the developer shall install a stormwater sewer system in accordance with
approved plans and profiles. The system shall be designed in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Design Manual Part 2, Chapter 12,
Drainage Design, and be approved by the city.
(3) Approval. Drainage structures for areas of more than one-half ( V2) mile square shall
be subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
E. Abutting properties.
(1) In the design of storm drainage facilities, special consideration must be given to
preventing excess runoff onto adjacent developed or undeveloped properties. When a
storm drainage outlet will abut another property, the developer must secure the
approval in writing of adjoining affected owners. In no case may a change be made in
the existing topography which would:
(a) Within a distance of twenty (20) feet from a property line to the beginning of the
slope result in increasing any portion of the slope to more than seventy percent
(70%).
9 Editor's Note: See also Ch, 168, Mosquito Control.
21331
§ 213-32 HAZLETON CODE § 213-34
(b) Result in a slope which exceeds the normal angle of slopeage of the material
involved.
(2) All slopes must be protected against erosion.
F. Drainage upon and on streets. In order to give proper surface water drainage upon streets, a
structure on a lot must be at a grade in satisfactory relationship:
(1) With the established street grade; or
(2) With the existing street grade where none is established.
§ 213-33. Building setback lines.
Building setback lines shall be as determined by Chapter 245, Zoning.
§ 213-34. Dedication of land for recreational purposes.
A. The amount of land required to be provided for recreational purposes for single-family
detached residential subdivisions or land development plans shall be a minimum of twotenths
(0.02) acre per lot or dwelling unit. Recreation land dedication for multifamily or
attached housing shall be a minimum of twenty percent (20%) for the total tract area.
B. Proposed recreation areas shall:
(1) Be easily and safely accessible from all areas of the development to be served, have
good ingress and egress and have direct access to a public roadway. However, no
public roadways shall traverse the site(s).
(2) Be contiguous and regular in shape.
(3) Have a suitable topography and soil conditions for use and development as a
recreation area.
(4) Seventy-five percent (75%) of the required areas shall have a slope of five percent
(5%) or less.
(5) No more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the required area may be within the
floodplain or wetland areas, as defined by the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development's Flood Insurance Rate Maps.
(6) Be easily accessible to all essential utilities: water, sewer and power.
(7) Be suitable for development as a particular type of park, as categorized by the
National Recreation and Park Association's National Park, Recreation and Open
Space Standards and Guidelines, 1983, and updates.
(8) Be designed and developed according to the standards established by the National
Recreation and Park Association.
(9) Be compatible with the objectives, guidelines and recommendations as set forth in the
City Comprehensive Plan and parks recreation plan and updates.
21332
§ 213-34 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-34
C. When the City Council deems it to be in the public interest to accept title to dedicated land,
such acceptance shall be by means of a clear title deed to the dedicated recreation area.
D. Recreation areas of less than three (3) acres proposed to be dedicated to the city shall not
normally be accepted, unless opportunities exist to combine them with other recreation
areas.
E. The City Council, after having conferred with the Planning Commission and the Parks and
Recreation Board, may find dedication to be impractical because of the size, shape,
location, access, topography, drainage or other physical features of the land, or that such
dedication would adversely affect the subdivision or land development and its future
residents or occupants, or that there is not other land area within the proposed subdivision
which is practical for dedication to the public because of size, access, topography or other
physical characteristics. In such cases the City Council shall require payment of a fee in
lieu of land dedication.
F. All approved recreation areas shall be completed and dedicated before fifty percent (50%)
occupancy has been reached in any applicable subdivision. Withholding of occupancy
permits may occur to ensure compliance with this provision. Developers required to
dedicate land for recreation shall also develop the recreation areas, according to the
National Park, Recreation and Open Space Standards and Guidelines published by the
National Recreation and Park Association in 1983, and any succeeding updates or
revisions.
G. In cases where the opportunity exists to combine dedicated recreation areas, the developer
shall be required to escrow funds that will pay for later construction of facilities on a
combined recreation area according to the subdivision's percentage contribution to the
ultimate combined recreation area. The city will then develop the combined recreation area
with the escrowed funds when all portions thereof have been deeded over to the city.
H. Actual size, number, placement and other specifications of recreation facilities to be
developed shall be recommended by the Planning Commission after negotiations with the
developers. The specifications of recreational facilities to be developed shall bear a
reasonable relationship to the anticipated use of the facilities by future inhabitants of the
development or subdivision.
I. Final subdivision and/or development plans shall indicate location and specifications of all
recreation facilities to be constructed and metes, bounds and acreage(s) of the recreation
area(s).
J. Recreation facilities shall be bonded and have improvement guarantees posted or deposited
as with any other subdivision improvements: streets, sidewalks, curbs, drainage facilities,
utilities, etc.
K. The developer shall install, as a minimum, the following number of recreation facilities on
the land which has been set aside for this purpose:
21333
§ 213-34 HAZLETON CODE § 213-34
Dwelling Units
Facilities
Number of
Recreational
24 or less
25 to 49
50 to 99
100 to 199
200 to 299
300 to 400
Over400
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
L. Recreation facilities shall include, but are not limited to, play areas, basketball and/or
volleyball courts, tennis courts, softball and/or baseball diamonds, pavilions and soccer
and/or football fields. The mix of facilities shall be determined and approved by the city.
M. Fee-in-lieu payments shall be arrived at by annual resolutions adopted by the City Council
that will set the fee-in-lieu amounts for each residential zone classification for the calendar
year. Amounts established shall remain in effect until a succeeding resolution establishing
other rates is adopted. The formula for all residential zone classification shall be as
follows:
Recreation Area Required 43,560 square feet x Development Cost Factor x Average
Lot Price = Fee in Lieu Payment
Where:
Recreation Area Required= The area calculated under the provisions of§ 213-34A
expressed in square feet.
Development Cost Factor = The percentage of the average lot price attributable to the
cost of developing the lot as defined in Article II. This percentage shall be established
by the City Engineer.
Average Lot Price= The amount determined by taking the arithmetic average of all
open market residential lot sales in the City of Hazleton for the previous year. Open
market sales shall not include multiple property/single consideration, nominal
consideration, family member, forced sale or partial interest sales as defined by the
Luzerne County Assessor's Office. This figure will be calculated on an annual basis
and established by the City Council.
N. Fee in lieu money authorized by this chapter shall, upon its receipt by the city, be
deposited in an interest-bearing account, clearly identifying the specific recreation facilities
and recreation district for which the fee was received. Interest earned on the account shall
be expended only for the purpose of providing park or recreation facilities accessible to the
development and located in the district from which the funds were generated.
0. Upon request of any person who paid fee-in-lieu under this chapter, the city shall refund
such fee, plus interest accumulated thereon from the date of payment, if the city has failed
to utilize the fee paid for the purposes set forth in this chapter within three (3) years from
the date such fee was paid.
21334
§ 213-35 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT §213-37
ARTICLE V
Required Improvements and Construction Standards
§ 213-35. Scope.
Required minimum improvements and construction standards for all subdivisions shall be as set
forth in this Article V. Where not set forth, required minimum improvements and construction
standards shall be as established by the Commission upon the advice of the City Engineer.
Alternate improvements and/or standards may be permitted if, in the opinion of the
Commission, they are equal or superior in performance characteristics to the specified
improvements and/or standards.
§ 213-36. Monuments and markers.
A. Types of monuments. Monuments shall be of the following types:
(1) Made of concrete, having a five-inch-by-five-inch cross-section and thirty-six (36)
inches in length. A scored one-half-inch round brass pin shall be located in the top
center.
(2) Made of cut stone, having a five-inch-by-five-inch cross-section and being thirty-six
(36) inches in length with a drill hole in the top center.
(3) A two-inch round galvanized pipe thirty-six (36) inches long with a brass cap having
a punch hole for in its center.
B. Placement of monuments. Monuments shall be set at the intersection of all lines forming
angles in the boundary of the subdivision. They shall be placed so that the scored or
marked point will coincide exactly with the intersection of the lines to be marked and shall
be set so that the top of the monument is level with the surface of the surrounding ground.
C. Markers. Markers shall consist of steel bars being at least fifteen ( 15) inches long and not
less than three-fourths (:¥4) of an inch in diameter. Markers shall be set at the beginning and
ending of all curves along street property lines, at all points where lot lines intersect curves
and at all angles in property lines of lots and at all corner lots.
§ 213-37. Street construction standards.
A. Streets must be surfaced to the grades and dimensions drawn on plans, profiles and crosssections
submitted by the developer and approved by the Commission.
B. All streets intended to be dedicated for public use shall be paved to full cartway width, as
shown on the final plan. In all cases, paving materials and workmanship shall conform to
any and all city regulations and the specifications of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
C. Subsurface drainage and all utilities shall be installed prior to placing the street surface.10
10 Editor's Note: See also Ch. 208, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. ll, Utility Cuts.
21335
§ 213-37 HAZLETON CODE § 213-41
D. Driveway entrances or aprons within the street right-of-way shall be surfaced to their full
width, the type of surface to be the same as specified by the engineering specifications for
streets.
§ 213-38. Curbs and gutters.
A. Curbs shall be installed on both sides of all streets in subdivisions and land developments
as herein specified. Curbs shall be concrete. Curbs and gutters are to be constructed within
the right-of-way.
B. The installation of curbs may be waived by the Planning Commission only where there are
unique physical circumstances or conditions or exceptional topography peculiar to the
particular property which make the installation of curbs impossible or impracticable.
§ 213-39. Sidewalks.
Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of all streets in subdivisions and land developments
as herein specified. Sidewalks shall be located, if possible, within the street right-of-way line
and shall be a minimum of four (4) feet wide, except that in the vicinity of shopping areas,
schools, parks, recreation areas and other community facilities, they shall be a minimum of six
(6) feet wide. Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete at least four (4) inches thick, underlain
by three (3) inches of compacted gravel or crushed stone.
§ 213-40. Street name signs.
The land development shall be provided with street name signs at all intersections. Such signs
shall conform to city specifications and shall be installed by the developer in a manner specified
by the City Engineer.
§ 213-41. Landscaping.
A. In developments of six (6) or more lots, the developer shall provide street trees in
accordance with regulations of the Hazleton Shade Tree Commission. The trees should be
of a minimum caliper of one and one-half (1 112) inches. 11
B. In residential subdivisions of six (6) or more lots or units and in all commercial and
industrial subdivisions and land developments, the developer shall provide landscaping in
accordance with this section. Planting plans shall be required, and such plans shall be
prepared by a landscape architect registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to
engage in the practice of landscape architecture. Plantings shall consist of clusters of
evergreens interspersed with groupings of deciduous trees and sluubs selected from the
recommended plant list. Single species planting is prohibited. Use of native species is
encouraged
C. Plant materials. Species selected by the applicant shall reflect the following consideration:
11 Editor's Note: See also Ch. 223, Trees.
21336
§213-41 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-43
(1) Existing site conditions and their suitability for plant materials, based upon the site's
geology, hydrology, soils, existing vegetation and microclimate.
(2) Specific functional objectives of the plantings, which may include, but are not
necessarily limited to, visual screening, noise abatement, protective or safety barriers
and aesthetic values.
(3) Maintenance and replacement considerations such as hardiness, resistance to insects
and disease, longevity and availability and cost of plant materials.
( 4) Review and approval of the Hazleton Shade Tree Conunission.
D. Site maintenance.
( 1) All landscape requirements shall be installed and maintained by accepted practices as
recognized by the American Association of Nurserymen. Planting and maintenance of
vegetation shall include, but is not necessarily limited to, provisions for surface
mulch, guy-wires and stakes, irrigation, fertilization, insect and disease control,
pruning, mulching, weeding and watering.
(2) The applicant shall make arrangements acceptable to the city for the property's longterm
landscape maintenance. The applicant shall provide the names, addresses and
telephone numbers of those persons or organizations who will be assuming such
responsibilities.
(3) At the city's discretion, the applicant may be required to escrow sufficient funds for
the maintenance and/or replacement of the proposed vegetation during an eighteenmonth
replacement period. In addition, an escrow may be required for the removal
and replacement of specimen trees damaged during construction.
§ 213-42. Streetlights.
A. For the safety, convenience and attractiveness of the development, on-site or public
streetlights shall be installed, unless conditions require otherwise.
B. Where electric service is supplied by underground methods and prior to the installation of
streets, curbs, sidewalks and driveways, the subdivider shall provide and install conduits
where necessary to accommodate the installation of a streetlight system. Installation and
locating of conduits will comply with the specifications of the appropriate public utility.
§ 213-43. Recommended trees and shrubs for buffer yards.
Recommended trees and shrubs for buffer yards shall be as follows:
21337
§213-43 HAZLETON CODE § 213-43
Recommended Trees and Shrubs for Buffer Yards
Street Trees
Height at
Maturity
(feet) Latin Name Common Name
35 Acer buergeranum Trident maple
40 Acer rubrum Red maple (N)
50 Acer saccharum Sugar maple
45 Acer campestre Hedge maple
50 Carpinus betulus European hornbeam
60 Cercidiphy llum japonicum Katsura tree
50 Ginko bilboa Maidenhair tree
30 Koelreuteria paniculata Panicled goldenrain
40 Ostrya virginiana Hop hornbeam (N)
50 Prunus sargentii Sargent cherry
30 Pyrus calleryana cv Bradford Bradford pear
50 Quercus imbricaria Shingle oak
70 Quercus macrocarpa Bur oak (N)
60 Quercus palustris Pin oak
60 Quercus rubra Red oak (N)
60 Quercus shumardii Shumark oak (N)
50 Quercus prinus Chestnut oak (N)
50 Taxodium distichum Bald cypress (N)
50 Tilia tomentosa Silver linden
60 Tilia cordata Littleleaf linden
50 Zelkova serrata Japanese zelkova
60 Liquidambar styraciftua Sweet gum (N)
Shade Trees
Height at
Maturity
(feet) Latin Name Common Name
40 Acer rubrum Red maple (N)
30 Amelanchier canadensis Shadbush, serviceberry
juneberry (N)
55 Betula lenta Cherry birch (N)
40 Betula nigra River birch (N)
35 Carpinus-caroliniana Ironwood, American
hornbeam (N)
30 Chionanthus virginicus Fringetree (N)
50 Cladrastis lutea American yellow-wood (N)
25 Comus kousa Japanese dogwood (N)
25 Comus mas Carnelian cherry
35 Comus flordia Flowering dogwood (N)
30 Koelreuteria paniculata Panicled goldenrain
21338
§ 213-43 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-43
Height at
Maturity
(feet) Latin Name Common Name
70 Larix decidua European larch
30 Malus floribunda Japanese flowering crab
30 Oxydendrum arboreum Sourwood (N)
20 Prunus serrulata cv Kwanzan Kwanzan (cherry)
30 Pyrus calleryana cv Bradford Bradford pear
30 Pyrus calleryana cv Aristocrat Aristocrat
30 Pyrus calleryana cv Autumn Blaze Autumn blaze
30 Pyrus callery ana cv Capital Capital
30 Pyrus calleryana cv Chanticlear Chanticlear
30 Pyrus calleryana cv Fauriei Fauriei
30 Pyrus calleryana cv Redspire Redspire
30 Pyrus calleryana cv Trinity Trinity
30 Pyrus calleryana cv Whitehouse Whitehouse
45 Quercus acutissima Sawtooth oak
80 Quercus borealis (rubra) Northern Red oak
80 Quercus coccinea Scarlet oak (N)
80 Quercus imbricaria Shingle oak (N)
80 Quercus macrocarpa Bur oak (N)
80 Quercus montana Chestnut oak (N)
80 Quercus velutina Black oak (N)
70 Taxodium distichum Bald cypress (N)
60 Tilia cordata Littleleaf European
linden
90 T. tomentosa Silver linden
40 Ulmus parvifolia Chinese elm
80 Zelkova serrata Japanese zelkova
Ornamental Trees
Height at
Maturity
(feet) Latin Name Common Name
30 Amelanchier canadensis Shadbus, serviceberry,
juneberry (N)
80 Betula nigra River birch (N)
35 Carpinus caroliniana Ironwood, American
hornbeam (N)
30 Chionanthus virginicus Fringetree (N)
50 Cladrastis lutea American yellow-wood (N)
25 Comus kousa Japanese dogwood (N)
25 Comus mas Carnelian cherry
35 Comus floridia Flowering dogwood (N)
30 Koelreuteria paniculata Panicled goldenrain
30 Malus floribunda Japanese flowering crab
21339
§ 213-43 HAZLETON CODE § 213-43
Height at
Maturity
(feet) Latin Name Common Name
30 Oxydendrum arboreum Sourwood(N)
20 Prunus serrulata cv Kwanzan Kwanzan (cherry)
30 Pyrua calleryana cv Bradford Bradford pear
30 Pyrus calleryana cv Aristocreat Aristocrat
30 Pyrus calleryana cv Autumn Blaze Autumn blaze
30 Pyrus calleryana cv Capital Capital
30 Pyrus calleryana cv Chanticlear Chanticlear
30 Pyrus calleryana cv Fauriei Fauriei
30 Pyrus calleryana cv Redspire Redspire
30 Pyrus calleryana cv Trinity Trinity
30 Pyrus calleryana cv Whitehouse Whitehouse
50 Abies concolor White fir (N)
45 Ilex opaca American holly (N)
40 Juniperus virginiana Red cedar (N)
70 Pinus strobus White pine (N)
40 Pinus strobus cv Fastigiata Pyramidal white pine
60 Pinus thunbergi Japanese black pine
70 Pseudotsuga menziesii Douglas fir
50 Thuja occidentalis American arborvitae
60 Tsuga canadensis Hemlock
50 Picea omorika Serbian spruce
50 Picea orientalis Oriental spruce
Native Shrubs
Height at
Maturity
(feet) Latin Name Common Name
8 to 12 Aesculus parviflora Bottlebrush buckeye
9 Aronia arbutifolia Red chokeberry
8 Aronia melanocarpa Black chokeberry
5 Callicaroa americana Beauty berry
12 Calycanthus ftoridus Sweetshrub
10 Cephalanthus occidentalis Button bush
18 Clethra acurninata Summersweet
18 Clethra alnifolia Summersweet
9 Comus amomum Silk dogwood
10 Comus sericea Red osier dogwood
9 Fothergilla major Fothergill a
15 Hamamelis virginiana Witch hazel
8 Hydrangea quercifolia Oak-leaved hydrangea
3-9 Itea virginica Sweetspire
9 Ilex glabra Ink berry
10 I. verticillata Winterberry
21340
§ 213-43 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
Height at
Maturity
(feet) Latin Name Common Name
6 Kalmia latifolia named varieties Mountain laurel
5 Leucothoe fontanesiana Leucothoe
8 Lindera benzoin Spice bush
20 Magnolia virginiana Sweet bay
9 Myrica pennsylvanica Bayberry
6 Pieris ftoribunda Mountain andromeda
9 Rhododendron arborescens Sweet azalea
2 Rhododendron atlanticum Coast azalea
6 Rhododendron bakeri Cumberland azalea
10 Rhododendron calendulaceum Flame azalea
10 Rhododendron canadense Catawba rhododendron
6 Rhododendron carolinianum Carolina rhododendron
12 Rhododendron fortunei Fortune rhododendron
6-10 Rhododendron x gandavense Ghent azalea
3 Rhododendron obtusum Hiryu azalea
3 Rhododendron obtusum kaempferi Torch azalea
3 Rhododendron schlippenbachii Royal azalea
12-20 Rhododendron maximum Rosebay
6 Rhododendron nudiftorum Pinxterbloom azalea
6 Rhododendron vaseyi Pinkshell azalea
6 Rhododendron viscosum Swamp azalea
8 Rhus aromatica Fragant sumac
20 R. copallina Shining sumac
15 Rhus glabra Smooth sumac
20 Rhus typhina Staghom sumac
12 Sambucus canadensis Elderberry
6 Symphoricarpos albus leavigatus Snowberry
5 Symphoricarpos orbiculatus Coralberry
6-10 Vaccinium corymbosum Blueberry
5 Viburnum acerifolium Mapleleaf viburnum
6 Viburnum cassinoides Withered
10 Viburnum dentatum Arrowwood
15 Viburnum nudum Smooth withered
15 Viburnum prunifolium Black haw
10 Viburnum trilobum American cranberry
Non-Native Shrubs
Height at
Maturity
(feet) Latin Name
5 Abelia grandiftora
3 Cotoneaster apiculata
3 Cotoneaster conspicua
21341
Common Name
Glossy abelia
Cranberry cotoneaster
Wintergreen cotoneaster
§ 213-43
§213-43 HAZLETON CODE § 213-44
Height at
Maturity
(feet) Latin Name Common Name
6 Cotoneaster divaricata Spreading cotoneaster
30 Enkianthus campanulatus Redvien enkianthus
3 C. horizontalis Rock spray cotoneaster
9 Euonymus alatus Burningbush or winged
euonymous
Forsythia
10 cv Beatrix Farrand Forsythia
10 Lynwood
10 Spring glory
15 Hamamelis x intermedia Arnold's promise
cv Arnold Promise witch hazel
15 Hibiscus syriacus Rose of Sharon or
althea
3 Hydrangea arborescens
cv grandiflora Hills-of-snow
1.5 Sypericum patulum cv Hidcote Hidcote St. J ohnswort
20 Ilex crenata Japanese holly
4 Ilex crenata cv Helleri Helleri holly
10 Ilex x Meservea Blue holly series
Juniperus horizontalis Creeping juniper
2 cv Bar Harbor Bar harbor
2 Emerson Black Hill creeper
2 Wiltonii Blue tug
15 Philadelphus spp. Mock orange
8 Pieris japonica Japanese andromeda
8 Pinus mugo mugo Mugo pine
15 Prunus laurocerasus Cherry laurel
6 Spirea x vanhouttei Vanhoutte spirea
60 Taxus buccata English yew
50 Taxus cuspidata Japanese yew
8 Viburnum carlesii Spice viburnum
9 Viburnum dilatatum Linden viburnum
8 Viburnum plicatum cv Mariesii Doublefile virbumum
§ 213-44. Water supply.
A. The plan for the installation of a water supply system must be prepared for the
development with cooperation of the Hazleton City Authority and approved by the City
Engineer. Upon completion of the water supply system, a reproducible as-built plan of the
system must be filed with the city.
21342
§ 213-44 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-46
B. Where the connection to a public water supply system is not possible or feasible, each lot
must be provided with an individual water supply system prior to the issuance of a building
permit.
C. All such individual systems shall meet all applicable regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources.
§ 213-45. Sewage disposaJ.12
A. Where a public sanitary sewer system is accessible to or plans approved by the city provide
for the installation of such public sanitary sewer facilities within six (6) years, the
developer shall provide the development with a complete sanitary sewer system ready to
be connected into the existing or proposed sanitary sewer system.
B. The plan for the installation of a sanitary sewer system must be prepared for the
development and approved by the City Engineer and the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources. Sewer line construction for dedication and city operation must
be to city standards and reviewed by the City Engineer. A full-time inspection is required
during all construction work. Review and inspection costs are the developer's
responsibility. Storm sewers, roof drains, footer drains or sump pumps may not be
connected to the sanitary sewer. The system must be constructed, inspected and offered for
dedication to the city. Prior to the city assuming operation of the system, the city must
accept ownership by resolution.
C. Where installation of a public sanitary sewer system is not required, the developer or
owner of the lot shall provide for each lot, at the time improvements are erected thereon, a
private sewage disposal system consisting of a septic tank, tile absorption field or other
sewage disposal system approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources and the City Engineer.
D. If on-site subsurface or alternate sewage disposal systems are feasible, they must be laid
out in accordance with the minimum standards of the Sewage Facilities Act (Act 537)13
and of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources. The city and/or the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources must inspect and approve each onsite
sewage disposal system.
§ 213-46. Storm sewers.
An adequate storm sewer system, cons1stmg of inlets and other underground drainage
structures and approved outlets, shall be constructed where the runoff of stormwater and the
prevention of erosion cannot be accomplished satisfactorily by surface drainage facilities. The
system shall be designed by a registered professional engineer and be approved by the City
Engineer.
12 Editor's Note: See also Ch. 193, Sewers.
13 Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
21343
§ 213-47 HAZLETON CODE § 213-49
§ 213-47. Fire hydrants.
A. Fire hydrants shall be installed if their water supply source is capable to serve them in
accordance with the requirements of the local fire authority.
B. Fire hydrants, if provided, shall be located within six hundred (600) feet of any dwelling
unit or structure open to the public as measured along the center line of abutting streets.
Fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with all applicable regulations.14
§ 213-48. Other matters related to required improvements and construction.
A. Placement of underground utilities and improvements. No underground sewer, water, gas,
electric or other utilities and improvements shall be located anywhere except within public
right-of-way lines as projected unless, in the opinion of the Commission, such location is
impractical or unreasonable. It is understood that this provision applies only to lines
serving more than one (1) property and does not apply to individual lot connections, i.e.,
on-site lateral service lines. In those cases where the Commission does approve such
placement in private lands, easements for same shall be provided, and no buildings or other
structures shall be permitted within the lines of such easements. (See also§ 213-29 herein.)
B. Grading, excavation and filling. Where major cuts, excavation, grading and filling
materially changes the site and its relationship with surrounding areas or materially affects
such areas, they shall not be permitted if they result in a slope exceeding a vertical rise of
one (1) foot for each two (2) feet of horizontal distance between abutting lots or between
adjoining tracts of land, except where adequate provision is made to prevent slides and
erosion by cribbing and retaining walls.
C. Mine and mine fire hazards.15 Land subject to mine subsidence or mine fires shall not be
platted for use unless such adverse conditions are fi~st remedied by the subdivider to the
satisfaction of the Commission and other appropriate state, county and local agencies. (See
also § 213-8B for other restrictions regarding geological hazards, etc.)
§ 213-49. Completion of improvements or guaranty thereof prerequisite to final plan
approval.
No plan shall be finally approved unless the streets shown on such plan have been improved as
may be required by this chapter, and any walkways, curbs, gutters, streetlights, fire hydrants,
shade trees, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains and other improvements as may be
required by this chapter have been installed in accordance with such chapter. In lieu of the
completion of any improvements required as a condition for the final approval of a plan, the
developer may deposit with the city a corporate bond, or other security acceptable to the
Commission, in an amount sufficient to cover the costs of any improvements which may be
required by this chapter. In the case where development is projected over a period of years, the
Commission may authorize submission of final plans by section or stages of development
subject to such requirements or guaranties as to improvements in future sections or stages of
14 Editor's Note: See also Ch. 125, Fire Hydrants.
15 Editor's Note: See also Cb. 166, Mining.
21344
§ 213-49 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-51
development as it finds essential for the protection of any finally approved section of the
development.
§ 213-50. Release from improvement bond.
A. When the developer has completed all of the necessary and appropriate improvements, the
developer shall notify the Commission, in writing by certified or registered mall, of the
completion of the aforesaid improvements as well as certification from all utility
companies that said utilities have been installed as shown on the as-built plans. The
Commission shall, within ten (10) days after receipt of such notice, direct and authorize the
City Engineer to inspect all of the aforesaid improvements. The City Engineer shall,
thereupon, file a report, in writing, with the Commission, said report shall be detailed and
shall indicate approval or rejection of said improvements, either in whole or in part, and if
said improvements or any portion thereof shall not be approved or shall be rejected by the
City Engineer, said report shall contain a statement of reasons for such nonapproval or
rejection.
B. The Commission shall notify the developer, in writing, of its action.
C. If any portion of the said improvements shall not be approved or shall be rejected by the
Commission, the developer shall proceed to complete the same and, upon completion, the
same procedure of notification, as outlined herein, shall be followed.
D. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation ofthe developer's right to contest
or question by legal proceedings or otherwise any determination of the Commission or the
City Engineer.
E. Where herein reference is made to the Ci~ Engineer, he shall be a duly registered
professional engineer employed by the city or engaged as a consultant thereto.
F. To cover inspection costs, the developer must pay a fee, to be established by the
Commission. Any unused portion of this fee will be refunded to the developer upon
completion of the inspections.
§ 213-51. Remedies to effect completion of improvements.
In the event that any improvements which may be required have not been installed as provided
in this chapter or in accord with the approved final plan, the Commission may enforce any
corporate bond or other security by appropriate legal and equitable remedies. If proceeds of
such bond or other security are insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making repair or
corrections to all the improvements covered by said security, the Commission may, at its
option, install part of such improvements in all or part of the subdivision or land development
and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action to recover the moneys necessary to
complete the remainder of the improvements. All of the proceeds, whether resulting from the
security or from any legal or equitable action brought against the developer, or both, shall be
used solely for the insulation of the improvements covered by such security and not for any
other city purpose.
21345
§ 213-52 HAZLETON CODE § 213-58
§ 213-52. Offers of dedication.
The offer to dedicate streets, parks or other areas or portions of them does not impose any duty
upon the city concerning maintenance or improvement until the proper authorities of the city
have made actual appropriation by ordinance or resolution.
§ 213-53. Approval required.
ARTICLE VI
Mobile Home Parks
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or extend any mobile home park within
the limits of the city until plans have been approved by the city and permits have been issued as
provided in this chapter.
§ 213-54. Application for mobile home park approval.
Application for mobile home park approval shall conform to the requirements and procedures
as established in Articles III and IV of this chapter.
§ 213-55. Site location and dimensions.
The location, minimum park area, lot sizes and maximum density within all mobile home parks
shall be in accordance with Chapter 245, Zoning, and the location of the mobile home park
must also conform to the City of Hazleton Comprehensive Plan with respect to streets, public
sites and proposed utilities.
§ 213-56. Improvements in mobile home parks.
Improvements, such as sewer, water, electrical, fire protection and other utility systems, storm
drainage systems, off-street parking areas, walks, recreation areas and service buildings shall
conform to the requirements approved by the Commission on the final plan.
§ 213-57. Street system.
All streets within mobile home parks shall conform to the standards of this chapter.
§ 213-58. Easements.
A. Use easements shall be provided for all utilities not located in a street and for well-defined
watercourses.
B. Width utility easements shall have a minimum width of fifteen (15) feet. Easements for
natural watercourses shall be of sufficient width to permit maintenance and provide for
future flow.
21346
§ 213-58 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-61
C. Location easements shall be centered on or adjacent to side and rear lot lines whenever
possible.
ARTICLE VII
Administration, Enforcement and Penalties
§ 213-59. Administration.
The Planning Commission of the City of Hazleton shall be charged with the responsibility for
the administration of this chapter.
§ 213-60. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Planning Commission or other such duly authorized representative of
the Commission and said Planning Commission is hereby given the power and authority to
enforce the provisions of this chapter. The enforcement officer shall require that the application
for a building permit contain all information necessary to enable him to ascertain whether the
proposed building, alteration or use is located in an approved land development. No building
permit shall be issued until the enforcement officer has certified that the site for the proposed
building, alteration or use complies with all the provisions of this chapter and conforms to the
site description as indicated on the approved and recorded final plan.
§ 213-61. Violations and penalties.
A. No lot in a land development shall be sold, rented, leased or conveyed in any manner, no
permit to erect, alter or repair any building upon land in a land development shall be issued
and no building shall be created in a land development until a final plan of such land
development has been approved and property recorded and until improvements have either
been constructed or guaranteed.
B. Any person, copartnership or corporation who shall develop any lot, tract or parcel of land
or Jay out, construct, open or dedicate any street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer or water
mains for public use or travel or for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting
thereon or who shall sell, rent, lease or convey in any manner any Jot or erect any building
in a land development without first having complied with the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
C. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the City of Hazleton, pay a judgment of not more that five hundred dollars
($500.) plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees, incurred by the city as a
result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date
of the determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays or
timely appeals the judgment, the city may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable
rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation, unless the District Justice, determining that there has been a violation, further
determines that there was a good-faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation
21347
--- -----~
§ 213-61 HAZLETON CODE § 213-62
violating the chapter to have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there
shall be deemed to have been only one (1) such violation until the fifth day following the
date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice, and thereafter each day that
a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
D. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order to stay, upon cause shown,
tolling the per diem judgment pending a final adjudication of the violation and judgment.
E. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to grant to any person or
entity other than the city to the right to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to
this section.
§ 213-62. Fees.
At the time of filing of the plan, whether preliminary or final, the developer shall pay to the city
the required plan fee as follows:
A. Preliminary plan. A filing fee, plus a fee per lot or dwelling unit for residential
development and a fee per acre for other types of development.
B. Final plan.
( 1) A filing fee, plus an amount determined by the Commission sufficient to cover the
reasonable cost of:
(a) Reviewing the development plan engineering details.
(b) Inspecting the site for conformance of survey.
(c) Preparing cost estimates of required improv~ments.
(d) Inspection of required improvements during installation.
(e) Final inspection on completion of installation of required improvements.
(f) Administrative and legal services necessary for the processing of the proposed
land development plan.
(2) Any engineering, legal and administrative costs in excess of the amount submitted
prior to approval of the final plan shall be paid by the developer upon being notified
of same by the City Solicitor. Any excess paid over the amount actually required to
cover such costs of the final plan shall be returned to the developer upon the
completion of the required improvement.
C. All fees shall be payable at the time of filing in the form of a check or money order payable
to City of Hazleton.
D. No final plan shall be approved until all fees and charges are paid in full.
E. All fees shall be set by resolution from time to time.16
16 Editor's Note: The current resolution is on file in the office of the City Clerk.
21348
---~~---~------
§ 213-63 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 213-66
§ 213-63. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements to meet the purposes
of this chapter. When provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions than those of any
statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. When
provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions than those of
this chapter, the provisions of such statute, ordinance or regulation shall prevail.
§ 213-64. AmendmentsP
The Planning Commission may, on its own motion, recommend to City Council a supplement
or repeal of any portion of this chapter. Amendments to this chapter shall become effective
only after a public hearing held pursuant to public notice. In addition, in case of an amendment
other than that prepared by the City Planning Commission, the amendment shall be submitted
to the Planning Commission for recommendations at least thirty (30) days prior to the date
fixed for the public hearing on such proposed amendment.
§ 213-65. Modifications.
A. The regulations embodied in this chapter are the minimum standards for the protection of
the public welfare. When special circumstances warrant, the city may impose stricter
standards.
B. Where a provision of this chapter would cause unique and undue hardship as it applies to a
particular property, the Commission may grant a modification from the strict application of
the terms of this chapter if the variation will not be detrimental to the general welfare,
nullify the objectives of these regulations or conflict with the Comprehensive Plan. In
granting the modification, the Commission may impose conditions which will substantially
secure compliance with the purposes of this chapter.
C. The City Planning Commission shall have the right to make modifications to the
regulations, in individual cases, as may be necessary in the public interest; provided,
however, that such modifications shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and
purpose of these regulations. The list of suggested modifications and the specific reasons
for such change shall be entered in the minutes of the Planning Commission. The
Commissioners may then alter the land development plans and specify changes or
modifications.
§ 213-66. Conflict with other regulations.
Wherever there exists a difference between the minimum standards and/or dimensions specified
herein and those contained in Chapter 245, Zoning, or other official regulation, the highest
standard shall apply.
17 Editor's Note: See also the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. §§ 10504 and 10505.
21349
Application for Approval of PRELIMINARY PLAN
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
City of Hazleton
Revised April, 1992
. •. . :): . Submitl2 copi~;-~ge,~~P.WJ~h i,~,oopiea bt};liJ:~~. ~: , ·'
Secre~l)', HaZleton Planning Ci>mm4iflion; City~ll, HazletoJli Pennsylvania 18201
Tract Name -----------------and Area------ Acres
Street Address of Tract --------------------------------
Name of Owner (s)
Address -------------------------------------------
Name of Subdivider (Equitable Owner)---------------------------
Address ---------------------------------------------
Number of Lots----~ Number of Residential Lots ____ Number of Commercial Lots ___ _
Number of Commercial Units Proposed (and use)
TYPes of Dwelling Units Proposed
Recreation Dedication, Area--------------------------------
Purpose of Subdivision
Other Required and Related Data
0 Preliminary plan, consisting of ___ sheets (minimum 12 copies).
0 General plan, sheet ___ of ___ sheets.
0 Cross sections, sheet ---~of ____ sheets.
0 Profiles, sheet----~ of ____ sheets (and tYPical sections).
0 Grading plan, sheet _____ of _____ sheets.
0 Copy of existing or proposed deed restrictions.
0 Receipt for fee paid to Director of Administration, City of Hazleton.
0 Check payable to Luzerne County Planning Commission.
0 Check payable to Luzerne County Road and Bridge Department.
0 Wetlands Study.
0 Erosion Control Study.
0 Copy of submission letter for DER Planning Module.
Authorized Signature of Applicant Date Submitted
Date Received by Planning Commission
§ 213-67 HAZLETON CODE § 213-69
§ 213-67. Appeals.
The procedures for securing review of any ordinance, decision or detennination is set forth in
Article X of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 170 of December 21, 1988,
P.L. 170, as amended.l8
§ 213-68. Authority to amend.
This chapter may be amended, revised and/or modified from time to time as prescribed by local
and state laws.
§ 213-69. Commission records.
The Conunission shall keep a complete record of its findings, decisions and recommendations
relative to all subdivision plans filed with the Conunission for its review.
18 Editor's Note: For current provisions,see 53 P.S. § 10908.1 et seq.
21350