ORDINANCE NUMBER j_



4n ordd.nanoe providing for the levy, assessment a.nd collection of a tax on the transfer of titles of real estate situate 1n  Haycock Township, Bucke County, Pa..
WHEREAS, it 1a necessary, in the juclgement of the Board of Supervisors of  the Township of Haycook, County of Bucks and State of Pennsylvania, to impose a ta.x on the	rana!er of titles of real estate for '!;he purpose of providing additional revenue for general township purposes ocoaaioned
.by the increase in  costs; and,

Whereas, it is estimated that the revenue derived from this tax will a.mount to Four Thousand ($4,ooo.oo) dolla.ra a.nnually,
IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Haycock in pursuance of authority granted by Act of June 25, 1947, P.L. 1145, a.a a.mended:
Section l.	That a tax of 1% of the consideration or

sales price involving the transfer of titles of rea.1 estate situate in Haycook Township, Bucks County, Pa., and which transfer shall be evidenced by a. deed or other instrument conveying title, which shall be recorded in the Recorder of Deeds Office of Bucks County, and indexed in the Granters' Index therein, is hereby levied for general· township purposes.
Section 2.	The tax shall be pa.id by  the granter prior to

the delivery of the deed to the grantee and prior to the recording of the deea.
 
Section 7.	(continued) of the real estate  in the same manner a.a other unpaid taxes on real estate a.re returned to the County  Treasurer  for collection.
Section 5.	Taxes levied under this ordinance shall become effective thirty (30) days after the adoption of this Ordi- nance, or on all transfers dated on or after May 26, 1952.


The intention of the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, Bucks County, State of Pennsylvania. to approve
and adopt this Ordina.nce having been advertised in the Bucks County Law Reporter and the Quakertown Free Press as required by law, the same was approved and adopted by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township at the Regular Meeting held
in Block's Restaurant, RD#3 Quakerto\'111, Pa., April 26, 1952.

 
 
 



B8 it ord ined by the Boar of Superviaor cf the	OITTlahip
o Haycock that it	is the consiiered opinion of this body that the
extension  of the Social Secu1•1ty Srstem to emp.l.uyees and officers of the 'l'mmahip of Ha.ycock  Nill be of great benefit, r.ot only to the emnloyees of the Township by provid ng  that said empolyees !l.n officers ma.y   pi;.r+,icipa te in the previsions of the Old Age and   Survl vors
lnsuiance By•tem, tut will a.lso be of great benefit to the To1mship
cf  Hayccck by enlil.bling it to ;;.t'!:ract and reta.in in 6mployment the
bes+, of personnel a.nd thus increase the efficiency of its government.

'!'he 1951 Session of the Gener!!.l Assembly at' the Comn:cnwe3.lth
of	ennsylv nia., in regular session, e actad a statute, known as Act No. 491, which is the enabling ,Act provided for in Section 218  of Pnhlic La 734,  Slat Congress, which designated the Secretary of I bor a.nd lnduetry of  the Co!llmonwealth o! t'ennsylvania to a.ct .s.e  the "State
A ency" to implement the cover ge cf employees	nd  officers under the ea id Uld A.ge and 8urvivo rs Insu:ria.n ce System. The Tomship of Haycock
is hereby authorized to execute and.  deliver to the State	gency a.	l n,
or plans, anc agreement, required under Section 6   c! eai ena.bl1r.g
Ac'!; and the Social Security  Act,	to	xtend. coverage to e·mployees and
officers of the Townt1hip of H:.ycock and  :lo a.ll  other necessary thinge to effectuate coverage of employees and officers under the Old Oge and Survivors lnsurance Syatem.

TDe Treasurer is he eby authorize to establish a  system cf
payroll deduction to be matched by payments by the Township of Haycock
to be made into the Contribution FUr-d cf the Social Security Act through the officA of the State	gency, and   to make charges of this t x to the Fund, or Funds, frore which \'16.ge or aalary payments are
issued to emi::loyees of the To-.mship of Haycock.	Such payments  are  to he  ma.de in a.ocorda.nce 111th the  provisions of the La·ll'  and Regula.tions promulgated by the State Agency s.ntl thlt Federal Security Administ:ra.tcr, f'.uch p:.:1.yl!'ents which a.re  delinquent shall bea.r interest a.t  the ra.te of 1/2 of 1 percent per month until  such  time as payments	re  made,

AFpropr1 t1on is  hereby ma.de from the proper fund, or funds,
cf the To•\'!'lahip of Haycr:icr. in the necelllsary amount to pay into the contribution fund as  provided in Section 4  of the ene.bling Act  nd in  ccordance With the plan, or plans, ana  agreement.  Th  TOl'ln&hi
of Haycock by  its Board  of Supervisors sl!a.11 execute and   deliver to the State	gen ; a  plan and a.greement,  which agreement shall be in accordance -.1ith Act	Jc,491 &nd ·.vith para.graph 211S of the Social
Security l.ct.	8uch pl i: al'd. a.greemen t sha.11 provide the.t the par- ticipation cf this Township of Haycock shall commence as of
January g 1952.

The above Ordina.nce · a.a duly a..:iopted by the Supervisors of Haycock at regular meeting of the	oard on	ovember  24 1952.



;•.	·
Seartttary
 
·:.I





e,	wn.i:m 11  n
A.	1be. and JurR:w.t  .\lo:rror
Orrdi·na '' to 1 N1miher Tl1 the ToW1D.F.JJ1iip rec-ords wins lm.f! ly  pa......t.
1'hl\9 o·rd.m.an<!e 11!.q J>Ubti.<itlf"f} beir  1-l,  1006,  in  the  QunJkf'lrOot Pm CI, wi l bec>&me efreotlve J:L. i957.·
A!l'TlilS'l':  WI LUI.AM B.
J-IAYCOCK	TOWNSJ-11 .  z
 
ORDINANCE	No.	3
 

. '•'·  '<.	• ,,,,yf;·
 



 

The ton.owing  ordd.nance  will  be  act­ ed "QJPon by the Board of Supervisors -0t Bllliyoodk TO'W'll.Ship &it its regulnr meet Ing <<> be lle!AI at .A.'J>Plo_,llo Mon­ ctay,  Deeemlber  31,  WfJ61      at 7   p. m.
ORllNNA.NCE   NO-   S
An     ordlnanee	ot    tlle   Townsh"1 S1rporvh;on1 at llayc1J1 k  Town.sb.lp, Bucks   CO"nnty,  l,P.nnsylvanla.,   p.ro­ hibJtlng   tlhe  storage  of   a.bond'on.ed Junked   m·otor  vehlcl  on  puibJlc iprivato	· rty l"'rit!hln	·the
·i.'own.sh:ip and prescribing venaltJes
tor  ID>.e   viollfltion  or the  provisions
thereot.
BFl IT lD <JrFID  .&N'D  OlUlAINED BY THJE BO.MllI> Oli' TOW'NSHiP SU­ P!DllVJSORS OF H.AYCOCK TOWN­ Slll·P BIJIOKS ClOUN"rY, l'IQNNSYI·­ VANIA.
Ami it rs 'hereby enacted a·nd  ord&inod by bhe autllority of tnie aame .uiat bbe Dtor<Jige ot aban.d.oncd or ju.nked motor vehllcles on pu:bN.c or prtvatc property wttJhln tho ToW'niSb'ip  B  hereby  dc­ ele.r..ed a n:n.fsaDA.-e and pt"Oillbtted ae ls hereinafter   'l>l'Ovided.
Section 1- Short 'Dlt!e. This ord!nall<!i! sba:l'l be knO'W'D amd mny be cited as "To-wnshilp  ot  Ha.ycoek  Alhnn'tl.oned   and
.J	unked  Motor  Voh'tele  Ord1ne.nce."
Section 2. Detlnftlons. The to-l wdng words and ph.msee, when used ln ttits ordlnanee. 'StntH have ahe mea.nings nscrihed  t.o  them  Lu  this  set.-tion,  except
in   those  hlsta.nt.-es   W'her.e   bhe  co mtexit
oiee.rly  tn1llcatcs  a  d·tirorent  meaning.

(a.) "Person"-JOvery natural pcrsOll, aesolliatdon   o.r  eonporation.   Whenever r       in any  elatt60 prascrS-binig  or  Im
1      g a  line, or  penalty  of  hnpr>ison-
mont In detaul.t :tlhereot, Ube term as applied to associations ebal'l mean any memJbor   thereof,     a.nd  ea   applted   to
 

co-lt}>oratlone s:haM  mean  tme  President or  Secretary   fJheroot.
(ih) "Jun·ked Mot.or  Vehlcle"-.Any motor vahiir.le ontisidc of  a  fnllly  en­ closed  hu·ild.ing,  not   in   wo.rklng  order,
\vbthont   Cll!rrent   registrntrlon   pliates, and stored as junk meta.I or for  tbc punpo8e  ot .se-11lng  parts  theretrom.
(c) u.Aibandoned Motor Vehk le"-.Any 1n-0to-r vohidle OU;t.s!.de of a f1rl!ly en­ closed building, without cunrent. re s­ t.nation piliates, the last owner or wb.tc-.h b-36 by hls neglect  lndl<.-arted  an  Inten­ tion   to  .relllnqudsh  his  riglbrts   o-f     owner-
6'lllp  I/herein.
Section 3.  It  shall  bo  unJawful  for any person .to .st.ore any &bnndoned o.r jun-ked motor ve-hicle on  prlvate or  pub­ lie pro·perty w:I•thin tlbe geographh.'ill honndarles of ·ttbe TownSb.i1>  of  Huy- 1.:c>Ck,   Bucks  County,  Pennsylvania,   tor a period e'oc:eeding thirty days. The i;to-ra.ge <>t an-y Illlotor vehlc le as here­ inbe1'orc prohliblted in this set1J:on tor niore tlhtln t:.he perlod  or  Ohtrty  days shall coJWt1tnte a separate and  dieth1<...>t unln.wf'ud  act  torr  eaoll   sueeeedtng   per iod  of   thirty  days.
R t.1.on 4. .Any poraon mpon summary eonv1<.•tlron  b(l;{torc  a Ju Dke o-f  the Peace!
c).f    violating    a.ny    oit   bhe   provle-lon.s   ot
Sec.."t:iou  3  of   tbJs  orddn:anc•e  shr.11.11  for
tihe first offense be sente-n.c d  to  pay  11 Jine  of  not  lee:t  thRn   Ten   Dol'lnrs ($10.00)   nor  mo-".'(    t'hun   I1'1tty  Dol:Jare
($50.00). nn..d tor each find every sub­ sequent otrense shall  be  sentew:.•ed  to ipay a tlne o( not 1ess bhon Twent.y-five Do.118ri. ($26.00) nor more rtbtin Three nun.rt.red Dollan1 ($300.001 :ind In  de­ fnult tb.rnof fOII" tl firat or subsequent o.fternse shall undergo impMsonroP.nt tor not tese ttbn.n five  (5)  days  nor  more tha·n   thirty   (:lO)    days,
Sectio0n 5. AU prose<.-ut1:ons 9h-Rll he brought   in   the name   of  ••unyeo<"k  To,vn-
 
hi:p" becfore nnY J1?St e ot bhe Peat'f! and  shall  bo  eommen< <l  by  informa­ tion  and    rrant and  Bha'll   be   directed
l-1	and be served by a  eonsta:ble.  War­ rants shelB be  return.able  torth\vfth  und upon  lfllob.   retnrn   Hke   proceedings ahe.l:t be had, a.a In -case ot suro.rnary e.on-vd.ction.

Section 6. TbP. ·provisfon-s ot this or­ dd.narl<.>e arc seve Lbolc reu1-aining sec­ tions, elauses, sentenct."8, pnrts, or pr-0- vi:r:i.ions t:bereof g}}all be held lll ral, in­ vaN<l  or  u.ncO'll&tltutional,  tbe  dt)Cision at tlbe Com-t f.llh..aJ.I  not  atrP.Ct  or  lnlo{lalr any of the renut.·infng sections, clrau.ses, sentcinL"P.9, parts, or p-rovis1ons ot this ord.4ne.n"e. It ls hereiby dCC'Mred to  be bhe intent ot 11hc Boul"ci ot Township Su.pervisol'S  ot  the  Townshi'lJ  of   Bay­ COf"..k   tihat  tbis   o:rd.fn11nce  would   have
been Oidopted  it Strch 111C4,'111,' fnvnlid of­ llIL>ConstiJtU'tfonnl	se<>tlon, C'lnuse, sen­ tence,   part  or  provislion   t:!Uereof   sb°'ll  be
=beld llllegal, luvalld or nn-con..abitutional. t!le decision r>t bltc CO'tirt sllnll not ut­ ff'<.'lt or tcmpnir any ot U1e remn·lntng sect..ion.s, d1e.u6es, senrtcn<. pu s, or p-rovieions  or tbis ordhmnce.  It  L-;  ber by   deelnred    to    be  the  intent   of    the
Hoard ot To\YD.Shdip Su1lervtsors ot the T-OWll.Slldsp of Hay.cock t"Qlat tlh1s ordin­ ance wout.a. have been udOIJ}tcd If such lllegnl, lnvnl!d or uneon&ttrtut.1-0nad. sec­ tion. cll8use,  sentence.  part.  oir  provi­ i=;ion   had    not   bt•on   luc-luded   therein.

Sect.ion 7. T!hha ord1unnce  shaJl  be­ C'ome ell'ect1ve on tho SC'vcut.b d11y ot J·anuury,  A. D.• 19UT,

Aittest:

WILLIAM    B.   A.Sil
S<!eretacy Franklin  J. Huichenbaeh,  clralrm11n
 
l-IAYCOCK	TOWNSl-llP	l

ORDINANCE	No.	4




 
An   ordinance  provldJr.g  for  t.llt   levy   anci collection   o!   a   tax,   [or   general   revenue . purposes,   on	the   USP.	or   occupancy   ot house    trailers		suitable	for     Uving    quar­ ters   \viUtin	the     Township    or   1-iaycock, Buck3    County,     Pennsylvania.
BE IT OR.DAil\"ED  by  the  Supervisors of   tho   Townahip   of    Hnycock,    purt1uan! to the Act of June '25,  1947,  P.  L.  1145, its amendments and supplements, as !ol­ lo\vs:
SECTION  l.   A   monthly   tax   of   S2.00 ls hereby imposed, fur &cneral revenue purPC>BeS. upon the use or occupancy  o t each h.ouse trailer  suitable  tor  UV1ng quarters within  the  Township  ot  Ha;,•­ cock.
SEC'l'lON  II.   A   tax  Jn  the  amount  ut
$2.00  shall  be  due  and  payable  by   the person	in charge ot any house tra!lPr su1ta.ble for llvlng qucrtcrs, used  or  oc­ cupied  within   the  Township  of   I-Iaycoi:-k.
thirty  da atter the  ettecllvf' dale of  this
ordinance  or   thirty    da)'!t   after  tlle  tn­
<-'Cl>tlon of acy use  nr  occupancy  wlL 1n the   Township,   whlchPver   shall   last   r.ic­ cur,    and   monthly   thereafter.
SECI'ION UI. In the  event  that  the perso!l  in  chal'fle  of  the  nouse   traller shall fall or re!use ta pay the tax her€' 4 inbetare imposed, th n such tax may  and shall be collected from the person  or persons, partnership, association, or cor­ poration owning U1c real   estate  upon whic.b the said  trailer  ls  or  shall  have been located.
SECTION  IV.   Upon   payment   or   the said tax as a!oresald,  Ute  true  cQi!ector shall  Issue  a  receipt   to  the  person   pay­ In!: the s.a.J.d  tax,  which  receipt  shall  bear the n:une o.f the  penon  in  charge  o!  the trailer tor which the tax ts paid, a brle! description  o!  the   trailer,   the   location   of the trailer, tho name  of  the  owner  of  the land  on  which  the  tr-1.ller  is   located,   the
amount  or  tax  paid,  the  date   the   ta.°'< feU due, and the date  ot  payment.  The receipt    so   issued    shali   be   kt'pt    in    the
 
traJler In connection \\•Ith  whil"h  the  re­ ceipt  was  issued  anti  shall  evidence  the rJght   and   privlle,6   ot   using   or   occupy­
ing-  the  said   trailer  !or  a   perl'lct   of   one month  from the due  C:atA?  o! the so.Id  l:.d.:;. SECTION  V.	If   the  tax   Ievl  in pur­ suanL-e   o!  this  ordinance   sha.C.	not   he
paid  wh  due.  a  penalty   o! twenty  per
cent  ot  the  amount   ot  tile  tax  due and
unpaid  shall be add  thereto..
SECTION  VI.   All   ta.""es   1m,posed   by this   ordinance,    together    with    all    na:. ties,  shall  be   recove"ablc   by   the   'l'own­ shlp  Solicitor  as  other   debt..   of   Ulce amount  are  recovere<.1..
SECTION VII. Th various  sretions  at lhts ordinance arc h rt.·by declared to be severable,   and    in   t.:.<.'    event    that   any
portlon    or   portions     or    this   ordlna '\C.?
shall  be declared  vol!!  and  unconslilu'!on­
al and o!  no  eacct.  the  remaining  sec· t!ons  ooa:t  rernain   in   full  rorce   and  e!­
!eet.
SE<..."TION VIII. Any person  convicted before  any  JuBtlce  of  the  Peace   or   •ne Town hip  or   violating   or   !aUlng   to   earry out  any  o!   the   provisions   or   re:quire-­ mcnts o! this ordlnanei!, or a! knowingly making  any   false   stn.tcmcnt   wtth   :"'.:Kard to   his   liability   for   or   payment   of    ttie said  tax,   or   o!  atu mptlng   to   do   any· thing   whatever    to   avoid   the    ayment    or the 'Nilolf; or any po.rt o( U-..c tax  imposed under  this  ordinance,  shall  be  llabl   o   a tine?  n-0t  exL-eedlng  F•rty  Dollllrn   ($50.00) for  each  nnd   every   Jlff'nse,   and   the  costs or  proRecutlon  thereof,  and  in   de!auJt   o! sucll    Une,    to    undcrr,o    lmprlsonment     1n the  Caunty  Jail   for  a   period   not   exceed­ ing   :tvc   dnys.
SECT'ION IX. This Ordinance  shalt beL'Ome effective on the 4th !Jay o! JaPu­ ary,     1960.
AT'l'EST:  r:eorge    C.   Heaverly,
secretary. FRANKI..IN  J.  Rl::ICI£ENB.ACH,
Dec.    -11-18                                       ChalnnA..n.



[
 






l-	IAYCOCK	TOWNSl-llP ORDINANCE	No. 5


An Ordinance prohlbltlng the dumping or  accumulation  of  refuse Ir.  the  Township  of  Haycock  and the   establlsbmewtt   or  maJ.ntenanoe­
ot  public  or  private  dumps  within
said   Township,	and	prescribing
pen aties  for   violation.
The   Township   of   Haycock   here­
by   ordains   as   tollowa:
1.	"Refuse" is all dl.sca.""ded. a:r­ tlcles or materials, except human scw<ll:e, anuna-l manure,  animal and veeetable matter, and  other articles  and   materials   ordlnarilY used  tor toad.
2.	No  per.son.  association,  1lrm ot· corporatloo  shall  keep  or  suffer to remain npon  his  or  he:  prem­ ises,  or  on  any   private   property,
any    reruse   matter,    or    cast   the
same   upon	any	lot   or  plett  pf
ground   within   Haycock   Township, or upon the  sh.ores  or  ma.rgjn  of any stream or body of water. or upon the highways in  said  Town­ sh.ip.
3.  Na   pe:son,   KSOCiatt   1lrm or  corporation  all  use   or   per­ mit to be  used,  any  apot  or  place wt thin  the  TO\vnshlp   as   a   public or private dump for  recuse  Rllat­ ter.
4. Any person,  firm  or  corpora­ tion  who  or  which  aba.U  violate any ot the provisions of thb or­ dinance shall upon summa..7 con­ viction thereof, be sentenced  to pa,y a fine o! $25.00 and coats at prosecution. and, ln  default  there­ of. to imprisonment Car not more than ten d.ays, provided each day's continuance ot a violation shall constitute  a  separate  offense.
ORDAINED	AND	ENACTED
this  5th  day  c>!  September,   1961.. GEORGE    C.    HEVERLY, FRANKLIN   J.   REICHE.NBA.CH. WILLIAM   B.    ASH,
Supervisors  o!  Haycock  Twp.
Aug. 1.8
1
I
 








l-IAYCOCK	TOWNSHIP ORDINANCE	No.	6


 
An  Ordinance  ot   the   Township ot Haycock, Buoks county, Penn· sylvaoia,   regulating    the    opening of driveways Into roads ot the Township ot llayeock. and  pr<r v:dJng   penalties   for  violation..
BF   IT  ORDAINED   AND   Ell·
r\.CTED   by   the   Township   Super­
,·1sors of the Township ot  Hny­ cack, D.lld  it  is  he=eby  on:la.lned and   enacted   by   authori y   o!  the
same that:
tlon  I.	The tullmWna words,
when  used  In  this  ord!nance,   shall have  the  meanl n:gs  asc...'"ibed   to tbcrn   in   this   section,   except   in those instances where the context cl.early     indicates      otherwlse:
(a)   The	word	"road''	shall
mean   any   public   slrei!t,   road, highway or other pu.bllc place  lo­ cntt.>d In the  ·rownshlp  of  l!aycock and maintained by the Board of Supervisors  00:   llaycock   Township and e'.'lta.bl1shed tor the use of ve­ hicles.
(-b)  The	wo:1l     "person"	shall
mean and include any natural per­ son, partner htp,  tlrm  assoctatloo Qr  corporation.
In   this   ordinance	the   singular
:;hall Include tile lural and the rnascullne shall include the  femin· 1nr.  and  the neuter.
Section  II.	It  shall  be  unlaw-
 
tu! !or any  per1ori  to  open  a dnveway ot  any  kind  into  any  ot th.e road..<> or the Township ot H.ay­ ccck wi hout  first  SC<:Urini:  a  per­ mit the:-c!or as herein a.!ter  pro­ vided.
Section  llI.  Any   pe.r30n   who shall  deSire   to  open   a   driveway Into any road or the T()WJ11hip of Haycock  shall  make  application   to the Secretary o! UK: Board ot SU pervisors of Rayeock Township 1n v.Tit;ng     !or    the     purpose.        Such
app\lcation  £hall   set   !Orth   th" name ot  the appllc.ant and the  ex­ act location ot the  proposed  dl'1Ve­ wuy to be OPened Into a road ot Haycock  Township.  Each  applica.. tlo:i  9ha.ll  aiso  be  accum.pantcd  by an  appllcu.tlon  tee  ot  $1.00.
Section  IV.	Any  person   vlolat
ng  or  asststtng  In   the  violation in any of the prov sions o! t.his o;dinance hall, upon summary conviction be  sentenced  to  pay  a ftne ot $10.00, or  in default  therc­ o(,  be  sentenced   to   Imprisonment 1n the county jail for not  more than  thirty  lla:11.
01!.DAJ.'<ED	AND	ENA.CTl!lD
this  5th  day  of  Sept('fnber.  1961. GEOR.GE C. HEVERJI.Y. FRA1'XLIN    J.    REIC!IllNBACH, WILLIAM  B.  ASH,
Supervbors    o•!   Haycock    T\Vp.
Aug,   18
 










HAYCOCK	TOWNSHIP ORDINANCE	No.	7


 
An Ol'dlnan<.'e  ot the Townsh.iP ot  Hnyoock,   Bucks   County,   Penn­ sylva.nia,    prohlbiling	the	laying, Installation.   replacem nt   or   a:lter­ aUon   of   drains   Jn   or   .along   any township   roads,   except  in   a<:oord.­ anee   with    an    a.ppUcation    to    be flit..'<!    with    the    Secretary    ot   the Board  ot  Supe.rviS(.)   and  in  a.c­ ordance    with    a   perrni.l     granted
tl•ereon,
BE  IT  ORD.Al·NEO  and   enact­ ed  by  the  To11Wtshtp   SUpervlsor:1 of  the  Township  of   Haycock,   and it Is hereby ordained  and  enacted by  authority  or  the  same  that:
Section  1.    That   no   person.   ro..
partnership    or    corporation     shall
!Ry,	nstaJl,    reJ)lace   or   alte:,   or cause to be laid, lnstallcd 1   rei>lac­ ed  or altered.,  an:y c::-ain •. cu.Ivert. or   storm   3€'\o\'cr   (collectively   here­ inafter     referred     to     a.'I    "draln"J, within   or   adjacent   to	right   ot way  ot  any township  road  Without
:tl::-st   having  procured     a     pennit
trom  the  secretary  o!  the  Board
c.f	Super:tso  in  the  manner  here-.
in.utter   set   forth.
Section 2. No  permits  shall  be tssu.ed  except  upon   application n:ed   with    the   Secretary    at    the
Board   ot   Sup&"Visors,    which    ap..
plication shall be  ln  wrtUng,  sign­ ed by the appHcnnt, setting  tart11 tha.t the appllcant Is the owner ot all land." a!rected by the p:-opoacd drain,  1nd  !UrthCl'  9et.ting   !orth the  locatJon  ot the proposed  drain,
in diameter, shape, length,  and material or composition. A sketch showing   the   location   ot   the   pro-
 
posed  drain  in  relation   to   the rond,  or  roads,  affected  thereby, and  indic:i.Ung  the  direction  o! flow shall be  attached  to a.ll  app11- ca lions.    Each    appiicaUon    sha.l also be accompalned  by  an  appli­ c1tlc)n  tee o! $1.00.
Section   3.	111e   Board   o!   SUH
i>e:-vlsr>rs   shall   take  into  consid­ eration   the   locat.!.,n,    size,   shape, t::ourse  anrt  cap.icity		t   the   pro­ posc-d   drain,   its   material   or  com­ position,   the  nat11re   ot  the  area to    be   drained,    and    the   existing ctrainag  condition	of		the   area. lf   the  Board   of   Supervisors  shall be   satisfied	that	the	prooosed drain   will  not   interfere   with   ().":" enda.ng		pubUc   !.!'a.vet,	that	It. v111l  not c:i.use dame.ac to any pub· liC'   road,   that   it   will   not   create a	hazardous	condition	or   other nuisance,  that  it  will  not  adverse­ ly   ar!ect   or  damage   the    property f)f   any  person  other  than  the  ap.. pllcnnt,   and   that   lt w1ll   not   im­ pe<te    the  natural  drainage   o!  the a:ea.,   It    sha.ll    dlreot   the   Secre­ tary   to   Issue   a   permit   tor   the lE.Yfng,	lns.tanauon.		rep!,acement or  alteration   o!  tile   dt-afn   ln   the manner   set   forth  in   the  appll.cn.­ tit'n;    othetwise,    the   permit   is   to be refused.
SectJon    4.	Permits	a.hall   be
granted    or   rofused.    as   the  case
muy   be,   within   30   days   of    the
date  of  the  tUJng   ol  the  appllca·
tlon.
Section   5.   AJJ:y   persoo,   co·part-
 
nd;\<Jhip,	or  carJJCJNUtfon	laying, ln9ta1.llng,	replat.ing		or    al , or  causing  to   be   laid,  Installed,   re­ placed    or    altered,   any    drain   aa o.(oresa.id	w:thout	first   obtaining a   permit  ::us   herefnbe!ore   provided, or,    onco   hav3ng    obta.ined    a   per.. mit,   laying,   installing,  ::-eplaclng   or altering,  or   cauBing   to  be  la.id,   in.. staUcd,   repJao:.?d     or   altered,   any drain   as  a.torcsaid,   except   in   con
!orm:ty  with   the  appUca,Uon  ftlcd,
shu.ll upon summary conV'icUon be sentenced to pay a  nne ol  $10.00, or ln default  thereof,  be  sentenced to the county jail for  a perlod not e>:<."eedlng   th!rty   da)'3.
Sect.ion 6. The provisions of this ordinance shalt  not be construed to enlarge,  diminish.  or  ln any  man­ ne:-  atrcct  the   rirht.3   or  remedict1 of  t.'1.:rd  persons  with  re1pect  to any  inJUIY  or  damages   sustained by the- laying, installation, re.. pla.iecment  or  alteration  Qt   any drain as utforesaid, u-respective ot whether an appllc.a.tlon !or such drain  was  filed,  or  it filed,   wheth.. er   a   permit   thereon   was    g:"311t­ ed    or   refused.
Sectlon   7,    This   ordinance   8hall
ecome    ettect:.ve    five   days    a.tter
enactment.
OR.DALNJ!lD	AND	ENACTED
this  5th  day  o-! September,  lOOL
GEORGE    C,   !IEVER!LY,
FRAN'ICLIN     .r.   REICHEN!BACH,
WILLIAM  B.   ASH.
Supervisors  o!  Haycock  Twp.
Aug.  lll
 
HAYCOCK	TOWNSHIP ORDINANCE	No.	8

 

NOTIOEt
The  Haycock   Township  Board   of
Superosors  will meet  at  the Ray­
 

refuse, other teriais
 

lndustriail wastes, and all dlsoa.rded a:.""iicles  or  ma­ of  a  slxnUa:r  nature,  refe-r­
 
SECTION m
1.	Disposal	permits	shall   be
valid   from   the   daite   a1   Issuance
 
cock Fire House, Thur:sda.y, Janu­ ary 11, at 8 p. m. in speetal ses­ slon and will consider the  follow­ ing   ordinance   for   adoption:
OR.DINIANOE NO. 8
AN  ORDINANCE   REGULAT­ ING 'DHE DUMiPING, DE- POSITING	ANlD HAULING OF GARBAGE, ASHES, COM­ BUSTl'BLE REFUSE, INCOM­ BUSTI:BLE REFUSE, INDUS­ TRIAL WASTElS, LIQUID WASTES, .AND  arHER  RE­ FUSE	MATERIALS: AND, PROVIDING FOR THE LI­ CENSING ANID REGULATENG OF DUMPS F'OR RiEFUSE MATEIUAI.a IN THE  TOWN­ SHIP OF HAYCOCK AND PROVIDING PENAJ:.TIE!S FOR VIOLATIONS		OF THE TERMS OF THIS ORDTNtANCE.
The  Township  of  Hicyeock  here-
by  ordains  as  f-aliows:
SECI'ION I
The  follow;lng   words   and   terms, as wed  1n.   this  01'illna11ce  .shall have    the   following    meanings    a.s­
cr.i!bed  theret.o:
1.	G&rbage--All ta:ble re.ruse, anima( and, veg-eta.ble matte!',  otf­ aJl from mewt, fish and  fowl, fruits,  vegeta:bles  and  parts  there­ of, a.nd Gtller articleS and  mater­ ials  and  JnaJterlals  orddnarUy  used
!or  food   which  have  become  untlt
for such  use  or which  are for any
::ea.son,  discarded.
2. Ashes-The residue from the burn.Ing of wood, coad, coke,  and other comhUl!tible ma.tertals.
3.	Combustible re1lul pa­ pers, s-tram, excelsior. rags, rub­ ber,  shoes  amd.  such   other   refuse as may resui1 from ordlnaey housekeeping or usual commi;-rclal pursuits.
4.	Incombustible     Refuse'-    Ail
discarded   artid.es   or  materials  ex­
cept    garbage,      ashes,    and   com­
bustible   refuse.
5.  Industria!  Wastes-Ml   wastes or discarded by-products Nhich may   result   f:tom   industrlail   pro­
duction    or    processing    excepting
 
r to collectively, exeeptlaig Uquid
wastes.
a.  Person-Any   n·atural   person,
assooiation,   ttrm.   pB.ll'"tner.shlP,    or
con>oration.
9. In thiS  ordinaince,  the  singU­ lar includt!fl the plural and the masculine shall :i.nolude  the  fem­ inine  and  neuiter.
SECTION II
1. It shall be unlaiwtud fOT any person,  either   a;s   owner  or  lessee, to  operat-e,  conduct,  maintain   or carry Gn 8.lillY sandtary  Iand:flll, any ilicinel'ato:-,     IMJl/or    runy    iagoon
within      the     limits      of    Hlcycock
Township  for  the  disposal   of   re·
fUse or  L!.quid  waste  ather  tbam. that produced. on  the  premises, without  first  havinig  secured  ti.  per­ mit for the  sam.e  from  the  Secre­ tary  of   the  Haycook   Township   SU­
perviso:s.
2.	Applkations  for  such   permit shall be in the  form  prescrlbed  by the Superv:lsor.s of ffiey'cock Town shiip from time to time and shall. include a description of the  Pl"OP­ erty to be used for disposal  !)Ul'­ poses,  together  with   a su:veyor's plain of the same, a genera! de­ so.ri.ptlon of the disposal operations to be established for the site. ln­ cludlng the area and the J.epth of expected and maximum  fill,  the name and  address  of  the  owner  Gf the  property  on  which   Jle   dis­ posal operations are to be  con ducted,  the  name  and  address  ot the persan  to  be  !n general  charge of the dispooad ope:attons :m the premises, the type or  types  i·f re­ fuse tG be  collected. a..nd  the man­ ner  Gt  disposa.J..   The   boundary points of the premises are o be indicated by concrete markers.
3.	The mv.ner  of  the  property and the person conducting the  dts­ posal  operations  shall.   fu;nish   to the   Haycock   Township  Supervisors a  bond  in  the  sum   Gf   ,J00.00 with good and sutficient surBty or securtty, conditioned upan ':he op­ eration  of  the  said  premises  a.nd
disposal   operation    in  accordance
 
Uflrtll   December    31  of    the   same
year.   There  shall  be  oo  reduction in  the  fee  for  a  lleense   ssued after the beginning of any  l'.al.en­ dar  year.
2.	The   fee   for   each   i!lslposal
permit   shall   be   $500 00.
3.	A   separate   permit   shaJl   be
.-equired   for     each    property   on
which  a  &pas.ad.  operation  Is con
ducted.
SECTION N
1.	Refuse  materia'l  may   be   de
posited  an  the  site  of  the  dts­ posa'l  operation   from  8:30   a.  tn. to 4:30 p. m. from Monday to Friday    incltusive;    and    from 8:80
a. m.  tG 12:30 p.  m.  on Saturday;
no refuse may be deposited  ll'll  the site of the di8posa:l operation on Sundays  or holidays,
2.	No refuse shall be burned at any lil.me.  Open fires of  any  type are p:-ohlbit:ed.
3.	All refuse shall be    '.!overc.d
at  the  close  of   each  day  by  oom, pactin:g   and   cC:,mpreSBing   as   llere­ lnaf-ter   provided    with   a   layer   of dirt  or  .soil   ait   lea.st   six  inches  in thtclmess.	At    least   eighteen    in­ ches   of   compressed   cover   'llaterial of   dirt  or  soil  shall  be  placed   on the   fim1:1   top   and    the   :llnai   sides o:-   toes   of   the   dumped   refuse   as a   sea:l   coat.     The  refuse   material and    the    cover    rnaiteria:l    shall    be compacted   and   oornpreS'sed   bY   opb erating     thereover		a   roller,    bull­ dozer,   or   other   machilne   Gl"   me· chanlca•l    device   weighing    not less than  five   tons   and  having   a  roller or   treads    of     sufficient    width    to thoroughly   compact  the  same.  The seal  coat   consisting    of	eighteen Inches  of   compressed   cover - inater­ iail.  Gf   dirt  or  soil  must  be   placed within     fourteen	day-s	from    the
dumping   and   compacl   af  the  re­
fuse materio!l. The seal coat o! eighteen inches  of compressed cov­ e.·  ma.terlal   of   dirt O'l' soil   shall be in a-ddltion t.o the six inch ucycr of   d1r!:    or   soil   hereinbelore   re­
·quired  at   the   close  of  each  day's
dumping.
4.	Be-fore  filling	any	water
 
liquid  wastes.
 
with   the   provisions   of   thls   orcti­
 
course,  a stony
 
drain of  approved.
 
6.  Liquid   Was:f:es-----,A,Y	house-
hold,     commereiai,	or  industr:ial
waste    ma-tenl.al    which.    is    l1l    a
ttufd  or  nnn-solld  fmm.
7.   Refuse--.AU   gaxbage,    .ashes,
coDllbustible    refuse,   in.com:bu&tl.ble
 
nance,  for  the  use  and  benefit  of an· parties   interested.
4,  Cash   or   certified   check   in the amount o! the permit fee ll'hal accompa.rcy the application.
 
rnateriai  a:nd  si.£e  shall  00 laid along  the  watercourse.   Slopes   on the fiil su.-:ta-ce shalll be  a.t  least 1%. Undue seepage lnrto and  from the   fill  shall   be   prevented,
 
HAYCOCK	TOWNSHIP ORDINANCE:	No.	8



 

5. Eveey precaution shall be taken t.o keep the premises in a presentable B,.iLd workmanilke con­ dition.  There  shall   be   erected a:long -any publl-c highway, nn that portion of the licensed premises fronting on the public highway, an 1ndustrla!l type chain link fence six feet  In   height,   and   the   dumping area sha:bl be enclosed by a snow fence. No part of the dlsposad. op­ e::.-ation  proper   shall   be   condw:rec=. or   carried   on  at  mcy  polnt   'lll  the
.premises  which   may  be   ctos:er   to 1)9.IlY  puiblic  highway  than  three  hun- ed  :feet.   Du.st ra.tsed  by  the dts­
sal  operations   shall   be   .kept   at
minimum   by  the   spreading   ot
 
suJiflcient  lagoon  area. provided  for that   pu:;pose.
2.	SUch la.goons shall be con· structed   only   .in   aaiordance    with the specifications and approval.  o! the Bucks County Department ot Hea:lth  and  the  PeDIIS¥lvanla  De·
parlment  of  Health.
3.	All premises on which la· goons have  been  camitnicted  shall. be enclosed by an industrial chain link fence at least e1ght feet tn height,  and  the  entrance  ':'hereto shall be kept locked at ail limes except  when  duiy authorized  pe-r..
.s.o.n.n..el   are  present   at   the   iagoon
4.	No_  pa:.i;   of  the  lagoon    area
 
roads,   or   highways   of   the   town­
ship.
2. It shall be unlawful for am.y person to ope:"ate     vehiele wdbh· in  the   Township   of   Haycook,   eith­ er  for  the  purpose   of   eol1ect!n.g
!use or liqUld waste within the township   or   for  the   purpose   of
dlschB.it'girlg such refuse  or  Jlqutd waste   with!l.n   the    township,    l"iith­ out  flrs-t  Juwing . .secured   a   permit for  tha    same   !.""-Om   the   Secretary of  the  Haycoek   Township   Super­ v:lsors.
3. Applications for such  permit sha:Il be in the form pre:ierilred by the Supervisol'll of Haycock 'town­ ship  from  time  to  time.
4.  The  fee  for  each  truck
 
oil,  calcium  chlorl.de  or  water.
 
shall
 
be con&tructed  at
 
atll.Y
 
point
 
per­
 
6. No refuse shaill be  deposl:ted within one hundred feet  Qf  any ci'eek or major  stream  OC'  under a:ny condition  that  woU!Id  permit t.he  contamination  ot   any   stream by   the  depaSit   of   refuse,
7.   Every    precaution,    Indudtng
spraying, where necessary, sha.11 be used to keep the llCensed premises free  of  rodents  and  Insects.
B.    The  person   in chuge  of  the disposai    operations     ShaJl    be   re-­ sponsfule  for  using  every  effort  to control   and   e!{'tlnguish   wcy  and  all ilres   which  may  occur   acctd!!nita!IY. on   the    premises.      There   shall   be maintained  on  the  11Censed  .t1rem·
ises   a..t     aH    times,   at  least   t;wo
portwbie back-pack wat>el' ··Xtin• gulshers of the  pressure type,  tc  be In good operating condltlon at alt times.
9.  The  U nsed  premises   sbaJ! be open for inspeetion during &Ii ope:-ating hours and at  other rea son'8lble t.lmes  by the representa­ tives Dt the Pmnsylwn.ia  Depart­ ment of Hew.th. the Bucks County Department of Health and resp<m· sible  offtci.allS  of   tih.e  Township.
SECTION  V
1. LiqUid wastes shall _not be POW'ed or deposited UPOll the open ground, but on  the  contrary,   shall be  dumped  Ol'  poured  ooiy  into  &
 
in   bhe   premiBe!I    which    may   be
closer  to  any  :public: high.way  than
three  hundred   feet.
5.	No la-goons shall be {!()11- structed at any point which  would cause tlle collltam.inatloCln of any stream or
6.	Every	precaution,     lncludlng
spra']l'lng,   shall  be  used  to  control mosquitoes  and  lmi-ects.
7.  The  Ucem>ed   prum.lses   lihall be open for inspection during a'11 operating hou.-s and at other rea­ sonable Mmes by Uie  representa­ tives o-f the  Pennsylvania  epart­ ment o-f Health, the Bucks County Depa'1'tment of Health and tapon­ slble  offlcials  of   the  town8hip,
SECTION VI
1.   All   persons   haullng    tefu.':le and  llquld  wastes  over   and   UIK>n the roads and highways n  the Township· of  Haycock   shall   haUl the· SlllI!e only 1n vehicles tightly closed on  the  bott.om  and  ;,ides  so as l:.o prevent  the  contents  there­ of from spi•lllng, dripping o-r oth­ erwise falling o.- comtng upon any walks, roads or highways >f the township. AU vehicles shail be so operated and so covered as to pre­ vent o-flenslve odors '!scaplng therefrom a.nd to prevent the con­ tents of said vehicle from  being blown   or  spilled  upan   any   mdks,
 
mit  shail  be  '$25.00  per  truck.
5. Ti"uck permdts shall be vailfd fom the date (if issuance until De­ cember 31 of the same yea:r. There
shall  be  no  reduction  in  t:lle  fee for a Ucense issued after trhe be­ g1.Iming  of  any  caleridar  year.
SECTION II
1. Any person who shaH v.l.aiate any of the· provisions (}f this or­ dinance shad.I, upon summary con­ viction, be sentenced to pay a  fine not exeeeding $300.00,  or  In  de­ fault thereof, be sentenced to Im­ prisonment   Jn  the  county  ja.ll   fer a  pe od   not  exceeding   thirty   days.
2.   An.y   person   Who    has    filed the   bund   hereinbe:f'ore     required, shall, upon coll'Victlon of aDf vio­ lation o-f this ordinance,  forfeit   the said     bond.
SECTION  vm
1.  The    a.t'oresaild    sections    and
sub-sections of this ordinance  aie hereby  declared  t-o  be   sever.able and  the  lnvaHdity  of   any  ;rectlon or sub-section shalt not inva1idate the remaJn1'llg portions of t.his o:"­ dlnanc:e. lt ts  hereby  declared  to be the intention that this o..'"'dlnance wo-U'id have been enacted had such invadid section  or  sub-section  not have  been  included  herein.
WILLIAM  B.  ASH,
Jan,   4                               Secretary.
 








 

 
 
 
 










HAYCOCK	TOWNSHIP

ORDINANCE	No.	9	j



 

NOTIOEI
The  llaycor.Jc  'l.'owmhlp  Board ot
Supervisors  will  meet  ait  the  Hay­
cock Fire House, Thumday, Jan­ uary 11, at 8 p, m. in  special session and wUl consider the !ol­ lc>wing  ordinance for adoption.
ORDINANOE  NO. 9
AN  OR.DIN<ANCE	REGULA­ TING  .JUNK   YA.RDS,		RU'B- BIBH	DISPOSA!L		DUMPS, LIQUID     WAflrE	DISPOSAL DUMP.I  OR  I.A.GOONS,  GAR­ BAGE	DISPOSAL		Dtnll'S, PJGGl!l!U	AUTOMOBil.E GRAVEYA®DS,    ANID   <YrHER OFWEmIVE		BUSLNESSES
 
ocoupatlon o! a.ny premises with:n l-la.ycock  Township  in  a   mamier so as to violate the  provisions  ut this section is hereby declared to constitt.utc  a nulsamce per  se.
SIDCrION II
It  shall  be   unJaiw.f.ui   for   any par on, co--partnership or .::orpora­ tion to  dispose,  keep,  place  nr st.ore, or  permit  to  be  dlsposed, kept. pl.a.oed o:- slxJrcd on any pre­ mises  whatsoever,   a:ny   :-ubhlsh, junk, garbage, ashes, Uquid N&Stf', manure, or refuse of  any  k.lnd v.1ha: ver   Within    three    hundred feet  o!  the  right-of-way  ot  any publlc  roa.da,  or vMh.in  one ltundred
 
AND	PHOVIDIING TIES,	FO!t	'!'HE lIEALTH,	i'Y. WELFARE.
SECTION  I
 
PENAL·
PIJBLli:
AND
 
ft•ct  o! any  creek  or  stream.  The
use or occupation of any p:-e:nises within llaycock Tawnshtp 1n  a manner so as to violate the pro­ visions   of   lhis   section   is   nereby
 
It shall be untawrul ff'lr  ml3 person, e<1-prartnership, or corpora­ tion to use or occupy a.ny  premises In the Townshi-p  o!  Haycock  as and for a junk yard, rubbish dis­ posal dump, liquid waste dlspooal dwnp or lagoon, gorbage :lhil)OS&l dump, piggery,  automobile  a.ve­ yard, or any other o!!enatve busi­ ness withkl the Township ol Hay­ cock,  whereby  any  noxious  c.ir  of­
fensive  odors   putrid  « polluted
wut.ers, C>:' other disaharge, 3moke, refuse, rubbisih, or  filbh  ed.  an}' nature  whatever,  is  blown,  carried, or dlscha.rt.-ed in any  manner,  onto the  publ!c  roads,   or  upon  the  Pl'e­
mlses  o! other  persons,  oo-partner­
 
declared   to  constltul'e   a   nuisance
per   :H?.
SECTION Ill
Any person, co-parlnerohip or corporation Violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall, upon  sununary  conviction  thereat, be sentenced to pay a nne nc..t exceeding $.'i00.00 or ln jefault the:-eo!, be sentenred and •!'Dmmtt­ ted to the county jail for a per:od not   exceeding   thirty   dava.
SF..CTION IV
The township may Jnstltutc pro­ ceedings in equity  for  the  purpuse ot enforcing the provisions o! this ordinance.
WILLIA.'\!:  B.   ASH.
 
sho o: corporatlona.  The use  or
 
Jan. 4
 
Secret:My.

u
 
HAYCOCK	TOWNSHIP ORDINANCE	No.	10


NOTICE!
The Haycock Township &ud or Supervtsors will meet at the Fire House  in  Applebachsville,  Tues· day, April 3, lll62, at 8 p. m., In regular  sen.ton.  and  Will  conslde:
!or   final  adoPtion	the	followtna
ordinance:
ORDINANCE  NO.  10.
An ordinance dellning the ot­ tense of dhiturbtns the peace, pru­ hib1Ung  th"e  disturbing  of   the peace within the Tovmahip of Hay­ cock, a.nd prescrtblna penalUe.s tor the violation thereof.
Supervioors  of	the   Town­ ship   of   Haycock.	Buck!J County, Pennsylvania, do hereby ordain u fol1'1\V8:
 
SEC'l'ION l.
Disturbing the peace la l!e:-eby prohibited withi.n the Township of lidycook.
SEL"'TION II.
Any   pei'SOO    who   shall   be llllillY
ot  any  act,  word.  or conduct  caus­
 

,4.-c. 1-.d

G ci1 ..	 
 
ing  o: tending  to  cau.'M!  a  disturb­	 	
ance  of  the  peace  and  good  order of	the   'l'mvnshtp   of    Haycock,    or causlna   or    tending   to   cause   any danger,   discom.tort,   or   annoyance to  any   of.   the   lnhabitnnts   uf   the town9hlp   or  use:s  ot  the  wwnsn1p thorouahtn.re:s •  or  who  shall  wU­ fully    make	loud,     boisterous, dr   unseemly   oolse   oc  disturbance;
or \vho  shall  Jlgh.t  or  quarret  or incite others to fight or quatt"e1,  or who  publicly  make  uso   o!  nbs or !ndecent lal1¥Uaa:e: or who ah.an Joa! or loiter  or  congregate  upon any ot  the  public  streets  or  alleys or   playgrounds    Jn    the    Township ot Haycoclt, to the annoyance ot peaceable re&iden.ts neeri>y or t:-avclltng  upon   any  9txeet  or  alley
Ol'   bel?Ql  lawfully  UPon   aey Of   the
publlc  &:rounds   in  the  said   town­
ship  whereby   the  publlc   peace   ts
disturbed or the travelling public anooyed shall be guJlty ot t.he ot­ rense  ot  d!sturbfng  the   peace.
SECTION III.
Any   persoo   who   shall    violate any ot the provisions of tlWi or­ dinance sh&ll, upon convlct1on thereof, be 8Cllten.red to pay a. 1lne ol not more  Utan  $25,00  and  coats or proeecutlon, and, 1n default ot payment ot such 1lne and costs. to JmprJsonment    tor   not   more   than
thirty  dO/I.
ENACTED  an<J. JlRYAlNED   th!a
_2 -r! day ? . 'A. D.,  1962.
 
OFFICIAL TOilNSHIP OF HAYCOCK ORDINANCE NO. //

AN ORDINANCE - Imposing a tax for general revenue purposes

by providing for the assessment, levy and collection of a one percent (1%) tax for general revenue purposes on the sale, transfer, conveyance or assignment of lands, tenements or hereditaments or any interest therein situate partly or wholly within the Township of Haycock, Bucks County, Pennsylvania; and conferring upon certain Township officers
and tax collectors duties in relation thereto, and providing for

certain exemptions and penalties.

BE IT ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Haycock, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, and it is hereby RESOLVED by the same in pursuarce of the authority granted by the Act of the General Assembly of Pennsylvania approved the 25th day of June, 1947, P.L. 1145 and its several amendments, relating thereto as follows, to wit:
SECTION 1.	It is necessary in the judgment of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Haycock, Bucks County, Pennsylvania,
to impose the tax hereinafter set forth, in order to provide additional revenue for general township purposes to meet the costs and expenses incident to the conduct of the activities and functions of the Township government.	It is estimated that the revenue to be derived from said tax will be the sum of One Thousand Five Hundred ($1,500.00) Dollars.
SECTION 2.	On every transaction or privilege arising therefrom,

whereby any lands, tenements or hereditaments or interest therein, lying, being and situate wholly or in part within the Township of Haycock, shall be granted, bargained, sold or otherwise corrveyed, including the transfer of any equitable interest in said premises and including the execution and delivery of any indenture, deed, assignment or transfer thereof (except by lease) during the year beginning ou the
Ei:rst day of January, 1966 and ending on the first day of January, 1967,
 
a tax for· said general revenue purposes at the rate of One ($1.00) Dollar on every one hundred dollars of the total valuation or consideration therefor, and on any fractional part of- one hundred dolla1s at the rate of one per cell.t (1%) thereof, is hereby imposed, levied and assessed against the granter or persons selling, trans­ ferring or assigning the same under any such deed, indenture or agreement,     during    the    sai(1    year,    the    Sam    being·at    the   rate
-J..;  une per centum (1%)   on the said consideration based on each one hundred dollars with fractions of one hundred dollars to be paid
at the same rate, to wit, one per cent (1%). PROVIDED that in

case of any lands, tenements or hereditaments or any- interest therein located partly within and partly without the boundaries of the said Township, such tax is imposed, levied and assessed only on the
value of that portion of such land, tenements, hereditaments or

interest therein lying within the boundaries of said Town ship.

No tax shall be	posed, however, where the actual consideration is less than One Hundred Doll.ars ($100.00).	PROVIDED, FURTHER, however, that this tax shall be collectableonly at the rate of one-half of one per centum (of 1%) on the said considerations based on each one hundred dollars with fractions of orie hundred dollars to be at the same ra e, to wit, one per cent  (1%) during the period from January
1, 1966 to December 31, 1966, if the School District of the Township of Haycock shall levy and collect a similar tax on any transaction or privilege during said period,
SECTION 3. The tax on such transfers hereinbefore provided

for, shall be paid by   the granter, seller or transferrer or other

person, beneficially interes ed therein as either legal or equitable

 
owner immediately
 
prior to said transfer.	Said tax shall becOll!e due
 

and payable immediately on the execution and delivery of said instru­ ment conveying said title; provided that in any transaction or privilege where the grantee or purchaser or other person beneficially
 
interested is a con:nnunity chest fund, foundat on, corporation or society organized or existing solely for charitable, religious or educational purposes, or trustee of said organization existing solely for such purposes, in which case the same shall not be taxable, nor shall the following be taxable:	Wills, mortgages, transfers between nonprofit industrial development agencies and industrial corporations purchasing from them, any transfers to nonprofit industrial development agencies, and transfers between husband and wife, transfers between persons who were previously husband and wife but who have since been divorced provided such transfer is made within three months of the date of the granting of the final decree 'in divorce, and the property or interest therein subject to such transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to the granting	of the.final decree in
·divorce, transfers between parent and child or the spouse of such a child or between ·parent and trustee for the benefit of a child
or the spouse of such child, by and between a principal and straw

party for the purpose of placing a mortgage or ground rent upon the premises, correctional deeds without consideration, transfers to the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or to any of their instrumentalities, age_ncies or political subdivisions, by  gift, dedication or deed in lieu cf condemnation or deed of confirmation
in connection with condemnation proceedings, or reconveyance by the
condemning body of the property condemned t0 the owner of record at the time of condemnation which reconveyance qiay include property line adjustments provided said reconveyance is made within one year from

the date of condemnation, leases, a conveyance to a trustee under a recorded trust agreement for the express purpose of holding title in trust as security for a debt contracte·d at the time of the conveyance under which the trustee is not the lender and requiring the trustee
:o make reconveyance to the granter-borrower upon the repayment of
 
the debt, or a transfer by •he owner of previously occu.p, ied residential premises to a builder of new residential premises when such previously

occupied residential premises is taken in trade by such builder as part of the consideration from the purchaser of a new previously unoccupied residential premises any transfer from a purchase money mcrtgagor to
the vendor holdi g the purchase money mortgage whether pursuant to a foreclosure or in lieu thereoft or conveyances to municipalities, townships, school districts and counties pursuant to acquisition by municipalities, townships, school districts and cornties of tax delinquent properties at sheriff sale· or tax sale.	It shall be the
duty of all grantors, purchasers or other persons beneficially interested

as aforesaid or acquiring title thereto of any real estate or interest therein,   and   also  every  person  upon  whom   thi -·    Ordinance	imposes     a    tax, to forthi;ith report unto the said Board qf Supervisors of the To•mship
of Haycock, either to its Secretary or Treasurer therein, the true

consideration,    and- for   the   seller,   granter  or   transferrer   to  pay   said cax unto the said Township of Haycock or its duly authorized officer aforesaid, or agent; it being understood that this tax is payable
immediately upon the vesting of said title or transfer of said property.

SECTION 4. A penalty is hereby provided for the violation of the provisions of this Ordinance to be at the rate of six (6%) per cent en all unpaid taxes to be collectible in the same manner as t!..   township taxes are collectible under the laws of Pennsylvani·· .
SECTION 5.	The several sec.tions and· provisions of this Ordinance

.s	hall be considered·as separable and should any section or part thereof

be   declared   unc.onstitutional,   il_legal   or   far· .any   reason   unenforceable, the said decision or f nding shall in no wise invalidate such sections or provisions which would otherwise be valid, or effect in any manner
-4-
 
the validity  of  sections or provisions  not  so held  to be  invalid.

ENACTED  AND  ORDAINED  into a  law  this	day  of	A.D.    1965.



HAYCOCK TOWNSHI BOARD OF SUPERVISORS



William F. Snyder



Franklin J. Reichenbach



William Frei
 
OFFICIAL	------ TOWNSHIP  OF  HAYCOCK ORDINANCE NO. /;;/,

AN ORDINANCE - Imposing a tax for general revenue purposes

on salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation earned

,,,  during the period beginning January 1, 1966 and ending December 31, 1966, by residents of the Township of Haycock, and on salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation earned during_said
period by non-residents of the Township of Haycock for work done, or services performed or rendered in the Township of Haycock, and on the net profits earned during said period
from businesses 2     professions or other activities conducted by residents of the Township of Haycock, and on the net profits earned during said period from businesses, professions or other
activities conducted in the Township of Haycock by non-residents;

requiring the filing of declarations and returns, and the giving
'
of information by employers and by those subject to the tax,

imposing on employers the duty of collecting the tax at source,
'
providing for the administration and enforcement of the ordinance,

and imposing penalties for violation thereof.

WHEREAS, the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania by virtue of Act No. 481, approved June 25, 1947,
P.L. 1145, with its supplements and amendments, authorizes the Supervisors of Townships to levy, assess and provide for .the collection of certain taxes on persons, transactions, occupations 3       and privileges withtn the limits of said Townships; and
 
WHEREAS,  it has become necessary to sec_Ere ad.d:itional revenue

to meet the costs and expenses incident to the conduct of the activities and functions of the government of the Township of Haycock, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
THE BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK under the

authority of the Act of June 25, 1947, (l'.L. 1145), and its amendments hereby enacts as follows:
SECTION 1. DEFINITIONS - The following words and phrases, when used in this ordinance, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates or   requires   a    different   meaning:
nAssociation.   11	A   partnership,    limited   partnership,    or  any other form of	unincorporated enterprise, owned by two or more persons.
11Business . 11	An enterprise, activity,  profession or

.n	dertaking of any nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for profit, whether by an individual, partnership, associa t.ion,   or  any  other  entity.
"Corporation."	A    corporation   or   joint    stock   association organized under the laws of the United States, the State of Pennsylv nia,  or any  other  State,  t3rritory, foreign  country  or dependency.
"Income  Tax  Officer. 11	The  person,  official,  firm or

corporation designated by the Board of Supervisors to collect the tax levied under this ordinance.
11Earnings. 11	Salaries,  wages,   commissions  and  other  compensation

as defined in this Ordinance,

"Employer. 11	An   individual,   partnership,    association,    corporation,

governmental body or unit ur agency, or any other entity employing

'-2-
 
one  or  more  persons  on a  salary,  wage.,  commission- or  other   ompensation basis.
"Net Profits."	The net gain from the operation of a business,· profession or enterprise, after provision for all costs and expenses incurred in the conduct thereof, either paid or accrued in accordance with the accounting system used in such business, profession or enter­ prise, but without deduction of taxes based on income.
"Nonresident." An individual, partnership, association or

other entity domicifed outside the Township of Haycock.

"Person .. "  A  natural person,  partnership,  corporation,  fiduciacy or association.	Whenever used in any section prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term 11Person11 , as applied to associations,  shall mean
the partners  or  members thereof,  and  as applied  to  corporations,   the·

officers thereof.

"Resident. 11	An  individual,   partnership,   associatiOn,   or  other

ntity domiciled in the Township of Haycock.

"Salaries,  wages,    commissions  and  other  compensation 11       shall include   salaries,  wages,  ·commissions,   bonuses,   incentive   payments, fees and tips that may accrue or be received by an individual for services rendered, whether directly or through an agent and whether in cash or in property; but shall not include periodic payments for sick or disability benefits and those commonly recognized as old-age bene£its,   retirement   pay,    or   pensions   paid  ·ta   persons   retired   from service after reaching a specific age or after a stated period of employment, nor public assistance or unemployment compensation pay­
ments, nor any wages or compensation paid by the United States to any

person for active service in the Army, Navy or Air Force of the United States nor any bonus or additional compensation paid by the
-3-
 
United States or the Conunonwealth of Pennsylvania .or any other State

for such service.

"Taxpayer . .,	A    person,   whether    an    individual,    partnership, association, or any other entity, required hereunder to file a return of earnings on net profits, or to pay a tax thereon.	T!-·e singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include the
feminine and the neuter.

SECTION 2. IMPOSITION OF TAX. A tax for general revenue purposes of one percentum is hereby imposed upon the following:
(a)	Salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation earned on and after January 1, 1966, by residents of the Township of Haycock,
(b)	Salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation earned

on and after January 1, 1966, by non-residents of the Township of Haycock for work done or services performed or rendered in the Township of Haycock,
(c)	Net profits, earned on and after January 1, 1966, of businesses, professions and other activities conducted by  residents of the Township of Haycock, and
(d)	Net profits, earned on and after January l, 1966, of businesses,

professions and other activities conducted in the Township of Haycock

by  non-res-idents.

The tax levied under (a) and (b) herein shall relate to and be imposed upon salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation paid by an employer or on his behalf to any person who is employed by or renders services to him.	The tax levied under (c) and (d) herein shall relate to and be imposed on the net profits of any business, profession or enterprise .carried oil by  any person, as owner or as proprietor, either individually or in association with
 
some other person or persons.

(e)	Provided, however, that this tax shalL be collectable only at the rate of one-half of one percentum (of 1%) from residents of the Township of Haycock during the period from January 1, 1966 to December 31, 1966, if the School District of the Township of Haycock shall levy and collect a similar tax during said period.
SECTION 3. DECLARATION AND PAYMENT OF TAX.

(a) Every Taxpayer who anticipates any net profits, or any earnings not subject to the provisions of Section 4 of this Ordinance relating to collection at source, shall, on or before February 15, 1966 make and file with the Income Tax Collector on a form prescribed by
the Income Tax Collector, a declaration of his estimated net profits,

or earnings, during the period beginning January 1, 1966, and ending December 31, 1966, setting forth the estimated amount of net profits
or earnings anticipated by him during the said period and subject to
{
the tax, together with such other information as the Income Tax Collector may require.
(b)	The declazation shall show the estimated amount of tax

imposed by  this Ordinance on such estimated net profits or earnings, the estimated amount of tax which will be collected at source in acccrdance with Section 4 of this Ordinance, and the balance due.
The taxpayer making the declaration shall, at the time of filing thereof, pay to the Income Tax Collector the estimated amount of	). ta;>< as shown due thereon.	Provided, however, that the taxp 's ll have the right to pay the esttmated tax or the balance of estimated tax due, as shown on his return, in four quarterly installments, as follows:	the first installment at the time of filing the declaration'
on or before April 15, 1966, and the other installments on or before

July 15, 1966, October 15, 1966, and January 15, 1967, respectively.
 
-, '\·

(c)	Any taxpayer, who first anticipatea any'net profits, or any earnings not subject to the provisions of Section 4 of this· Ordinance relating to collection at source after April 15, 1966, shall make and file the declaiation hereinabove required on or before July 15, 1966, October 15, 1966, or January 15, 1967,
whichever of these dates next follows the date on.which the taxpayer

first anticipates such net profits or earnings.	The taxpayer	making the declaration· shall, at the Ume of filing tnereof, pay to the
Income Tax Collector the estimated amount of tax shown as due thereon.

Provided, however, that the taxpayer shall have the right to pay the

estimated tax or the balance of the estimated tax due, as shown on

his return, in equal installments on or before the quarterly installment payment dates which remain after the filing of the declaration.
(d)	On or before April 15, 1966, every taxpayer who receives

net profits, or any earnings from which no tax was deducted under

he provisions of Section 4 of this Ordinance relating to. collection at source, shall make and file with the Income Tax Collector, on a farm prescribed by him a final return showing all of his net profits or earnings for the period beginning January l, 1966, and ending
December 31, 1966, the total amount of tax due, the amount of estimated tax paid under the provisions of this section, the amount of tax deducted under the provisions of Section 4 of this Ordin;mce, and the balance due.	Provided, however, that any taxpayer may, in lieu of paying the fourth quarterly installment of his estimated tax, elect
to make and file with the Income Tax Collector on or before January

15, 1967, the final return as hereinabove required,	At the time of filing the final return each taxpayer shall pay the balance of the tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in the   case of
overpayment.
 
(e) Every taxpayer who discontinues busines prior to December 31, 1966, shall, within seven (7) days after the discontinuance of business, file his final return as hereinabove required and pay the tax due.
SECTION 4.	COLLECTION AT SOURCE.

(a)	Every employer within the Township of Haycock who employs one or more persons on a salary, wages, commission or other compensa­ tion basis shall deduct monthly, or more often than monthly, at the time of payment thereof, the tax imposed by this ordinance on the salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation due to his employee or employees, and shall file with the Income Tax Collector on ·a form or forms furnished by or obtainable from said Income Tax Collector, quarterly returns herein prescribed and pay to said
Income Tax Collector, the amount of taxes deducted and shown by

such returns to be due for each quarter by each employee.	Such quarterly returns shall be	filed and payment of taxes so deducted as
>hown due thereon shall be paid an or before April 30, 1966, for all taxes being deducted during the quarter beginning January 1, 1966 and ending March 31, 1966; on or before July 31, 1966, for the quarter
beginning April 1, 1966 and ending June 30, 1966; on or before

October 31, 1966 for the quarter beginning July l, 1966 and ending September 30, 1966; and on or before January 31, 1967 for the quarter
beginning October l, 1966 and ending December 31, 1966.

(b)	On or before February 15, 1967 every such employer shall file with the Income Tax Collector on forms prescribed by him;
(1)	An annual return showing the total amount of salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation paid, the total amount of tax deducted, and the total amount of tax paid to the Income Tax Collector during the period beginning January 1, 1966 and ending December 31,
 
1966; and

(2) A return for each employee emplcyed during all or any part of the period beginning January 1, 1966 and ending December 31, 1966,
setting forth the employee's name, address and Social Security number,

the amount of salaries, wages, commissions er other compensations paid to the employees during said period, the amount of tax deducted, the amount of tax paid to the Income Tax Collector and such other informa­ tion as the Income Tax Collector may require.	Every employer shall furnish a copy of the indi1· idual return to the employee for whom- it
is filed.

(c)	Every employe.r who discontinues business p>:'ior to December 31, 1966 shall, within seven (7) days afte>:' the discontinuance of business, file the >:'eturns hereinafte>:' required and pay the tax due.
(d)	The failu>:'e or omission of any employer to make the deductions required by this section shall not >:'e]jeve any employee from the payment of the tax or from complying with the requi>:'ements of this 01:'dinance
•elating to the filing of declarations and returns.

SECTION 5.	POWERS AND DUTIES OF INCOME TAX COLLECTOR.

(a)	It shall be the duty of the Income Tax Collector to collect and receive the taxes, fines and penalties imposed by this Ordinance. It shall also be his duty to keep a reco>:'d showing the amount received by him from each person paying the ta and the date of	such receipt.
(b)	The Income Tax Collector is hereby charged with the

administration and enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance, and is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and >:'egulations relating to any matte>:' pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this Ordinance, including p>:'oVision for the reexamination and correction·of declarations and returns and
of payment alleged or found to be incorrect, 01:' as to which an
 
overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred, aµd to prescribe forms necessary for the administration of this Ordinance.
(c)	The Income Tax Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books, papers, and records ·of any employer or supposed employer or of any taxpayer or supposed taxpayer in order to verify the accuracy of any declaration of return, or, if no declaration of
return was £iled, to ascertain the tax due.	Every employer or supposed employer and every taxpayer or supposed taxpayer is hereby directed
and required to give to the Income Tax Collector or to any agent designated by him, the means, facilities and opportunity for such examinations and investigations as are hereby authorized.
(d)	Any information gained by the Income Tax Collector, his agents, or by any other official or agent of the Township of Haycock as a result of any declarations, returns, investigations, hearings, or verifications required or authorized by this Ordinance shall be confidential except for official purposes and except in accordance
_th a proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law.

(e)	Any person aggrieved by any action of the Income Tax Collector shall have the right of appeal as provided by law.
(f)	The Income Tax Collector shall be bonded by a good and reliable bonding company in an amount sufficient to pro ect the Township of Haycock at all times for all monies coming into his hands for Ta1mship purposes under this Ordinance.
(g)	The Income Tax Collector shall receive for the proper performance of his duties under this Ordinance compensation in an amount to be determined·by the Board of Supervisors.
SECTION 6. SUIT FOR COU.ECTION OF TAX.

(a)	All taxes imposed by this Ordinance, together with all interest and penalties due thereon shall be recoverable in an action of assumpsit in the name of the Township or in such other manner as is now or may
-9...
 
hereafter be authorized by law.

(b)	Any suit brought to recover the tax impo8ed by this Ordinance shall be begun within six (6) yearB after &u h tax is due or within six
(6)	years after a declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is later.	Provided, however, that limitation shall not prevent the institution of a  Suit for the collection of any ta due or determined to be due in the following cases:
(1)	Where no declaration or return was filed by any person although a declaration or return was required ta be filed by him under the provisions of this Ordinance.
(2)	Whare an examination of the declaration or return filed by

any person or of other evidence relating to such declaration of the Income Tax Collector reveals a    fraudulent evasion of taxes, incl ding, but not limited to, substantial understatement of taxes deducted and of actual or estimated net profits or earnings.
(3)	Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of this Ordinance and has failed to pay the amount so deducted ta the Income   Tax  Collector.
SECTION 7.	INTEREST AND PENALTIES.	If far any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of six per centum (6%) per
annum on the amount of said tax, and an additional penalty 0£  one-half

of one per centum (!;;  of 1%) of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof during which the tax remains unpaid, shall be added and collected,	Where suit is brought for the recovery of any
such tax, the person liable therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of collection and the interest and penalties herein imposed,
SECTION 8.	PAYMENT illl1lER PROTEST AND REFUNDS,	The Income Tax

Collector is hereby authorized to accept payment under protest of the
 
..



amount of tax claimed by the Town$hip in any case w.here any person

-disputes the validity or amount of the Township's claim for the tax,

.L	f it is thereafter judicially determined by a court of competent jurisdiction that there has been an overpayment to the Income Tax Collector, the amount of the overpayment shall be refunded to the person who paid under protest.
SECTION 9. APPLICABILITY.	The tax imposed by this Ordinance

shall not apply;

(a)	To any person as to whom it is beyond the legal power of the Township of Haycock to impose the tax herein provided for under the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution and laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(b)	To institutions or organizations operated for public, religious, educational or charitable purposes, to institutions, or organizations   not   organized   or  operated   for'  private   profit,   or   to trusts and foundations established for any such said purposes.
This section shall not be construed to exempt any person who is

an employer from the duty of collecting the tax at source from his employees and paying the amount collected to the Income Tax Collector under the provisions of Section 4 of this Ordinance.
SECTION 10.  FINES AND PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF ORDINANCE,

(a) Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to make any declaration or return required by this Ordinance; any employer who fails, neglects, or refuses to register or to pay the tax deducted from his employees; any person who refuses to permit the Income Tax Collecor or any agent designated by him to examine his books, records
and papers;	any person who makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent return or attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full disclosure
of the amount of his net profits er earnings co avoid the payment o.f the
 
whole or any part of the tax imposed by this Ordinance, shall upon 'onviction thereof before any J stice of the Peace, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than Three Hundred ($300.00) Dollars for each offense and costs, and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to be imprisoned in the Bucks County Jail far a period not exceeding thirty  (30) days•.
(b)	Any person who divulges any information .ohich is confidential

under the provisions of Subsection (d) of Section 5 of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof before any Justice of the Peace, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than Three Hundred	($300.00) Dollars for each offense and costs, and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to be imprisoned in the Bucks County Jail for a period not

exceeding thirty (30)days.

(c)	The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed by any other section of this Ordinance.
(d)	The failure of any person to receive or procure the	arms

required for making the declarations or returns required by this

Ordinance shall not excuse him f!cm making such declaration or return.

SECTION 11.	SEVERABILITY.	The provisions of this Ordinance

are severable.	If any sentence, clause or section of this Ordinance is for any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses or sections of this Ordinance.	It is hereby declared to be the inter.t
of the Township of Haycock that this Ordinance would have been adopted

had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause or section not been included herein.
 



ENACTED  AND  ORDAINED  int:o a law  this	2 7 -d  day  of  .J'W	A.D.    1965.


HAYCOCK TIJilNSHI:t' BOARD  OF  SV:t'ERVISORS

 	/sf 	
William F. Snyder



Franklin   J. Reichenbach



William Frei






" r	 
\I / (h I
'l,


















-13-
 
TOWNSHIP OF HAYcoc,;
ORDINANCE NO. I ;;j



PROVIDING FOR THE CLOSING AND VACATING OF A CERTAIN PORTION OF	'-"·

ROAD, BEING A PORTION OF THE BED of Township Road No.376 ; Haycock Township, from L.R. #09068 to Tohickon Creek;	the closing and vacating of the same being in the best interest and for the best conven.ience of the Township of Haycock; and the closing and vacating of the same being pursuant to the laws relating to second class townships in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
IT IS HEREBY ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Supervisors of the Town-

ship of Haycock, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, and it is hereby enacted and ordained by the same, pursuant to the laws relating to Second
Clasa Townships of the Conunonwealth of Pennsylvania, as follows, to wit:

SECTION 1.	Whereas, it is necessary in the judgment of the Supervisors of the Township of Haycock, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, to close and vacate pursuant to the laws of the Conunonwealth of
Pennsylvania relating to Second Class Townships a portion of Township Road No. 390 in the Township of Haycock, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, as hereinafter described:
ALL THAT CERTAIN lot or piece of ground situate in Haycock Township, County of Bucks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and described as follows:
 

BEGINNING at  a   point, the i•<tc.rsection cf cei1terlines of Legislative Route #09068 (33' wide) and Townshlp Rc d #376 {33' wide), thence from said point and  along rhe  ,:enterlir.e  of To..,,:i.ship   Road 11376   S 48  - 45  E,
950.00 to a point: on t:he bank of  ':';:;hickon Creek, said point marking the end of Township Road #376,	he	ight-of·way	idth being 33 feet from beginning to end.

Total length 950   f et	0"18 mii s.



ENACTED   AND  ORDAINED   i to an Ordinance this	day of

 
' 1966.
 



TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK
BOARD  OF SUPERVISORS


 



William F. Snyder Gerald Kramer
 
TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK// ORDINANCE NO.

. PROVIDING FOR THE CLOSING AND VACATING OF A CERTAIN PORTION OF ROAD, BEING A PORTION OF THE BED OF TOWNSHIP ROAD NO. 390, HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP, FROM L.
R. ·NO. 09068..to Tohickon Creek; the closing and vacating of the same being

in the best interest and for the best convenience of the Township: of Haycock; and the closing and vacating of the same being pursuant to the laws relating to second class townships in the Co11111onwealth of Pennsyl- vmiia.
IT IS HEREBY ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Supervisors of the Township

of Haycock, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, and it is hereby enacted.and ordained by the same, pursuant to the laws relating to Second Class Townships of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as follows to wit:
SECTION'l.	Whereas, it is necessary in the judgment of the Supervisor! of the Township of Haycock, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, to close and vacate pursuant to the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania relating to Second Class Townships a portion of Township Road No. 390 in  the Township of Haycock, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, as hereinafter described:
ALL THAT CERTAIN lot or piece of ground situate in Haycock T0tmship, County of Bucks, C011DDonwealth of Pennsylvania, and described as follQWa:
BEGINNING  at a point,  the intersection  of centerlines of Legislative Route #09068 (331      wide) and Township Road #390 (33' wide) thence frOlll said point and along the centerline of Township Road #390, the ne t	even
(7) courses and distances; (1) S 48-45t 948.85 feet to a point., (+) S 49-05
E, 809.14 ft., .to a point, (3) S 49-00 E, 514.61 ft., to a point (4) S 46- 31 E> 249.67  ft•• to a point, (5) S 49 24  E, 426. 77  ft., to a  point (61
S 48-'55 E, 418.45 ft. to a point:, and (7)  S 52-35 E, 172.56 ft. to a
point on the bank of the Tohic on Creek, said point m«rking t:Pe end of
 
Township Read #390,	the  righ!.:  vf  '••ay  · idth .:icing  33  ft. from beginning
to end.

Total length • 3540.06 fc.	 



ENACTED  AN1l  ORD !N!D  i:?1:o  -9n	:rdi:.:.ance   this	day of

) :..966.



TOWNSHIP JF HAYCOCK EOARD OF 'SUPERVISORS



- William Frei William F. Snyder Gerald Kramer
 
TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK....­
ORD !NANCE NO • /f)



PROVIDING FOR THE CLOS:.tNG AND VACATING OF A CERTAIN PORTION OF

ROAD, BEING A PORTION OF THE BED of Township Road No. 398 , Hayco.ck Township, from L.R. #09062 to Tohickon Creek; the closing and vacating of the same being in the best interest and for the best convenience of the Township of Haycock; and the closing and vacating 9f  th same being pursuant to the laws relating to second class townships in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
IT IS HEREBY ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Supervisors of the Town- ship of Haycock, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, and it is hereby enacted and ordained by the same, pursuant to the laws relating to Second
Class Townships of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as follows, to wit: SECTION 1.	Whereas, it is necessary in the judgment of the
Supervisors of the Township of Haycock, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, to close and vacate pursuant to the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania relating to Second Class Townships a   portion of Township Road No. 390 in the Township of Haycock, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, as hereinafter described:
ALL THAT CERTAIN lot or piece of gro nd situate in Haycock Township, County of Bucks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and described as follows:










 
 
I
BEGINNING  at a  point,	tt°'ce   inicersectio1n  of  ccu:erli:ne  of  Legislative
Route 4109062	{33' wide}  E<nd Township Ro.ad  ifa398  (33 °  wide),	thence   from
said  point  and  along  the  centerlitH:  of  Township  Road  ff398  the  next  three
(3)  courses  and distances;	i(l) S 47 45 E,	l5i, 45 ft. to  a  point,	(2) S
41-03-30  E,  970.48  ft. co  a  point	and  Cl)  S  34-59 E,  256,96  ft. to  a  point in  the  middle  of  ·"'  bridge  Bpanning  the  Tohickcn  Creek,  said point  marking
the  end  of  Township  Road  ¥!398,  the  right of-way  width  being  33  ft. from
beginning  to end.

Total  length 1378.89 feet.	0.261 miles.

ENACTED  AND  ORDAINED into an Ordinance this	day of

' 1966.



TOWNSHIP OF  HAYCOCK
BOARD OF  SUPERVISORS



William   Frei William  F.  Snyder Gerald Kramer
 
TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK ORD INANCE NO ./(,



PROVIDING FOR THE CLOSING AND VACATING OF A CERTAIN PORTION OF

ROAD, BEING A PORTION OF THE BED of Township Road No.424 , Haycock
"------- - --
Township, from Township Road #466 to Tohickon Creek; the closing and

vacating of the same being in the best interest and for the best convenience of the Township of Haycock; and the closing and vacating of the same being pursuant to the laws relating to second class townships in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
IT IS HEREBY ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Supervisors of the Town- ship of Haycock, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, and it is hereby enacted and ordained by the same, pursuant to the laws relating to Second
Class Townships of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as follows, to wit: SECTION 1.	Whereas, it is necessary in the judgment of the
Supervisors of the Township of Haycock, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, to close and vacate pursuant to the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania relating to Second Class Townships a portion of Township
...,- · .. """"' ..'
Roa	in the Township of Haycock, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, as hereinafter described:
ALL THAT CERTAIN lot or piece of ground situate in Haycock Township, County of Bucks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and described as follows:
 
' BEGINNlWG  <n:  " poi.:,L,	u;.e  t.n-::er 52·>- ion of  cented. tne of Township
Road  11466  (:33'  wid oi	<rec Towr.':lh.:.i,:;  ti..:iad lf4°2'_.  ;3: , w{de),	thence    from    said
point: snd along i:h.e  •:e.-.·:E"r-:.::.,1e  .::-i ':tow,,.;;n1p  R.o.;d "1424,	the   next    three
(3)  cour.<>es	and disc.;;c:·:<0s;	( ) I'.  7 5-·+9  E;,	SOD.;);')  ft. t:o  .a  point,	(2)
N     77-14-30  E,	li'O 98  tr: ..	,_:,    :>     ;_;.Jint  and  {3)  i'<    79-43  E,	367.55   ft.  to  a
point	in  t::te  middle  cf  a  bn:.::!ge  s1 :;.1.ning  thE:  T.Jhickon Creek,  such point marking  t:he  end of	ownsh.::.p RvP.d 41424,	the  right  of  way  width  being  33  ft. from beginning  t:o  end.

Total length 2 1038,SJ feet.	 



ENACTED  AND  ORDA!NED  into .;m Ordinance  this	day of

,	1966 ..



TOWNS.HIP  OF HAYCOCK BOARD   OF  SUPERVISORS



William  Frei William F.  Snyder Gerald Kramer
 
TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK ORDINANCE NO. /


PROVIDING FOR THE CLOSING AND VACATING OF A CERTAIN PORTION OF

ROAD, BEING A PORTION OF THE BED of Township Road No.449, Haycock Township, from L.R. 1109062  to Township Rd. 41466; the closing and
vacating of the same being in the best interest and for the best convenience of the Township of Haycock; and the closing and vacating of the same being pursuant to  the laws relating to second class townships in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
IT IS HEREBY ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Supervisors of the Town- ship of Haycock, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, and it is hereby enacted and ordained by the same, pursuant to the laws relating to Second
Class Townships of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as follows, to wit:

SECTION 1.	Whereas, it is necessary in the judgment of the Supervisors of the Township of Haycock, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, to close and vacate pursuant to the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania relating to Second Class Townships a portion of Township Road No. 390 in the Township of Haycock, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, as hereinafter described:
ALL THAT CERTAIN lot or piece of ground situate in Haycock Township, County of Bucks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and described as follows:
 
BEGINNING at a  poi:u>::,	trie	iM:ersect ion of cem::er .u.nes of Legis­ lative Route f09062	(33" wide) and Township Road 4f449 (33' wide) thence from said point snd eilong the centerline of Township Road
/f449, the next twelve	(12)  courses E>I'.<d   distances; (1) S  04-33-30
E  647.96 ft. to .a  point, (2)  S  14,  10-30 E,	137.61 ft. to a  point;
(3) S   04-58 E,	328.84  ft, to a  poik;.t, (4)  S   38-44-30 E,	138.78  ft.
to a point, (5) S  17-55 E  148.90 ft. to a  point (6)  S 35-20 E  142.91
ft. to a  point, (7)  S  17-08 E  221.61 ft. to a  point, the inter­
section of centerlines of Township Road #449, and the Ridge Road
(S.R. #563 - 33' wide), thence from said point and along the center­
line of Township Road #t449, (8) S  22-03 E,  471.46 ft. to a  point, (9) S  23-03 E, 403.63 ft. to a  point, (10) S  22-34-30 E, 243.16 ft.
to a point, (11) S 63-43-30 E, 66.24 ft. to a  point, and (12) N 83-
42-30 E,   30.82 ft_. to a   point, the intersection of 1·enterlines of
this and the centerline of a spur of Township Road #449 that leads
from the main right-of-way of Township Road #449 to Township Road
#418 in Bedminster Township, said spur having the two (2) following
courses and distances; (1)  S 33-16 W 178.16 to a point and (2)
S 20-28 W 87.50 ft. to a   point, the centerline of a bridge spanning
the Tohickon Creek, thence from the intersection of centerlines of
the ma in right of way of Township Road {f449, and the spur of Town­
ship Road #449 and along the centerline of the main right of way of Township Road #449, the next sixteen (16) courses and distances; (1) N 81-22-30 E 94.70 ft. to a point, (2) N 71-02-30 E, 268.06 ft.
to a point, (3) N  27-25-30 E,  291.50 ft. to a point, (4) N  44-23-30
E, 430.37 ft. to a point, (5) N 44-52-30 E 781.49 ft. to a point, (6) N 46-51 E 677.76 ft. to a  point (7) N 47-44-30 E, 880.64 ft. to
a point, (8) N 49-07-30 E, 768.88 ft. to a point (9) N 31-26-30 E,
922.4	ft. to a  point, (10) N 32-08 E, 463.96 ft. to a  point (11)
N 10-01-30 W, 233.05 ft. to a   point, (12) N 04-53 E 79.27 ft. to
a point, (13) N 23-49-30 E, 975.93 ft. to a  point, (14) N 15-16-30
E, 84.80 ft. to a point (15) N 02-06-30 E, 125.53 ft. to a point, and (16) N 17-53 W, 64.00 ft. to a  point, the end of Township Road
#449, and the beginning of Township Road #466, said right of way widths of Township Road #449 and the spur of Township Road #449, being 33 feet from beginning to end.

Total length= 10389.56 feet.	1.968 miles.

ENACTED AND ORDAINED into an  Ordinance this	day of 1966.
TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK BOARD OF SUPERVISORS

William Frei William F. Snyder


i""'J---., ..J    'IF----.-
 







TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK ORDINANCE NO ./$



PROVIDING FOR THE CLOSING AND VACATING OF A CERTAIN PORTION OF

ROAD, BEING A PORTION OF THE BED of Township Road No.466 , Haycock Township, from Township Rd. #449 to Ridge Road; the closing and vacating of the same being in the best interest and for the best convenience of the Township of Haycock; and the closing and vacating of the same being pursuant to the laws relating to second class townships in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
IT IS HEREBY ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Supervisors of the Town- ship of Haycock, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, and it is hereby enacted and ordained by the same, pursuant to the laws relating to Second
Class Townships of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as follows, to wit: SECTION 1.	Whereas, it is necessary in the judgment of the
Supervisors of the Township of Haycock, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, to close and vacate pursuant to the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania relating to Second Class Townships a portion of Township Road No. 390 in the Township of Haycock, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, as hereinafter described:
ALL THAT CERTAIN lot or piece of ground situate in Haycock Township, County of Bucks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and described as follows:
 





BEGINNING  ar  a  pc ;:; ,	che ?·::;lnt  ,_,hen;		·ow:-...;hl.iJ Road ff449 ends	(33'  wide) and where Towr.sh.Lfl  R::.ad  ;,t456 '.i.:iS::.-;,	;·33"  ·•id:';,  thence   from   said
point  and  alor..g  .. .'=   c:<=n;:e; : ;-,.:,  :;f   ·;:.:;,..·1:."n::.p   Roiod  li466  the  next
four  {4) c0urSE.:>	iff:d ,-:fs::an.::c;;,	il:O  t:	3-lL,T,	30.1..83  ft.  to  a
poi::it,	(2} N  7-<+o  i'J.  48).37  fc.  ;:o .c  pc r.'.:,  ·:::ie  intersection of
centerlines   cf	J:c:,..· .;;hi;:, Ru,;:! lF466 c.:-,d Tow;-.snip Road /1424	{33'  wide)
(3)  N   7  - 46	. 2Z3   JJ	fc	t	p::iicc,	(4)  N   4   -   56  E   1066.99
ft. to B   poi:-.::  ..mer«O?  · :-.E <:e-:it-=!:i..l.r:.<:  of	To,.,;nship  Road  11466   intersects the  centerll.-:e   0f   Ridge   Road	{S.R.   #563-33'   wide),	said   point
marking the end oi Township Road il466, the right of way width
being  33  feet	from begirmir'.g	to  end.

Tota 1 length  ""  2080. 52  ft.	0.394 mile;i.



ENACTED AND ORDAINED into an Ordin6nce  this	day of

 
' 1966.
 



tOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK
BOARD   OF  SUPERVISORS



William Frei



William  F.  Snyder Gerald Kramer
 

\<\
ORDINANCE NO.	-:t?'=



AN ORDINANCE REGULATING PEDDLING, INCLUDING SOLICITING, WITHIN THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, REQUIRING PEDDLERS TO OBTAIN LICENSES; PROVIDING FOR APPLICATION FOR ESTABLISH­ ING RULES OF CONDUCT; PROVIDING FOR REVOCATION OF LICENSEs UNDER CERTAIN CONDITIONS; EXEMPTING CERTAIN PERSONS FROM THE TERMS HEREOF AND FIXING PENALTTES FOR VIOLATION.


The Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, in the exercise of its police power, and in order to protect the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of Haycock Township, does hereby enact and ordain as follows:

SECTION 1. Definitions.

a.	The  word   11 peddl_ing 11      as  used  in  this ordinance shall mean engaging in peddling, canvassing, soliciting or the taking o orders, ei her by  sample or otherwise, for any services, goods,  wares   or   erchandise ·'    or  engaging   in  soliciting  contribu­ tions, gifts or pledges of money or any other thing of value, by visitation to private homes or	e idences without the direct invi­ tation of the inhabitants thereof, or -on the public streets or
highways of Haycock Township.	Provided:	the word "peddling"

shall not apply to (l) farmers selling their own produce, (2) any manufacturer or producer in the sale· of bread and bakery products, meat and meat products or milk or milk products, (3)
persons who have been licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

to engage in an activity mentioned above, including, without limi- tation, real estate,  insurance, or securities brokers and salesmen.
b.	The word 11 person 11 , as used in this ordinance,

shall  mean  any  natural   person,   association,   partnership-,   .firm  or

corpora ti on.





- l -
 

c.	The word  11 peddler 11      as used in this ordinance, shall mean any person who shall engage in peddling, as herein­ above  defined.
d.	In this ordinance, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.

SECTION 2.	No person shall engage in peddling or soliciting within the Township of Haycock without having a license for  this purpose  aa  hereinprovided.

SECTION 3. Every person desiring to engage in peddling within the Township of Haycock shall first make application to
the Township Secretary for a license.	Licenses may be applied for and issued for the period of one day, one week, one month or one year.	Both the application and the license shall set forth the
following information:

a.	Name of applicant.

b.	Home address of applicant.

c.	Name and address of employer for whom applicant will be working, if any.
d.	The period of time for which the application is made and the expiration date of the license.
e.	The type of goods or the nature of the activity in which the applicant wishes to engage within the Township.
.	The applicant's previous criminal record, if

any, or an affirmation that he haa no previous criminal record.

g.	The type of vehicle he will use, if any, together

with its license tag number.





- 2  -
 

h.	The number and the name·a of the persons with whom the applicant will be working.
i.	A brief physical description of the applicant.

Nothing herein contained shall be construed as permitting the   licensure ·of  more   than   one  J.Jerson   under  a  _:=single   license.	No license issued under this ordinance shall be transferable .from
one person to another.


SECTION 4. No license shall be issued under this ordinance until the applicable fee is paid by the applicant, except that a
fee shall not be required or charged in the case of solicitors for charitable or community undertakings.	The schedule of fees sha.11 be as follows:
 
License for one day
License for one week LicenaB for one month License for one year
 
$  3.00
5.00
8.00
10,00
 

SECTION 5. Upon making application therefor and paying the proper fee as herein specified, a licBnae shall be issued for every  peddler,   provided   the  issuance   of   such  license   shall  .not
in any way endanger the general safety, morals or welfare of the

citizens of Haycock Township.


SECTION 6. Every person to whom a license has been issued hereunder shall, in the carrying an of his business or activities in the Township, comply with the following rules of conduct:
a.	He shall carry his license card upon his per­

son at all times and exhibit it upon request of any police officer, Township official or citizen.
b.	He shall not permit any other person to have possession of his license card and shall immediat•ly report its




- 3 -
 

loss to the Township Secretary.	He shall not cause or permit his license card to be altered or defaced.
c.	He shall not enter, or attempt to enter, any dwelling house without express invitation or permission of the occupant and	hall immediately leave any premises upon request.
d.	He shall not represent his license card to be an endorsement of himself or of his goods or services or of the goods or services of his principal or employer.
e.	He shall immediately surrender his license card upon revocation of his license as hereinafter provided.
f.	And he shall not engage in selling any product

or service not mentioned upon his licenae.


SECTION?.	No person licensed as a peddler under this ordinance shall engage in peddling at any time on Sunday, on any legal holiday, or upon any other day of the week before nine o'clock A.M  or ·after five o'clock P.M. prevailing time.

SECTION 8. No person licensed as a peddler under this ordinance shall hawk or cry his wares upon any of the streets or sidewalks of the Township, nor shall he use any loud speaker or horn or other device for announcing his presence by  which the public  is annoyed

SECTION g,	No person licensed as a peddler under this ordinance, shall occupy any fixed location upon or along any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks of the Township for the purpose of peddling, with or without any stand or counter.

SECTION 10.	The Township Secretary shall keep a record

of all licenses issued under this ordinance.
 

SECTION 11.	The Board of Supervisors by.majority action is  authorized .. to  suspend   or  revoke  any   license   issued  under   this ordinance when such suspension is deemed beneficial to the public health, safety, morals and/or welfare, or for violation of any
of the provisions of this ordinance, or for giving false informa-

tion upon any application for a license hereunder.


SECTION 12.	Any person who shall violate an of the provisions  of this ordinance  shall, upon  summary  conviction before any Justice of the	eace, be sentenced to pay a fine or penalty of not less than Ten Dollars {$10.00) nor more than Three Hundred Dollars {$300.00) and the costs of prosecution, and, in default
of payment thereof to imprisonment in the county prison for not

more than thirty {30) days.


SECTION 13.	If any section, provision or part of this ordinance shall .be held unconstitutional, such unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, provisions or parts of this ordinance.	It is hereby declared as a legislative intent that this ordinance would have been enacted had such
unconstitutional, invalid or illegal provision not been included
 

herein.
 



ENACTED AND  ORDAINED this	<:#A
 




day of  	
 

A. 11., 1970.

HAYCO K TOWNSHIP SUl'ERVISORS

//
 



ORDINANCE NO.


AN ORDINANCE RELATING TO THE MOVING INTO OR THE REMOVAL FROM HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP, THE TRANSPORTATION INTO, OR REMOVAL OF PERSONAL PROPERTY, THE OCCUPATION OF ANY PREMISES LOCATED IN HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP, REQUIRING PERMITS TO MOVE INTO OR TO MOVE FROM HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP, AND PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF.


The Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township hereby

ordains as followst


SECTION 1.	On and after the effective date of this ordinance, no person, firm or µorporation  shall move into or remove from, or cause his or its personal property to be so moved
i.	nto  or  removed  f'rom,  any  house,   dwelling  or  other  building,   within

Haycock Township, without first having obtained a permit therefor,

as hereinafter providede


SECTION"2.	Applications for permits shall be filed with, and permits shall be issued by the Secretary of said Township, pursuant  to  the provisions  of section  5 of this Ordinancev	No  fee shall be charged for any such permit.

SECTION 3. Every person, firm or corporation seeking a permit to occupy any premises  shall file an application on a form furnished by the Township and setting forth the name of the appli- cant, the location of the premises,  the name of the owner, the address of the owner, the nature of the proposed use of the building, and if for residence purposes,  the names and ages of the occupants.

SECTION 4. Every person, firm or copporation seeking a permit  to remove from any premises  shall file an applic tion setting forth the name of the applicant, the location of the



- 1 -
 


premises from which the removal is to be made., the expected time

of departure, the address to which he is moving, the names and ages of any other members of the household who may be removing from the Township with the applicant, and there shall be attached to said application sufficient proof of payment of township or school
taxes, if any, for the current year.


SECTION 5.	Upon the filing of the application, it shall be the duty of the Secretary to issue the requested permit if, in
the event the application is for a permit to move into the Township, the indicated use does not violate any of the ordinances of Haycock Township or Bucks County; or if, in the event the permit is for the removal from the Township, there are no outstanding obligations
due the Township or Quakertown Community School District.


SECTION 6.	It shall be.Jl.Illawful for any person, firm

or corporation ta·transport or remove his or its own, or the per­ sonal property of another person, which said person is moving into or removing from a house, dwelling or other building within the Township of Haycock, unless such person so moving into or removing from the said Township of Haycock shall have first obtained the
permit as hereinbefore provided.	It shall be the duty of such

person, firm or corporation, transporting or removing the personal

property of itself or of another person to or from the Township

of  Haycock,  to ascertain that the  person, firm or corporation whose property is to be so transported or removed, has obtained the per­ mit    as   hereinbefOre    required.

SECTION 7. Nothing contained in this Ordinance shall be construed to require any owner of tangible personal property· held for the purpose of manufacturing in the ordinary course of his




- 2 -
 


business, or held for the purpose of sale or resale in the ordinary course of his business, to obtain any such permit to transport or remove such tangible personal property from or to any storehouse, warehouse or usable place of business; and nothing contained in this Ordinance· shall be construed as to require any hotel, lodging house, or rooming house, to obtain any such permit for the use of transient guests, or to require such transient guests ta obtain a permit.
SECTION 8. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance at a summary hearing before a justice of the peace of Bucks County, shall be subject to the payment of a fine not exceeding the sum of Fifty Dollars ($50.00) and costs of prosecution, and in default of the payment of such fine and costs, such person shall be subject to imprisonment in the Bucks County prison for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days.


SECTION 9. The provisions of this Ordinance are severable, and if any part shall be declared illegal, invalid or unconstitutional
by any court of competent jurisdiction, such illegality, invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair any of the re- maining provisions  of this Ordinance;  and it is hereby declared to be the intention of the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township
that this Ordinance would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid

of unconstitutional part or parts, had not been included herein.


SECTION 10.	Ail ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed insofar as such incon­ sistency may exist.




- 3 -
 


ORDAINED  and  ENACTED   this	<£...;al	day   of

A.  D.,  1970.






HAYCOCK   TOWNSHIP   BOARD OF
SUPERVISORS


/
 










































_4_
 




ORDINANCE NO. 21


AN OHDINANCE ES'rABLlSHING S'l'OP  lNTF:RSF.C'rIONS WI':'l!IN THE 1'0WNSHlP OF HAYCOCK,	COUNTY OF BUCKS  AND  STATE
OF PENNSYLVANIA

'11he  'l'ownnhip  of'  Haycock  hereby  ordains  ag  follows:

S:r.:CTION I.The followinr.; lntersectlons are hereby designated as stop .tntersect1on.s, and official stop signs shall be erected at such 1ntcrsecL1or1s and placed so as to confront traffic approaching on the !':trst named road or street travellJng in  the  directjon  .lndicated.	It  shall  bP.   un.:awt'ul   for  the  d:r'llver or operator of any vehicle, streC!t car, or trackless trolley onu1lbus,    to   fall  to   come    to   a   full  stop,  within   a  reasonable distance, before entering the intersection, aftot•  the erection
or 8ald offlclal 3top signs.

(a)	Eastbound  traff:lc on rrownshlp Road No.  467 (Raudenbush  Road)  shal 1.  stoo at. l ts intersection with 'l'owrishlp Road No.	04  (Mtss.ton Koad)'.

(b)	Ea!3tbound  tra!'ftc  on 'fownshio  noa<i  No.  !165
('!'hatcher  Road)  shall :::;top at  its intersP.ction  \.,.ith Township
!load No.  11011   (Mjsslon Road).

(c) Southbound traff:tc on Town::ihip Road No.  390 (Creamery Roarl) shall st.op at its intersectlon with 'l'own3hip Road  No.   398  (Old Applcbachsville  Head).

(<l)	WP.stbound  traff1c on Ce:lder- Press Lane  shall stop  at   its  westbound     terminus,   itu   lnteraectlon   wltl1   Old Applcbachovillc Road.

SHC'l': ON tI.	Any  person violating any or the  provisl.ons
or thl Ortllnance :3hall sut'fer the  penaltles  lmposed  by  the Vehlc  e
Code  of  the  ConunonweaJ.th  of  l:'cnnsy Lvanlq  r!uv1 provided  or as may,
at u1y  t!mc hcrRafter,  may  he  amended  ln respect  thereto,  to1 cthc
with  the  cost5 or prosecution,  ln default of  which  payment  th ? defendant  shall be  sent. to thP.  Bucks  County  Prison  for a period
not  to  exceed  60  day8  Jn  accordance  w.lth  the  .Act  of  June  19,  1961
.L.  1186,  B   l;(ao amended  by  the Act  of  June  6,  1965,  P.L.  '/3,
S  1)  )3  P.S.  8  657'1).

i
Enacted  and  ordained  this  1'1!.fth  day  of  .JuJ.y  A.D.,  1972.  )


HAYCOCK/  TOWNSl!!P     BOARD OI-'    SUPE,1VISORf
,G:;;,,,,:;'·t c:;·/c itJ£   c:: ;,,_,, .)
 
ij.
 
f{----l
 

ORDINANCE  NO.  22


AN   ORDINANCE   PROHIBITING   THE   OPEHATION   OF   CER'l'AHI MOTOR   VEHICLES   UPON   CERTAIN   S'l'REETS,   ROADS,   OR HIGHWAYS   AND   IMPOSING   RESTRICTIONS    AS   1'0  TfiE
WEIGH'!'   OF   VEHICLES   PERMITTED   TO   llE   SO  OPERATED
Wfi'lllN   THE  TOWNSHIP   OF   HAYCOCK,    llUCKS   COUNTY,	ENNSYLVIL IA



WHEREAS  the Supervisors of Haycock. •rownship, a r:;econd class  township,   in  the  Commonwealth   of   Pennsylvania,  has  determined that  dcterioratlon   1.s   occurring   to  Clde!'  Press   Lane;   and
WHC:Hi!:AS said Superv.lsors have determined that said  C.tder Press   Lane   may   be   scrlously  damaged   or  destroyed   unLeas   the  unc   of s :.ime by veh"i. c 1c3 , to1m•!lll!l11iiiiill!l!l•• ...!11!iN1•-..l"!!!,.. l!l!Oee!l"'"'-'"'"""'""'""J1CY
therr.on  i:3  pr'ohlbltcd   or  the  perrnl::;s1bl  WP-1gl1t   th( r·eof   be  reduced;!

NOW,  'l'HEiiRFORE,   the  'l'ownshtp   of  Haycock   hereby   or<lains

as  f'ol Lows:


SEC'!UON  I.	The use  of Cider  Pt·ess Lane ls !'cstrtctP.<l Jn  that..  no trucks  sha l be  permitted  t..o  us<:  same  and  all trucks
arc ucohi.blt d  from us:lng  sameJ  except  fc:r  local  dc.li.v rlci::;,  and,
r-:o...t.t,
Jn  all cventr;,  thf!:re  ::Jh:-1.ll  be  a weight  llm:l.t  of,..._ ton:J  appllcab e
to  a 11 such  trucks  or  other  motor  vehj cles  when  UflinK,  attempt.!.ng	I

Lo  ur;e,  cros::1lng  over  or  upon  C:ldcr  Pre::; ;  Lane  ln  Haycock  Tcwn::;hlp
 


or  any  pact  theccuf.	.Sa.1.<l  weight  llmltat.lon
 
shall mean   and  be	j
 
lnterpreted  to mean  the grcss wctg..'1t  of' the  vehicle and  it::;  content  .

i 0.fficlal  oten!-i  as  so de:;l.gnatcd  by  the  Pcnn2:y!.va.nla  Oepartruent  of

'l'ransportatlon or the Pennsy 1vania Department  of  H gliways  shal 1 be Hrcct,!d and ma:lntalned immediately in advance o+' P.ach tP.rm'..nus o!' C:!.der  Press Lane and upon  the rlp;ht-han'l side or Clder Press Lane not  mere  than  twenty-five  (?.5)  feet  beyond  any  tnter ectea  road  on itihtch  the  restr\ctlon  rioes  not  apply.	A :3lgn '1NO 'l'HUCKS" shall be p.Laced upon a pole and immedtate;.y thereunder a s1.gn 11 r...:XCEP'1'  LOCAL DELIVERIE.'.:3 11     shall  be  placed  upon  '3atd  pole  .in1medlately  bcneat.h   the
 

"NO 'l1RUCK"  s1.gn.	If possible,  a  sign 8 WEIGHT  LIMI'l1 ., 'l'ONS"  shal 1 Ue  placed  lmmcdiately  undcv  the  two  aforesaid  signs.	I.f  not
possib:i..e  to  so  place  the  latter s.lgnJ  sald  sign  ''WC:IGHT   LlMT'J'  .q  TON   "

sha11  be   placed   on   a   snparate  pole   t..wen1..y-f'\.ve    (25)   fP.et   beyond    the pole  containing the signs  '1 NO  'rH.UCKS 11    and  11  XCE"P•r  LOCAL  DELIVE.RIES 11

SECTION  II.	Any  person  vtolatlng any of the provislons

o.f  this  ord nancP.  2hal],  upon  summary  convt.ction,  tic  sentenced  to pay  a  !lne 01'  Fifty  Dollars  ($50.00),  together  '.Y"tth  the  costs  of pt•osecutlon,   and,  in  default  of  the  payment  there-of,  shall  undergo tmpr.lsonment  tn  the Hucks  County  Prison  for not  more  than  five  (5) days.

            U'1''ECTIVE  Dl\1 ':	This    ordlno.nce    shall   be

effccti.ve  .lmmectLatcly  upon  itd  enactment  and  ordination  anti  rihall Ue  ent'orccab 1-e   lmmediately  upon  the  erection  n.nd  maintenance   of
::1ald  offlcial  signs  hereinabove   rcfert:"0d   ta.


J•:nacted  and  ordained  th1 s	o2/ =:_-r	tiay  of	usr

A.  il. 19'12.

HAYCOCK   TOWNSHIP   !lOAHD  OF  SUPl>R'lTSORS





 
 


ORDINANCE   NO.    ?.3



AN    ORDii'IANCE    ESTAllLISIIING     S'J'OP    IN'l'ERSECTIONS    WITHIN THE  TOWNSHIP  OF  HAYCOCK,  COUN'l'Y  01•' BUCKS  AND  STATE  OF
PENNSYLVANIA



'l'he Township  or  Haycock  hereby  ordains as  follows:



SEC'l1ION  I.	'Phe   following  intersections  are  hereby desic;natcd  as  3top  lnteraectlon:s,  and  official 3top  signs  shall be erected at such intersectionn and placed	o as tcJ confront traffic  approaching  on  the  fJrst  named   road  or  st!"cct  travelling
ln  ihe  djrection  1.ndicatcd.	rt shall  he  unlawful  for  the  driver
or operator of any vehicle!, street car, or trackless trolley,
omn:lbus,  to fail tc come  to  a  full stop, wJ.thJn  a  reasonable
distance, before cntcrinµ; the intersection, after the erection
of said offlcl.al stop o.1.gns.
 

(a) (Saw Mll.l  Rmid) No. 'l'-3'/6 (neck
 

Westbound  traff .c on 'l'own::;htp Rc;ad No. T-11'('3 shall stop at its intcraact I.on  wl.th 'l'ownshi.p  Road Road).
 

(o)	Northbound   traff1.c  on  'f'own::5hln   Hoad   No.   'l'-398 (Woodbine   Lane)	hall stop at it;s lntcr:-;ect.Lon wi <;!I  'l'ownship Ho ad
No.  T-11'13  (Saw  Mill  Road).

SECTION II.	Any person  vlolatlng  any  of  the  provi sion.:J of   thJs  Ordinance   shall   i1ffcr   the  ]Jcnalties  impo2cd   by   the  Vchjc c Code of  the Conunonwealth  ot'  Pennsylvania  now provtdcd  or as may
at  any  tlme  hereafter,  he  amended  ln respect	hereto,     toe;cthcr with the costs of  prosccut1.on,  ln dara11lt at' which payment the de!'endant  shall be  sent..  to  the  Bucks  County  PI'J.son   for  a  period not  to exceed 60 days ln  accordance with the  Act of  June 19, 1961 P.l..	86,  S l; (tw  amended  by  the  Act  of J·unc  6, 1965, P.T,, "(3,
S l) 53 P.S. S 657 1.

Enacted  and  ordained  thls  6th  day  of  li'cbruary,  1973.

HAYCoci;;yowNSllIP   lJOARD  OF ,SUl'EHV!SORS
/ dt<l 	
 


-:--7
 
,,.-....-::y::	·-/:/,,?,."..,:/,,;//       .
 
,· zi'.--:P-: . t ..-[.4-":/. -r:: "'-'""'----·------·-- --
.	£	t.{k
 





ORDINANCE NO. 24

AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING A TOWNSHIP PLANNING COMMISSION, PROVIDING THE MANNER OF APPOINTMENT TO SAID COMMISSION, AND FOWER AND DUTTES .OF COMMISSION. 	

The Township of Haycock, by   virtue of and in accordance with the provisions of the 1rsecond   Class Township Code" and   the "Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code 11 , HEREBY ORD.AINS" AS FOLLOWS:
SECTION 1.	CREATION - A Commisslon to be known as the

Haycock Township Planning Commission is hereby created and established subject to the right of the Township, at any time by ordinance, to abolish such Commission.	Any   previously appointed Township Planning Commission is hereby abolished.
SECTION 2.	COMMISSION - The Commission shall consist of five (5) members.	All members of  the Commission shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed by the Township for necessary and reasonable expenses.	No appointed officers or
employees of the Township shall be members thereof and therefor ca - not, by reason of membership on the Commission, forfeit the r ght
to exercise the powers, perform the duties or receive the compen- sations of the Township offices held by them during membership on the Commission, since no such membership is possible by virtue of SECTION : . :· hereunder.
SECTION 3-	APPOINTMENT, TERM AND  VACANCY - All members

or the Commission shall be appointed by the Township Supervisors. The term of each of the members of the Conunission shall be for four (4) years, or until hiS successor   is appointed and qualified.
However, in the first instance_, two members. of the Conunission shal.
 

_  ..:.  be appointed  for four years each, one m mber for one year,

one member for two years, one membe for three years, and, annuall ,

thereafter, members  of  said Commissiori  shall be appointed  for a term of  four  ( 4)  years.	The Chai):'man  or the Commission shall promptly notify  the Township  Supervisors  co cerning vacancies  in the  Commission,  and  any  such vacancy  shall be  filled for the  un­
expired term.

SECTION   4.	MEMBERSHIP    - All  of  the  members   of  the Commission shall be  residents. of the Township.	All  of   the  member shall be 11 cit1zen members n,  that is, shall not  be-  officers  or employees of the Township during their term Of office on the Commission.
SECTION   5.	'REMOVAL	Any  membev of the Commission once qualified and appointed may be removed from office for mal feasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance in office or for other just
cause by a majority vote of the Township Supervisors, taken after

the member   has  received  f'irtecn (15)  days'  advance notice  of  the Township Supervisors' intent to take such a vote,	A hearing shal be held in connection with the vote if the member shall request it in   writing.
SECTION  6.	CONDUCT  OF  BUSINESS	The   Commission   shal elect its own Chairman and Vice-Chairman and create. ilnd fill such other offices as it may determine.	Officers shall serve annual
terms and may succeed themselves.	The Commission shall keep a
full record of its business and shall ·annually make a written re­ port   by   March   1st  of   eachyear  of   its  activities  to  the  To.wnship Supervisors.	The Commission shall meet mon.thly and/or at the· .cal of'. its Chairman.	Regular meetings shall be open to· the public.·

SECTION  7.	POWERS  AND  DUTIES  - The Planning  Commis s·ion

shall at the request of the Township Supervisors, have the power•

-2-
 
and shall be required to:

(a), Prepare a comprehensive plan fa the development

of   the  township   as   set   forth  .in  The   Pennsylvania  Municipalities Planning Code and present it for the consideration or·the Township Supervisors;
(b). Maintain ·.and keep  on  file reco.rds  of  its actions.
All records and files of the planning commission shall be in the possession of the Township Supervisors.
·1. - The Planning Commission,  at the request  of

the Towns.hip Supervieors, may:

(a). Make recommendations  to the Township Supervisors

concerning  the  adoption  or  amendment  .of  an  official  map;

(b). Prepare and pre sent to the Township Supervisors

a zoning Ordinance., and make recorrunendations to the Township Super visors on proposed amendments_ to it.;
(c). Prepare recolJlillend and administer subdivisiOn and land development, planned residential development r gulations;
(d). Prepare and present to. the Township Supervisors, a

building code and a  housing code and make recommendations concerni g propesed amendments thereto;
(e). Do  such other act or make such studies as may be

necessary to fulfill the  duties .and obligations  imposed  by  this

ordinance;

(f). Prepare   and  present to the T.own.ship Supervisors an

environmental study;

(g). Submit to the Township Supervisors a recommended capital improvements program;
(h). Promote public interest in, and understanding of,

the comprehe-nsive plan and planning;

(i). Make recommendations to the Township Supervisors,



-3-
 
civic and-p iv te agencies and individuals as to the effectiveness of the proposals of such agencies and individuals;
(j), Hold.public hearings and meetings;

(k). Require from other departments and agencies of

the Township, if anyJ such available information as relates to the work of the Planning Commission;
(l). In the performance of its functionJ enter upon any

land to make examinations and surveys with the consent of the owner.
;-2, - In the performance of its powers and dutiesJ

any. act or recommendation of the planning commission which involve engineering consideration, shall be subject to review and comments
of  lhe Township_ Engineer,  which  shall be  incorporate.d and separate. y set forth in any  report, writte-n act or recommendation of the Planning  Commission .,
SECTION 8. ASSISTANCE - The Commission may, after obtaining prior approval of the Township SupervisorsJ accept and utilize any   funds> personnel or other assistance made available by  the TownshipJ County> the Commonwealth or the Federal Govern­ ment or any of their agencies, or from private sources.	The Township Supervisors may employ administrative and/or technical
consultants to assist the Commission in carrying out its responsi­ bilities herein.
SECTION 9. SEVERABILITY AND CONSTITUTIONALITY - The

provisions of this :·.·ordinance are deemed to be severable and should any court of last resort declare any provision herein to be  illegal or unconstitutional, only those provisions shall be considered to be ill gal or unconstitutional and shall not affect
the validity, constitutionality or legality of the other provisio s


-4-
 

 
of this Ordinance.

ORDAINED   AND   ENACTED   this

A.D., 1973.
 

        day a f ;1-a,(,
 


HAYC.OCK   TOWNSHIP   BOARD   OF   SUPERVrso·



E
/

"







































-5-

r
 

 



AN   ORDINANCE    ESTABLISHINq    AND   PRESCRIBIN(l.   SPECil'ICATJ:ONS AND  MINIIWM  REQUIREMENTS   )'OR  THE  CONSTRUCTION,   OPENING, OR  DEDICATION   Ol'  AN:(  ROAD   OR  STREET  OR  ALLEY  FOR  PUBLIC USE  OR  TJUWEL   IN Hil,YCOCK  TOWNSHIP	.

WHEREAS, the Tow'nshi·p SuperVisors are ·enipower·ed by: The Sec·ond Class· Towni>h:l.p  Co.de  to: adopt rules or· i:-e.gulati.oris  concerning the ·con·st:ruct:i:.on,   opening,  or  dedicati:ori  of  any  road  or  str.eet  ·or all:e,.  far· pub1:;l.c  use· or  travel  in Hayc9ck  'r wi::rsh:!;p,  and;
WHEREAS,.  the· Hayco·ck Towrish:i!'  Supervisor·s desire ta: pre­

scribe  and   establ1sh  ·sp·ecificatian·s  and  minimum   requ·irements:  in corinectiori  with ·any  said  streetg  or· roads  p;t>ior· to: ·any pub11c  us.e­ ar: travel. oc·curr;ing theieon ;iri Ha:yco·ck .To.Wrish:ip;
WHEREAS,  the 'row'nship Super.visors de·e:m it necessary for

the health;  safety.,  welf'are  of  the f>Ubr:J.:c  to: "spec:J;fy  the" matters set" .fQ:tith: heJ;'e:l.n;
NOW lllllEREFORE,   be: ·;1.t RESOLVED  as follows:

SECTION I: . ApplicaU"ori

(a;) The· f'ol"lowihg principles., standards and  requirenientg will· ·be· ·applied bY: the Tow'nshiJ? super.visors in evaluating plans .for proposea  subdivisions  and  land  deyelopinent3:.


be  considered  m;i.nimun  standards  and requirements: :t'or the ·promot;iori o;t'  the  ·publJ:c  heal th,  safety; morals,  and. genel:'al  welfare.
(c)	Whenever othe·r appli·cable· i:-egulatioris impose more

:restrictive   standards  and  requi;rllll!ients:  than  tha·s·e  :outlJned' herein, su-ch  other  re.gulat1ons   shall  ·cohtro·1;
SECTION .II:	Sect1ori: 507. of  the Bucks: County  subdivision  and Larid Deyelop)nent  Regulations. ·anact.ed on Deoembe·r: 22;. 1971, are in­ corpor.'ate:d he):'.ein  b/f  reference  as  corita:l,ned  the"rein  as of  trrat  :date
and n9t· as may  thereaftep be: ·amended.
I
SECTION III:	.St1'eet s: proposed tq: be. dedicated for pubrtc  use

and. m<;inte:riance. ·shall coliform to: the des·ign ;roe<J;uirenierits: and  speci­

ficati:oris  of   this  res·qrution   as  we11·  ·as the  provisions   ot: the   af'ore said Bucks .County Subdivi,sion· Ordinance:,· 9.8 we11 as any  amenctments: ·
 
or  additions  either  to. ·this resolution,  to.  that  ordinance  or  other­ wise· in ;t:QJ;>ce  and effect and the mare  restr.ictive  of  any  requiremen  s
shall  be  the ·applicable minimum  speci:('icatioris  and  requirements:.
SECTJ;ON ·:rv;	E·tre·ets:

(9.)	The  constructi:on·  of   streets; roads,  lanes,  driveways and  alleys <1s  shown upon· final pla.ns  and  as co.ntained  in contl:'act a.gveemerits: intended: fQ;r use· by the pubD:c shall· in every res:p·ec·t c<;>i:it.'arm tq: su·ch J;>equirenients as the Township Supervisors may by resQluti:on· J;>equire  t:o!:  the  coristruct:l;oi:i of  streets.
(b}   Spec1ficat:l;on·s.	Exc·ej:it   as otherw:Lse provided  hel:'ein the ·minimum J;'equirenients: ·for· imp:t'Ov'enients: ·sha;11· be· ·thas·e conta:ined in th:e l'ei:insylva.nia  Depal'tment  of  Transpor·tat.:J;oi:i' s  Specification·s CJr.aJ:'m  408)  M  last· reyized,
Cc)	All   streets:  shall  be·.  graded·  to:;·

(1)	The  g;rades  sha·wn  on  the  street proriles  and


(2}	The  t:un· width of  the ·right-:or-way.

(d)	Along the eod:st:t:ng lltreet on· wh:t:ch ·a subdivision or land  dev'elopD\ent   abuts:  (her.einafter  c'llled  a  boundary   street). im­ rovements: shall be· made to· .the ·street·,:  The improvements. to the
oundarY  str.eet  :shall be. detei;>mined  bi the  w;!.dth  of' the  required

cartway  and  btiilt  to  the  sped,ficati:on·,,  estabD:shed  by the· Township

;'iuperviso:i:'s.	The  To.wnsh;lp  Supervisors  shall have  ·the  option  to. gra variance  to:  this  sub..;secti.oi:i  only,  with  the  requirements:  for  such aria.nee· to: be· considered  to: be: ·at least  :equal  to: the  req'ui;rements: aJ:'· the. gra,nt :or· a v<1r1ance· under  zoning  ordinances·,
SECTION Yi

1.	The roa,·dway, dra1nage ·and shoulders shall be. graded i

ccordance with the plans approved by the Bupel:'Visors.

2 .. · Drainage  shall be  acc·ompl:l:shed  to: ·permit  all surface ater· to. have ade<J;uate: out1:ets:. froni i:>oadside ·gutt:ers •
. 3.	The· .shoulde;t>s sha;11· be· ·canst):'Uoted at .the· time o:(' the

r:l,g;i.nal   construction  ot: the  subgrad.e;	The·y shall be· trimmed and ompacted  with a power  roller.	The  inside  edges  shall be  cut  to. nea
-2-	I
 
lines  and  t,,. ·grade px-ior  to. the  placing  qf   the mate;t>ial  J:or  the  bas course;	Thi·s wQJ:'k will not· :be ·cohside:r:'ed  as final completion of the· eho.uld:e:i:'s  but :they shall be· satis:t'a,ct·arily  completed  af.ttr: the
pq,yemeht  :;ts )'lace·d.
4,	The· ba;se  course  shall  contain  at a m;l:himum  either  8	of CQmp1'.ct.ed m1mbe·r 3 '·c;tmshe·d aggrege,te: 'or· 6 11  of compacte:d aggregate:
l:J.me ·poz·zoloh,	sec·t;1:ons  3'rn. 2  and  322 ;2 ·or· 'th l"ennsylvania  Depart ment  of Trl;l.nsport3.t:l.:on· 1 s ·specir:J.cat1·ons ·(Form 408)  as last revised must  ·a.h·o be· sa,tis:(':i,ed,	The· material shall be of  a density. equal to. ·or. gx-eater  than toot :of trappe ·x-ock.,.	The· installation· of  the base ·c<iu;t>se inust·  ur.ther  include :the use  or· quarry  sand  to: :('111 in the· yoids,  a,ddit1:onal  compact1:ori  a,nd  pr;iJning  of· the base .course
w;ith )VIG  30 .dust oi'l ·0p ;its: equ11,yalent;	In  the  event  aggregate· lime poz·zolon  is used, only the .surface· nee·d  be· p:t":l.med  with NC  dust
on or· its: equivalent.

5.	The· binder cau·;t>se -shall ·con·ta:in as m:l,nimum reqU'iremen s

a 3" depth ·of. compact.e:d  bltuminous  paye;:>  applicati:on  o:f a plant

mix   using   a  mate;t>;ial   aggregate·  of   trappe   rcick  ·or· equiValent   :density The   binder.   course   shall'  fu;t'ther   comply   in  complete:  det3.il   with Pennsylvania Depa;t>tment  ·ar T:t"anspor·tat;!:an· rs Specifications ·(l!'.orm 408.)   as  l'lst  revised.	l'!oto   payer·  applicati:on   shall   use   aggregate mate:r·ial    of   trappe   rock   :density   or   Hs:  equ:i.yalent.	The· ·1:tquid aspha;lt  :shall meet  :or· exceed  the· minimum  requirements  ·at  Form  408
as a:\'oresaid.

6.	'rhe wearing su;t>:('ace· ·shall ·be ·or 1 1(2." at:· compacted aggregate: applied eithe·r. by. a bituminou·s  paver: or a moto· paver.
The aggx-egate: sha;ll not· :excee·d. 3/4° in d:!.amete:r' and the ·applicati:on

must· like.wise· mee·t. all specTricati:on·s as set .fa:t"th ·ror the· bfndex-

cou se:

SECTION VI;	The· To'w'nship Supe:r'yiiior·s. ·or· thei·r agent shall ha;ye ·the pight  of  insp·ec't.fan· at a11· t:l.meK ·(Ind shall ;further have the ·.,:J.ght ta: make ·as many te:st :!)o;t'ings ·as T :wnship ;3uperyisor·s dee
rea;sonable  (riot· to: ·exceed· 6"  by 6 11     in  she to. the determined  depth) prior to. ·acce.ptance· .·and a!')':t'av·a1 at :the· collt :i:if· the develop.er. or
 
landowner.

SECTION VII:

Ca;)	As  a  condition  9f· the  Tow'nshiJ?   Supervisors'  approv- ing  a,ny  such ·plans,  the  landowner·  or· deyelQper· must  place  in  an inte;t'est,..;bearing  accou·nt  in the name  of. Haycock  Townsh:!.p  Sixty.-five
)'ercent  {6.5%) of.'· the ·co.st  of  any  coristruct.:Lon·,  opening,  or· dedica­

t:i,:c;m   of  any roa;d,  st;r>eet,  lane  or  alley. for· public  use  or  travel in Ha,yc<ick  Township  as determined by .the· Township Supervisors or th:e:Li:-   agent   in  the·1r  sole  discretion,  wb:Lch  ·account  :shall  consist of  cash ·alon·e.	The·  balance  of  Th:trty.-f.;i, ye l'ercent  :(35%)  of  the cost· :as  dete:i:'mined  by:  the  Supervisors  or· their  agent  .shall be secuo:>ed by: bond in. form approved by. the To.wnsn:tp  superviso;r:'s and
sec.UJ:'ed  by  approved .su;rety.	All   roads   or  streets: must  ·be· completed priop to. the cominencemerit  ·.of  any  land  de\¢e1opment ,: construction  of any  str.uctu:res  or· bu.Ud;i,ngs   and  said  roads  or· streets. must  ·be
acc.ep.te:d by Townsh:l:p Superyis0i;>s prior ti;r any othe;r:' construction
comi:q,encJ,ng   or.  occur;t;'ling.	Upon·  acceptance  ·or the  :roads   or  streets.

by  the Tow'nsh1p  Supe;r;•visoJ:'S,  any  rema1n1ng  funds  in sa:!.d  1nterest­ beaJ;'1ng  a,ccciurit   .sha;ll: be  returned  to: the  developer  or  landow'ner.
Tbe· ··row'n·ship  SuJ?eryisor·s  will ·have ·sole ·d1scr·et·1.an· to: w1thdraw  said

runds  from  said  accou:nt  .;\n  order  to ·1nsure  compliance  with ·the minimum  specifica.ti:on·a;  requirements:  and  rules  -a,nd   r gU.lati.ons   in J:'o:i:'ce  ·;;nd  effect,. as  well  as to:r.  reimbu·rse  theni  for  the  cost  of
insp-ecti:on·,  te.::it  :bo-r"i!J.gS  or· o.the·rw1·se

('h}    The  deposit   of   funds   in   said  escrow  account   need   not oc·cu·J:'  prior· to: .'IPp:r:'OVal  of· any .su·c:ti ·pl'lns bU:t  ;must  occur  prior  to. any. coD."struc-ti:on· or· any roa·d, i::.rtr.ee·t.,,: lane - n:• a.11·ey er· any other constructi()n·  pursuant   :to.  ·said   i1pproied   pli1ns.
Cc)  The Tow'nsh1p Superv;isor·s,	n thei):'  sole disc;r:'eti.on
[I  ?-nd   at  :their  sole·   pti:on·,   shall have. ·the  ·i:-:1.ght..  to. ·agree. with  the landowner  o:i:'  deyelop·er  for· a  sche.diJ,1e· ·whereby. the  escrow  funds
I may  be  pe:r1oa·1cally   released  f:t'om  escrow .du;;>ing  the  co·urse  Of   d.QP l.str;i;ti.on.  Tne  ded;s:l;on  of   the  Tow'nship    upe:rv:i..so'l'.'s   as  to· whether

::.or· m:it  to make  such ·an  agi:-ee!J\ent  o:t'· .the ·terms the;r:>eof   sha;n· ·be: ·
 

b:lnding  and  conclusive.

SECTI.QN VIII;	This ordinance  is adop.ted pursuant  to: Section

16 <Jf  the  Act  of  J'une  1, 1956, P.L.  (1955)  2021;  53 p.S.  § 66140,.
·	66140 ,.1, eta.. , and violati:on· or non: oonipl1ance· with the .terms hereo shall subjec·t :all approp);>iate: persons  ·as defined by the Act. of·
J.lja;'  1, 1933_,  l.'.L.  101, art. XI,§ l144; Act  of J'uly i.O, 1947, P.L.
14a1, B 17' .(53 P,S,	: 661-114)   and  to. the ·provi..iion·s  and  penalties contained    the.rein.
 

·••   r
 


To.whship th:ls
 
ORDAINED
"'-
 
by. the Township  Superyisor·s  of· Haycock
       , A.  D.,  1973.
 









A1'TEST;


 
Secr.e    .  y	t  ·     ·
 

Paul Hunn:e:r
 
 



AN   OlWINANCE    CLOSING   AND  VACATING   CERTAIN
TO\>INSHil' ROADS IN HAYCOCK  TOWNSHIP


PROVIDING   Jl'OR   THE   CLOSING  .AND  VACATING   Olr   A   CERTAIN

)?ORTION  OJ)'  ROAD,  BEIN(j  A  PORTION  Oi!'  THE. BED  of  Township  Road  T424.,
Haycock  Township,  betwee·n  its: intersection with ]"a. Legislative fl9ute. #386 (Route. S63 1 also known· as Ridge Road l and a po:l,nt in th:
cQl:'ne'l:'  <;)f'   lands now  o:r" late. of  Philip  ;r. flies  and Mildred  s. Ries, husband and w:l,:f'e;
PROVIDING JrOR THE CLOSING AND VACATING  OF A CERTAIN PORTION   01'  ROAD'   BEJ;NI;  A   PORTION  OF  THE  BED  of  Township  Road  T467
fr<:>ni its: intersecti:on with Tawnsh:l;p  Road T424 to th:e boundary  line be.tween Haycock Tow'nshi.p and No9l<·a.niixQn Township, the· ·closing
and vacS:ting  o:('  th:e·  same  bei·ng  in the best· ;lnterest and  f.'or  the best convenience· ·of.' the To.wnship of Haycocl<;  and the· clo·sing and vacating  of· the  same  being  pursuant  to: the·  laws  relating  to: ·second crass· to:w'nshj,ps  in the  Conilllonweal th ·of Penns.-1vania.
IT IS HEREBY ENACTED ANDCORDAINED by the Superv:isors of

the Township  of· Haycock,  Bucks·  County,  Pennsylvania,  and  it :is he·reby   enacted  and  ordained  by  the  sallle; pursuant   to  the  laws relating  to  Second  Class  Townships  of.'  the  Gqnunonwealth  of  Pennsyl­ vania,  as  ,f'ollow's,  to: w;l.t;:
SECTION :i:.	Whereas,  it is necessary  in th:e· Jud·gment  ·o;f the Superyisors  of  the Tow'rishil'  of  Haycock,  Bucks· County, Pennsylvania,  to: c1·ose  and  vacate: pursuant  to: the  laws  of  the· Coll)ll)onwealth ·or: Pennsylvania relatlng to: ·se·cond Class· Townships a poi:•ti:on of Township Road T424. in th:e· 'rQ:wnship of Haycocl<, Bucl<s County,,  Pennsyl yania  as more ·partfoularlyc descr;l.bed  as  follows;
NOW  THEREFORE,   said rqad  is he;t'eb7  closed,  vacate:d, and  abandoned;
l\LL THAT .CERTAIN	lot  :or  l'iec·e: ·or· ground   s;i.tuatec  in Haycock  ·Tow'nsh:lli',  Countyc  of  Bucks; CollliIJonwe th  of    ennsylyania, ano  describe<'r   as  follows;
 

Beg1nn1ng   at a point  in  the  cente:r' l:i.ne  of  the· old  and  the new Legisl·atiire Route: #386: (als·o· kriol'in a,s· Ridge Road and also·· kriown  now and ;f'orme.-ly  as RoutE>  563 ·i>,nd ·Legislative Route: 386 PAR);
thence· along  the center  line o:f  Townshiµ  Roa,d  424  N. 530  W  a  distanc
<;if  a,pppox1ma.te1y  1.,575. feet'r  thence  N  27.Q. W  a  distance  of  approJd­ mately   125  feet;. thence  N   439  W   a  distance  9f   approximately   485 ·.
feet;: thence.  N.  38°   W   a  distance  of   a,pprox·:l.ma,tecly.  610  .feet·;.  thence N  13". w a  distance ·or appro•J.matel·y  47.5  ;\eet·;: the.rice  N   99  W,  a
diiitance  of  apvrox1matel;y' 6ao .feet,: to: a  point  designate:d  b;y'  a r<'\:llroad  spike  in the  cente:r>  line ·of sa·;i.ct  Township Road' 424 . (also known   as  Hayc9ck  Run   Roact.),   whfoh  railroad   sPihke  further  designates
a point,: a_ CQ,J;'ner·,   in l;i.ne  .Qf.  lands  now  9r· la,te. ·of  !'hi.lip T: Ries
anct JV!ilct;red· !'>,  Ries., hu bi>,nd  anc:I  wH'e,. which ·rail:t'o·act  spike. further delinea;te:s the  nofthern terminus  o:f  Tc;>wi:lSh:lp  Road  424: ·(Haycock '!lun
Roa'd ). to: be· abandoned,  closed  and ·vaci>te:a here bi.

.  The   total  length  ·thereof   is  approximately    ,.73· ·miles, 3.,858;7  feet,: as  dete:t'minect  by· a  straight 1:1,ne  ·diagram  dated Septell!be):'  22,   1973 and  attached  her.etQ:  ·and  made   a· part  hereof·.

SECTION  ;u,	Wher·eas ,it is nece·ssary  in the ·judgment  of the  l'lu)lei:'visors  o;f  the: .To.wn:Ship   o:f  Ha)'cock,  Bucks  County.,  Pennsyl­ vania.,  to: cl<:>s·e   and  vacate: pursuant  :tq: the  laws  of  the  Commonwealth or  Pennsylyania  relat'Lng  to· ·sec·ond  Cla,ss· T9.wil:Sh:t:ps   a  portion·  of Townsh:t:p  Road  T467 ·:1.n the Township  or· Haycock,  Bucks  County:,
l;'ennsy:lyania,  as more ·pe,rti·.cula.rly des.c:t'ibe·d  as follows:

NOW  THERE)l'ORE,   said  roa.d  1s hereby  closed, vacated,  and
 

a,bi>,ndoned;
 



ALL  THAT  CERTAIN  lot :or piece ·o:r: ground situate: in
 

Haycock Township,  County..of  Bucks,  Cominoriweal th of l'ennsylvania, and   described   as   follows:
·	!leginning  at  :a  point   :in  the   cente;t'  of'  a   stone  masonry th:r>ee a,;r>ch. br;ldge· over: Hitycock Creek and bei!lg ori the· ·boundary
line between· Nockam:l.xon  Townsh:l.p  and  Ha.yco·ck  Towrrnh:t:p ;. the.rice· along cent.er· u·ne of[  T<)wil'sh:t:µ  Road  46T  (Park 'Road)  ff -819· W;  thence  S
590  W;   thence  ·:;;·  800.  W  the· distance· ·of  29r;62 ·Jee.t: :to:· a  p9int  ·1n the  cente;r>  Une ·o:r: Ha.Yc 0ck Run  Roa,d· ·.(T1>wilsh·ip  Road   424)   North· qt: southern   terminus  gf   Township    Road·  424 i  .aim,   knol'in    as  Haycock   Run
J.\9a,d'

To.ta;l  length  equals  a,pproximateTy  29r;62 ·.feet,: approxi­ mately  , 0568  m:Ues·,. as  determined· by. a  stra;I,ght· line diagram  dated September  24.,  15/.73, and attached heret·o: and mitde  a part hereof.

ENACTED AND  ORDAINED  into. ·an Or.dinance this 4th ·day of December>, 19.73.


 
-2-
 
I/l/'/4 gpn i.,.o








OKDINANCF.  NO.   27



AN  ORDINANCE   OF  Tllli  TOWNSHI?
HAYCOCK,   BUCKS   COUN'i'Y,
Pl-:NNSYLVANIA,   PROVIDING  THAT NO   PUBLIC   S'l'REE'l'S  OF  TIIF.
'l'OWNSHIP   Ol'  HAYCOCK   llE   OPENED OR   CUT   BY ANY PERSON;    FIRM;
COHPORATION   OR   UTILITY   WITKOIJr
FIRS '  SECURING   A   PE&'1IT  IN
ACCORDANCE   WITH  THE  TOWNSHIP
CODE, AND   PROVIDING   PENA TIES   ?OR
THI::   VT<'JLATION   THEREOF.



Ill•:  IT OHD/\INED  by  the Townsh p of Haycock, County  of  13ucl<.3,   Pennsylvania,   aa  follows;




SEC'!' f.ON ONE.	Ln  Accordance  with  the  pI'OVi:lions   of'  Sccti..on  11'6 of  Art ic J.e  .XI  of  the  Second  Cl us::;  •row:nshlp  Cede,  as  amended,  no pall road  or  street  ral:lway  shn.ll  heraat't;er  be   con3tructcd  upon any  township  road,  no!'  shall  any  railt'oarl  or	treet  ratlway   eras in gs,  nor   any  Kas  pipe,  water  p1.pe,   e.lcctric  conduits,   or  other pip.t g,   be   lald  upon   or  in,  not'  shall  any   te.lcphone  telegraph,
or clectr:lc  l:lg."lt  O!'  power  poleR,  or  any  tt·ecs  or  fol.L,igc  or shruhbcr·y  or  any  other  obst!'uctt.ons  be  erected  upon  or  ln,  any portlon  of  a  townsh.1.p  road,  except  under  such  condlti.ons,  re-
:.strlctlons  and  .regulati..ons  rclat:lng  to  the  installation  and maintenance  thereof,  ar;  may  be  prescI'ibed  ln permits  granted by the Town hip  for  uch  purpose.


3EC'.rION TWO.	1i'he  application  for a pcr•ml.t   sha.l L   be  on  a fo1•m prescribed  'by  the  'l1ownsh.lp  ancl  :.3Ul>mlttcd  to  the  rJ1own hip   i.n tri- plicate.	The  app Llcation  shall  be  accompanl.etl  by  a  fee  1.n accordance with the Schedule  of  !:i'ees  ::;et  forth by the Department of  'l'ransportatlan  or  llaycoek  1'own h1.p,  fa!'  Highway  Occupancy
 

Per>mits  and	Restoration Cha,r>ges.	In  addition,   the  applicant shall submit  three  (3)  copies.. ·of  a sketch showing such dimcns.Lon
as  the  location  of  the  intended  fac:J.llty,  w·i.dt.h   01'  the  traveled roadway,  right-of-way   lines  and  a dimension  to  the  nearest   inter aectlng    street.


SEC 'ION Tlmm-:.	A   permit  .:3hall  be  lssued  to  the  applicant  aft all the  afort!ment.ioned  requlrements  have  been  filed.


SRCTION FOUH.	Upon  com.p.Lction  of  th.e  work,.  Lhe  appllcant shall  i:,ive   written   notice   th.ereof    to  the  'l'ownsht.p.


SEC'r[ON PIVE. Upon col'lpletion of the \'fork author:L7.cd by thr: perm the •rownship shall lnspect the work and 1 when necessary, enforce compllance  with   the   condtt.ions,   rest1·ictj_ons   and   rcgu1attons
pre:;cribed  hy the  perm.it.	'.¥here any  settlement  or defect .1 n the work  occur:::,  l f the  appllcar.t  shall fall ta rectify  any such settlement  OT'  other defect, wi. hin  s.txty  (60) duys  a.f'ter
written not.lee  t'l'.•om  the 'rown ;.hlp  to do  :.>o,  the 'l'ownship  may  do  th work  eind   shal.liropo::.c  upon  t;-i.e   appllcant  the  cost  thereof,  to­ gr.ther  wltil  an  additional  twenty  pel'.'centum   (20%)  of  such  cost.


SH:CTT.ON ST.X.	Any   per5 on,  fj rrn,  corp or at ion  ol'.'   utl lity which shall violate  any  of  the  provtsJ.ona   of  this  Ort!l.nancc  shall  be
subject,  upon  convlct.ton  before  a Dist!'lct  Just:Lce,  to  pay  a  ftne of not more t;han 'l'HHEJ<; HUNDRED  DOLLARS  ($300.00) o.nd coet ol' prosecution,  and  1 n  rte.fault  ot' the  payment  of  such  t'lnc  and
costs  to  "lrnprlsonrnent;  in  the  County  .Jail  fol'.'  not  more  than  flve

(')) day .


jEC'l'ION  SEVEN.	Any  o ·dinar1ce  or  part  ot'  Ordinance  tnconsisten




-?-
 



herewith ls hereby repealed insot'aI' as it is incons1-stent here-

with.




P.NACTl':D   IN'!'O   AN   ORDINANCE   thi,;	'  19'711.



OARD  OF  SUPERVISORS  OF  HAYCOCK
TOWNStiIP
8aref;s i5-m-=a-·n	_








































-3-
 
jrt:dmi	11/14/74	l+l
---.
 



 






ORDINANCE NO. 28
 


AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, CLOSING AND VACATING A CERTAIN PORTION OF A TOWNSHIP ROAD

PROVIDING FOR THE CLOSING AND VACATING OF A CERTAIN PORTION OF ROAD, BEING A PORTION OF THE BED or Township Road 424,
(also known as Haycock Run Road) Haycock Township, between a point in the corner of lands now or late of Philip J. Ries and Mildred S.
Ries,  husband and wife, this point :being the northern terminus  of

a former road abandonment (Haycock Township Ordinance Number 26, enacted and ordained 4 December 1973, and filed of record 2 Januar 1974) and the junction of Township Road 422 (also known as Top Roe Trail Road)with T424; the closing and vacating of the same being
in the best interest and for the best convenience of the Township

of  Haycock  and  the  residents  ther·eof;  and  the  closip.g  and vacating

of  the  same being pursuant  to the laws relati g to: second class to n­

ships in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

IT IS HEREBY ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Supervisors of the Township of Haycock_, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, and it is hereby  enacted  and  ordained  by   the  same, . pursuant  to· the  laws relating  to·  Second   Class  Town."ships   of   the  Commonwe?-lth   of   Pennsyl-
vania_, as follows, to wit:

SECTION  I.	Whe·reas,  it ·is necessary  in the  judgment  of the Supervisors of the. Township of Haycock,. Bucks County., Pennsylvania,  to· close  and  vacate  pursuant  tn  the laws  of  the Conunonwealth of Pennsylvania relating to Second Class Townships
a portion of Township Road 424, in the Township of Haycock, Bucks

County, Pennsylvania:

NOW THEREFORE, portion of said road is hereby closed,
 




vacated  and  abandOned,,   s·ame  being  more  particlilarly  described  as
 

follows:
 



ALL  THAT  CERTAIN  lot  or  piece  of  ground  situate in
 

Haycock Township) Cou·nty. of Bucks) Commonwealth· of Pennsylvania,

and described  as  follows:

Beginning  at a point  in the  center  line  of  Township
Road  424  (Haycock  Run Road) designated  by  a railroad  spike
(S.L.D.  Stati:on  38+59.70). which  designates  the northern  terminus
of  a previous  to.wnship road  abandonment  _(Haycock  O:rdinance  No.  26, enacted-   4   December    1973),   which   railroad   spike   further   designates
a point,,  a corner, in line of  lands now or- late of Philip T. Ries
and- Mildred  S.  ·Ries,,  husband  and  wii'e;  thence  along  the  center
line  of  Township  Road  424  N  220  ll' W  a  distance	of"   approximately
108 feet  (Said point  ·being a corner  in lirie  of- lands  now· or  late
of  Philip  T	Ries and Mildred S ..Ries,, husband and wife);  thence
N  50°  52'  w a  distance  of   approximately.  308  feet  to  a  point,,a corner   (S.L.D.   Station  42+.77 .23)  being  the  East  Right-of-Way   Line
of  Township  Road  422   (Top  Rock  Trail)Road)  which  point  .further delineates  the new northern  terminus  of  Townshi"p  Road  424  (Haycock Run Road)  to be  abandoned_,  clos·ed  and va·cated  thereby.

The tot.al length thereof  is approximately  .0788 miles,
416 feet,,	s determined by   a straight  line  diagram   dated   29  June
l974 and  attached  hereto  and made  a part  hereof.
 

ENACTED   AND
day  of	197$-
 
ORDAINED  into an Ordinance this f·


TOWNSHIP  OF  HAYCOCK . BOARD   OF  SUPERVISORS
 



Attested by:	=
Peggy	s,  Secretary






















-2-
 
 




NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that the following Ordinance will be considered for adoption by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township,  Bucks County,  Pennsylvania,  at a regular meeting to be held  at the TownshiR  Building situate on Harrisburg School Road in said Township op. Wednesday, October I, 1975, at 7i30 o'clock P.  M.

AN ORDINANCE REGULATING AND RESTRICTING THE SPEED OF MOTOR VEHICLES ON TOP ROCK TRAIL BETWEEN RIDGE ROAD AND HAYCOCK RUN ROAD IN THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK,  COUNTY OF BUCKS AND COMMONWEALTH  OF PENNSYLVANIA.


BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Haycock, County of Bucks and Commonwealth of PennsylvaD.ia,  and it is  hereby  enacted  and  ordained  by  the  authority  of  the  same  as  follows:

SECTION 1.  Words and phrases when used in this Ordinance shall have the meaning described to them in the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania, as now in force, or as hereafter amended.

SECTION  2.   The operation of any motor vehicle in excess of thirty- five (35) miles per hour on Top Rock Trail (T422} in Haycock Township from its intersection with Ridge Road  (L. R.  386 also known as Route  563) to its inter- section with Haycock Run Road  (T424} is hereby prohibited.

SECTION 3.  The proper authorities of the Township are hereby directed: to erect official signs restricting the  speed as aforesaid  in conformity with the provisions of the Vehicle Code.

SECTION 4. Any per-J?Qn violating .ij?.e maxi.Iq.um speed limit as set forth in Section 2  hereof  shall, be prosecuted  under the pertinent section of the Vehicle Code, ActofApril  29,  1959, P.L.  58,  as amended,  and shall be subject to the fines and  penalties  therein set forth.
 




SECTION 5.  This Ordinance shaU become effective five (5) days

 
after final enactment.


ENACTED AND ORDAINED this 1975.

















FRANCIS X. GRABOWSKI,  ESQUIRE
Township  Solicitor Jaczun & Grabowski One  South Fifth  Street
Perkasie,  Pennsylvania	18944
 


day of  o	.





HAYCOCK  TOWN SHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
 
































-2-
 

 




NOTICE IS HEREBY G!Vl:N that the following Ordinance will be conside ed for adoption by t e Board  of Supervisors  of Haycock Township,  Bucks County, Pennsylvania,  dt a rogular  meet1ng  to ba  hold  at  the  Township  Building  situate
 
on Harrisburg School Road in said Township on Wednesday, October 1 at 7:30 o'clock P. M.

AN  ORDINANCE  OF THE  TOWNSHIP  OF  HAYCOCK,   BUCKS COUNTY,  PENNSYLVANIA,   PROHIBITING  THE PARKING  OF M01'0R  VEHICLES  ON  THE  WEST  SIDP. OF TOP ROCK  TRAIL IN  HAYCOCK  TOWNSHIP,   BUCKS  COUNTY,  PENNSYLVANIA AND  PROVIDING  PENALTIES  FOR  THE  VlOLATION  1'llEREOF.
 
' 1975'
 


Wlll:RLAS,  the  Act of Assembly of  May l, 1933,  P.I..  103, 53 P.S. 65724,  as dmended,  gives to the  Board  of  Supervisors  of  Townships  of  the econd  Class  power  to  regulate  parking  within  the  l'ownship;   and

WI-IEREAS, the Board of 'Supervisors of 'Haycock Township in onier to promote  the  convenience,   protcct1on  and  best  Interests  of  the  public  believe that  these  purposes  will  best  be  accomplished  by  prohibiting  parking  on tho west side of  Top Rock  Trail from  its intersection  with Ridge  Road  to its intersection  with  Ilaycock  Run  Road.

NOW,  THEREFORE,   BP. IT ORDAIN ED AND  BNACTED  by  the  Board

of SupP.rvlsors as follows:


SLCTION  1.  Definitions:   Whenever the word  "parking" is used in this Ordinance,  it shull mean the  standing of u  vehicle,  except a police or fire department vehicle or ambulance,  whether occupied or not,  upon a highway otherwise than tcmPQraril y for the purpose of and while actuull y engaged in loading or unlOdding,  or in obedience  to traffic regulations  or traffic  signs or
sJgnals.
 


SECTION 2. Parking is hereby prohibited on the paved surface, or withln the right-of-way of the west side of Top Rock Trail between  Ridge Road and Haycock Run Road within Haycock Township, Bucks County.

SECTION  3.    Official  "No Parking"  signs  shall  be  erocted  and maintained along the west side of the aforementioned rood, which shall be tn accordance with Sections 1105 and 1106 of tho Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Cade,

SECTION 4.  Any person violating the provtstons of thts Ordinance sh ll,

upon conviction thereof before a District Justice of tho Peace, be found guilty of

a  summary offense and  shall be  fined  Fifty  Dollars  ($50. 00)  plus  costs  of prosecution. and in default of payment theroof 1 shall be committod to tho Bucks County Prtson for a period not cxcecd1n9 five (5} days.
ENACTED AND ORDAINED this	day of   o	.

1975.


HAYCOCK  TOWNSIIlP BOARD OF SUP!'RVISORS












FRl\NCIS X.  GRABOWSKI,  ESQUIRE
Township  Sollcltor Jaczun & Grabowski Ono South  fifth  Street
Perkdsie,  Pennsylvania	18944















-2-
 
n
!l
ll
fi -
ii
dI'
!j
h

)i
H
 








LEGAL  NOTICE

NOTICE IS  HEREBY  GIVEN  that at a regular meeting of the  Board of I
 
iuf Supervisors. -of  Haycock  Township  to be  held  an  Wednesday,   May  5,  1976,
If   at 7:30 P.M... , in the Township  Building,  Harrisburg  School Road,  Haycock
H"
!l Township,  Pennsylvania,  the  Board of Supervisors propose ta cpnsider and
:1
!
I,,'  enact if  appraprtate  the  following  Ordinance.
l!
u	ORDINANCE NO.  ·30
H
:1	AN  ORDINANCE   OF  HAYCOCK  TOWNSHIP,   BUCKS  COUNTY,
PENNSYLVANIA,   CLOSING  AND  VACATING A  CERTAIN  PORTION
ii	OF  A   TOWNSHIP    ROAD.
(j
li	WHEREAS,  under Section 1101 and Section 1130 of the Second Class  '
HJ  Township Code of May 1, 1933, P .L. 103, as amended, the B9ard of Supervisors
H has the power to vacate roads  or parts thereof;  and
!1

};
VVJi REAS!_ it is necessary in the judgment of the Supervisors of
-   ' ''  '' . ,,- ••r--·  ' -,,.	-	•
ii
!i Haycock Township,  Bucks· County,  Pennsylvania,  to close and vacate pursuant
!l
.
)J  to the  laws  of  the Commonwealth  of  Pennsylvania  rel.citing  to Second Class
t"f Townships  a  portion  of Townshi_.,  Road  T-376  (Camp  Trail  Road}  in the  'Ibwnship
ii
H of  Haycock,  Bucks  County r     Pennsylvani;  and
t:
'1	I
!I	WHEREAS,   the  Pennsylvania   Department  of  Environmental  Resource
l!1! has  requested  the  Board  of Supervisors  to so  vacate  said portion  of Township	I

H  Raad 376; and
'!
ii
 
H
1-\
tHi
fi
 
WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors has  specifically determined

that the road is useless,  inconvenient,  and burdensome,  and that the vacation	I
 















-·· -
 
il of  said road is in accordance with the  spitit and intent of the Township Com-
H
1  prehensive  Plan;  and
il
"H
ij

t
I	'
H
ii
I,,i
,i.i
!l
ii
....t.i.
 
. -..	ii


11	-,

!	WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors has held a public hearing in
!1 regard to the vacation of said road portion,  after due notice in writing having

!f   been  given to the  abutting  property  owners.
i!
!'!1	NOW THEREFORE,  be it ORDAINED and ENACTED by the Board of
II Supervisors of Haycock  Township,  Bucks  County;   enn ylvania,  and it is
!\ hereby ORDAINED and ENACTED by the authority of the same as fallows:
ll
"B
ti	SECTION 1.   That a portion of Township  Road 376  is hereby vacated,
I clo_sed and abandoned,  the same being more particular described as follows, to
!I wit:
H
!i	ALL  THAT  CERTAIN  tract  of land,  situate in Haycock  Township,
1i
fl  Bucks  County and  Commonwealth  of  Pennsylvania,   more  particularly  described
n
!,!, on a survey plan dated November-3,  1974,  made  by Pickering-,  Carts  &
ii
;\Summerson, Inc., Consulting Engineers, bounded and described as follows:
lJ
II	BEGINNING at the intersection of the center line of T-3 76  (Camp
H
!\Trail Road) with the centerline of T-376 as reconstructed,  THENCE from the
!
if!  point of beginning and along the centerline of T-376 to be vacated the four
11
lj following courses and distances,  viz:   (1)  North 7° 55' 13 11   East118.36 feet to
i,i.
\I an angle,  thence  (2) and passing  partly through the bed of L.R.  386,  Parallel
!I
;i A North 10° 03' 47" West 223 .87 feet to an angle, thence (3) North so 30' 13"
•1
!i East 146.22 feet to an angle, thence (4) North 3° 37' 13" East 84.55 feet to a
l4i	.
[;  point  in the  Northerly  legal  right-of-way  line  of 1.R.   386,   Parallel  A.
n
:1	Said road having  a  legal right-of-way width of 33  feet.

The bearings on the above description are tied onto the Meridan as
,,
!i used  an L. R.  386,  Parallel  A.-
;
;
\j	ALSO ALL _THAT CERTAIN TRACT OF LAND, situate in Haycock

,!,Township,   Bucks  County and Commonwealth  of Pennsylvania," more particularly
 
" describe_d  under survey plan dated November 13, 1974
 

made by Pickering,
 

Summerson, Inc. L   Consulting Engineers, bounded and described as





-2-
 
I/
ii
;I
'1I-

!l ti II
I11i
 







follows:
 










BEGINNING at a point in the Southeasterly legal right-of-way line
 




. ::·
 
'i of L.R.  386,  Parallel A and in the centerline  of Township Road  No.  376
l1	1
1'I    (Camp Trail Road} THENCE  from the point of beginning and along the centerline  1
11	,i
iI•i  of  said road  (50 feet wide) the two following  courses and distances viz:   (!} by i

a curve to the right in the Southerly direction having a radius of 150 .feet for
II the arc distanc1> of 133.36 feet to a point of tangency.  thence (2) South 7° 55'
l!
I! 13" West 70. 64 feet to a point,  thence continuing along the centerline of said
11
l! road  (33 feet ·wide) the eight following courses and distances,  viz:   (1)    South
:i
il 70 55' 13" West 100.90 feet to an angle, thence (2) South 530 20' 47" East
Ii	;
H   500 Feet to an angle,  thence  (3)  South 530 22' 17" East 266.21 feet to an
il
ii  angle, thence. (4)  South 36° 42', 43" West  312. 24 feet to an angle,  thence
n  (5) South 53° 02' 17" East 636.46 feet to an angle, thence (6) South 53° 26'
l
H    47" East 226.-45 feet to an angle, thence (7) South 54o 04'' 48° East 200 fee tol'
tz	'
 

1,
11
1t
"i:
H
u ii ii

it
Jl
1!
d
ii
i,,l
I,l,Il
"ij
!l
U"·
";i-
 
an angle, thence (8) South 73° 13 1  28" East 76.58 feet to a point in the North- westerly legal right-of- way line of L.R •. 09068 (Old Bethlehem Road) 33 feet wide.·
Said road having a legal right-of-way width of 33 feet.

The bearings  of the above descriI?tions are tied onto the Meridan as

used on L. R. 386, Parallel A.

The length of the first description is approximately 5 73 feet,  or

1.11	Miles as indicated by a plan attached hereto and a !'lade a part hereof; the second description containing a total length o approximately 2, 523 feet,
or 0. 48 miles as indicated  on the plan attached heret6 and made a part hereof.


SECTION 2.  That the map, zoning map, or plan of Haycock
 
11    Township be admitted by striking therefrom the said portion of the road as
i;
:1      above  described  and  hereby vacated.
'i
"'I
;j
iJ
H
i( h H
_ii ..                                                                                    -3-
 






SECTION 3.  That all Ordinances and parts of Ordinances

inconsistent hereof are hereby repelled.


ENACTED AND ORDAINED this	day  of \'\'I (o.  A. D. ,


 







FRANCIS X.  GRABOWSKI
TownshiP Solicitor
Jaczun & Grabowski One South Fifth Street Perkasie 1  Pennsylvania

--,
 


HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP SUPERVISORS


I I I I


I

Earl D. Winters	I

L	I

I
er	c:;flZ	I
 
·;
i
,_c'.




--
 
-1

Ronald W. Walters	I























i
I



!
 
..	..... ,





ORDINANCE   NO.  ;;:, I


·	AN  ORDINANCE  PROVIDING FOR THE LEVY, ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION OF A TA,'{ FOR GENERAL REVENUE PURPOSES FOR THE YEAR ONE THOUSAND NINE
HUNDRED SEVENTY-SEVEN AND ANNUALLY THEREAFTER, UNDER THE ·AUTHORITY OF THE LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT,  UPON SALARIES, WAGES,  COMMISSIONS ANJ:i OTHER COMPENSATION  EARNED DURING THE PERIOD .BEGINNING JANUARY 1,
AND ENDING  DECEMBER31,  BY RESIDENTS  OF THE TOWNSHIP  OP HAYCOCK,
: AND ON THE NET PROFITS EARNED DURING  THE SAME PERIOD,  OF BUSINESSES, PROFESSIONS AND OTHER ACTIVITIES  CONDUCTED BY SUCH RESIDENTS; AND
ON THE SALARIES,  WAGES,  COMMISSIONS AND OTHER COMPENSATION  EARNED  ,
·	BY OR PAID TO ALL OTHER PERSONS EMPLOYED IN SAID TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK DURING THE SAME PERIOD, AND ON THE NET PROFIT EARNED BY ALL OTHER PERSONS DERIVED ,FROM BUSINESSES,  PROFESSIONS AND OTHER ACTIVITIES CONDUCTED IN SAID TOWNSHIP  OF HAYCOCK  DURING THE  SAME PERIOD;
'•  PROVIDING  FOR  THE  FILING  OF  DECLARATIONS,   QUARTERLY  RETURNS  AND
.: FINAL RETURNS; REQUIRING EMPLOYERS TO REGISTER AND.TO DEDUCT THE TAX ''FROM THEIR EMPLOYEES'  WAGES AND TO FILE RETURNS AND PAY THE TAX;
MAKING AN EMPLOYER WHO WILFULLY OR NEGLIGENTLY FAILS OR OMITS TO
MAKE THE  DEDUCTIONS LIABLE  FOR PAYMEN.T  OF THE TAX;  SETTING  FORTH
.THE DUTIES OF THE INCOME TAX OFFICER,  PROVIDING  FOR THE  BONDING OF '   THE  OFFICER,  FOR  HIS  COMPENSATION,  AND AUTHORIZING  HIM  1'0 SUE;
PROVIDING FOR INTEREST AND PENALTIES FOR LATE PAYMENT; PROVIDING FINES;
i AND PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF THE ORDINANCE; PROVIDING FOR
' SEVERABILITY OF ITS TERMS; AND REPEALING A PRIOR ORDINANCE,	·



\11/HEREAS,  it is necessary in the judgment  of the Board of Supervisors

·of Haycock Township,  Bucks County, State of Pennsylvania, to impose a tax on

.. the salaries, wages,  commissions and compensation earned by residents  and on ' the net profits earned Of businesses,  professions and other activities conducted by residents and on the s lartes, wages,  commissions  and other compensation
·	earned  by or paid to all other persons  employed in the  said Haycock  Township for general revenue purposes,  occasioned by- incre.3.!:!ed Township costs and operating  expenses;  and
WHEREAS,  it is estimated that the revenue to be derived from this tax

will amount to Thirty Thousand ($30,000.00) Dollars annually.


IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township,

 
 
ARTICLE I - GENERAL PROVISIONS

SECTION I. Definitions:  The following words and p!:'.rases When used in this Ordinance shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context indicates a different meaning:
(a)	11Association 11    shall  mean  a  partnership.  limited  partnership, or any other unincorporated  group of two or more persons.
 
(b)	"Business'1  shci11 mean any  enterprise,     activity
 
profession
 

or any other undertaking  of an unincorporated  nature  conducted for profit or
·
·
ordinarily conducted  for profit whether by a  person,  partnership,  association  or	1,

any other entity.

(c)	"Compensation" shall mean earned income as herein defined.

{d)   "Corporation" shall mean a corporation or joint  stock	'

i'  association organized under the laws of the United States of America, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,  or any other state, territory,  foreign country or	I

dependency.	'

{e}  "Current year 11   shall mean the calendar year for which the tax  is  levied.
(f)  "Domicile" shall mean the place where one lives and has

:;  his permanent home and to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent.   Actual residence  is not  necessarily domicile,  for domicile is the
fixed place of abode which 1   in the intention of the taxpayer,  is permanent rathe than transitory.   Domicile is the place in which a man has voluntar.ily fixed the habitation of himself and his family, not for a mere special or limited purpose, but with the present intention of making a permanent home, until some event occurs to induce him to adopt some other permanent home.  In the case of businesses,  or associations,  the domicile  is that  place  considered  as the  center of business affairs and the place vvhere it3 functi.on::: arc discharged.
(g)    "Earned  Income 11    shall  mean  salaries,  wages,  commissions, bonuse:s,  iacentive payments,  fees, tips and other Com9ensa tier.. rac-e veci by a
person  or his  personal  representat ve  for  services  rendered,  whether  directly  or  _	 

-2-
 
'·



through an agent, and whether in cash or in propertyi not including, however,
.I
wages or compensation paid to persons on a·ctive milita1·y service, periodic

=        payments  for sickness and disability other than regular wages  received during

,, a period of sickness, disability or retirement or payments arising under

·. Workmen's  Compensation Acts,  occupational  disease acts and  similar legislation, or payments commonly recognized as old age benefits,  retirement pay or
pensions paid to persons retired from service after reaching a specific age or
,,
,· after a stated period of employment or payments commonly known as public
1:
·;assistance, or unemployment compensation payments made by any governmental
)
' agency or payments to reimburse expenses or payments made by employers or

li labor unions  for wage and salary supplemental programs,  including,  but not

; limited to,  Programs covering hospitalization,  sickness, disability or death,

h'   supplemental  unemployment  benefits,  strike benefits,  social  security and

!'.   retirement.

(l }  11Employer 11    shall mean a person, partnership, association,

i!i! corporation,  institution,  governmental  body or unit or agency,  or any other
'!
I\ entity employing  one or more  persons  for a  salary,  wage,  commission  or other

compensation.
!\
I.
(i)   11Income tax officer or officer" shall mean a person,  public
:! employee or private agency designated by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township to collect and administer the tax on earned income and  net prof ts
i!	,

(j)  "Net profits" shall meant.he net income from operation of '.!a business,  profession or other activity, except corporations, after pro-Vision
i; for all costs  and expenses  incurred in the conduct thereof,  determined  either on
;,).
.,  a  cash  or accrual  basis  in accordance  with .. the  accounting  system  used  in  such
H
;: business,  profession,  or other activity,  but  without  deduction of taxes  based  on

income.

(k}  "Nonresident" shall mean a person,  partnership,  association

,:;-r ot'1er entity domiciled outside the Township of Hay-cock.

(l)   11 Person or individual" shall 1nean a na.turai p.arson.




-3-


·.,.,\.1'""J.O:
 
·-·-··






{m)   11 Precedjng  year"  shall moan  th0 calenciur  year  before the

:::urrent year.

(n)	"Resident" shall mean a person,  partnersi1ip,  association or other entity domiciled in the 'l'ownsh1p of I-Iaycock 6
(o)	11 Succeeding  year"  shall  mean the  calendar year following

the current year.

(p)	11Taxpayeru  Shall mean a  person,  partnership,  association or any other entity requir0d hereunder to fl.le <:1  return of earned income or net profits,  or to  pay a tax thereon.
(q)	11 Township 11   shall mean the Township of Hayc6ck, County of  Bucks and State of Pennsylvania.
In this ordinance,  the singular shall include the plural,  and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.

ARTICLE II.  IMPOSITION AND RATE OF TA'{

The following taxes •'ire hereby imposed  for general  revenue purposes, under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act for the year 1977 and annually thereafter:
(a)	One percent  (1%) of all earned income received in the

period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of the current  year by residents of the Township.
(b)	-one percent  (19b)  of all net profits  earned in the period

beginning  January 1 and ending December 31 of the current  year of businesses,

professions and other activity conducted b)7  residents of the Township.

(c)	One percent  (I%) of ail earned income received in the period beginning Januaiy 1 and ending December 31 of.the current ye:ar by all other persons employed in the Tow·vnship.
{d)   One percent  (l %) of all net  profjts  earned in  the  period beginning  January l and  ending  Deccmher  31 of  tht current  year  of  businesses, professions  and other activity conductod  by u.11 0thor porscc;.s  ;·,  L-1c  'i '\-\'!lSilip.





-4-
 
ARTICLE   lll.   DECLARATIONS ..    l'AYMENT  OF TAX  AND  RETURNS

(a}  Every tnxpuyor who unticipatr-:is net prof.\t:J shall  on or before April 15, of the current year make and file wlth the Inconie Tax Officer on a form prescribed  or approved by the officer,  a declaration of his estirr.ated  riet profits during the period beginning January l and ending December 31 r  of the current
l; year, and pay to the officer in four equal quarterly installments  the tax due
;;
.•:
' thereon as follows:  the first installment at the time of filing the declaration,
:!and the other-installments  on or befor  Tune  15 and September 15 of the  current

; year, and January.15 of the succeeding year, respectively.

(b)	Any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profit after April

\ 15, of the current year,  shall make and file the declaration hereinabove required
•i
on or before June 15, of the current year,  September 15 of the current year,  or

f December 31,  of the current year,  whichever  of  these dates next follows  the
!l
,; date on which the taxpayer first anticipates such net profit,  and pay .to the

:·officer in equal installments the tax due thereon on or before the quarterly payment dates which remain after the filing of the declaration.
(c)	Every taxpayer,  eurning  net profits  in the current  year,
c\
'i shall on or before April 15 of the succeeding year,  make and file with  the officer

''.on a form prescribed  or·approved by the officer a final return showing the amount

\ of  net profits  earned  during the period beginning.January  land ending  December

/ 31 of the current year, the total amount of tax due thereon and the total amount
;1
'.of tax paid  thereonc   At the time of filing the final return,  the taxpayer shall pay

.i to the officer the balance of the tax due or shuJ1 mnke demund for refuri.d  or

;·credit in the case of overpayment •
. ;.
Any  taxpayer may,   in lieu of paying  the  fourth quarterly  installment  of  his

., estimated tax, elect to make and file with the officer on or before January 31, of the succeeding year,  the final return as hereinabove re'quired.
(d)	Every taxpayer v1ho ..discontinues  business  pri0r to 'C·ecember

31, of the current year,  shall, within thirty (30} days after the discontinuance


 



-s-
 
(e)	Every taxpayer who is employed for a salary, wage, commiss-ion, or other compensation and who received any earned inco1ne not subject to the provisions  of Section IV of this Ordinance relating to the collection at the source, shall make and file with the Income Tax Officer on a form prescribed or approved.
i::y the officer a quarterly return  on or before April 30 of the current year, and

July 31 and October 31 of the current year and January 31 of the succeeding  year, setting forth the aggregate amount _of  earned income not  subject to withholding  by him during the three month periods ending March 31 of the current year, June 30
of the current year,  September 3O of the current year,  and December 31 of the

current year,  respectively,  and  subject to the tax,  together with  such other information as the officer may require.  Every taxpayer n1aking such return shall at the time of filing thereof,  pay to the officer the amount of tax shown as due thereon.
(f)  Every taxpayer shall, on or before Ap1il 15, of the succeeding

,, year 1  make and file with the officer on a form prescribed or approve.d by the officer a final return  showing the an1ount  of  earned income  received  during the
! period beginning January 11 of the current year,  and ending December 31, of the

;; current year 1 the total amount of tax due thereon, the amount of tax paid thereon,
;;
the amount of tax thereOn that has been withheld pursuant to the provisions of Article IV  of this Ordinance relating to the collection at the source and the
;; balance of tax due.  At the time of filing the final return, the taxpayer  shall pay the balance of the tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in the case of overpayment.
(g)  Any taxpayer who has con1plied with those provisions  of

i"   the Haycock  Township Ordinance levying a tax of  one percent  (1%)  on salaries,

i!;i wages, commissions and other compensation and on net proflts earned and received in the year one thousand  nine hundred seventy-seven,  which relate to

' the filing of declarations shall be deemed to have complied with the requirements

c.f t.!'1.is Ordinance relating to the fi_ling of declarati0ns for the year one thousand nine  hundred  seventy-seven,  only.
:;
-6-
 
-  -'-






ARTICLE IV.  COLLECTION AT SOURCE

(u)  Every employer having an office, factory, workshop ,

branch,  warehouse,  or other place of.business within the Township who employs one or more  persons,  other than do1nestic servants,  for a  salary,  wage, commission,. compensation or other earned income,   _ho has not previously registered,  shall.  within  fifteen days  after the  effective  date  of this  Ordinance or Within fifteen d·ays after becoming an employer, whichever occurs first, register with the Income Tax Officer his name and address and such other
"	information as the officer may require.


(b)  Every employer having an office, factory,  workshop,

branch, warehouse,  or other place of business 'Nithin the Tciwnship who employs one or more persons,  other than domestic  servants,  for a salary,  wage, commission 1  compensation or other earned income.  shall deduct at thei time of payment thereof,  the tax imposed by this Ordinance on the earned income due
to his employee or employees,  and shall on or before April 30 o-f the current year 1  July 31 of the current year. October 31 of the cu..rrcnt year and January 31 of the succeeding year, file a return and pay to the officer the arnount of taxes deducted during the pr ceding three-month  periods ending March 31 of the current year,  June 30 of the current year,  September 30 of the current year and
December  31 of  the current  year,  respectively«    S·.Jch return  unless  otherwise agreed  upon  between  the  officer and  Gmployer  shall  show the  name  and  social
., security nurnbP..r of each employee, the earned income of such employee during such preceding  three-month  period,  the tax deducted  therefrom,  the. political subdivisions imposing the tax upon such flmployee,  the total earned income of all such employees during such preceding three-month· period,  and the  total tax
,.  deducted  therefrom  and  paid  with the  return.

Any empioyer who for two of the preceding four quarterly periods

has  :fuiled to deduct the proper tax, or any part thereof,  or has fa tied to pay over the




-7-
 



proper amount of tax shall be required by the officer to file his return and pay the tax monthly.  In such cases, payments of tax shall be made to the officer on or before the last day of the month succeeding the monthfor which the tax was withheld.
(c)	On or before fobruary 28	of the  succeeding year,  every

employer shall file with the Income Tax Officer:

(1)	An annual return sbow.i.ng  the total amount of earned. income  paid,  the total  amount of tax deducted /    and the  total amount  of tax
paid to the officer for the period beginning January l, of the current year, and

ending December 31,  of the current year.

(2)	A return withholding  statement for each employee employed during all or any part of the period beginning January l, of the current year and onding December 31, of the current your, settiny forth the emp1oyee 1 s name,  address  nd social security number,  the amount of earned iricome paid to the fln1ployee during said period,  the amount of tax deducted,  the political subdivisions imposing  the tax upon such employee,  the amount of tax paid to the
·	officer,  Every employer Shail furnish two copies of the individual return to the

employee for whom it is filed

(d}  Every employer who discontinues business  prior to

:_December 31, of the current year, shall, within thirty days after discontinuance

:of business,  file the returns  and withholding  staten1ents hereinabove  required  and

,. pay the tax due.

(e)	Every employer who vvilfully or negligently fails or omits to

·make the deductions required by this ordina nce shall be liable fa! payment of the

·taxes which he was re(Iuired to withhold to the extent that such taxes have not

been recove·red from the employee.

(f)	The failure or omission of any employer to muke the deductions

r qulred ty this siqctir)n ::>hnJ I not relieve any e1nployec  fro r   t"- pay --. .t of the tax or from complying ;.vith the re4uiremAnt.s  of this ordi11ance reiatinq to the filing  of  declarations   and   returns.




-8-
 


ARTICLE V.   POwtRS AND DUTIES OF OFFICER

{a)  It shall be the duty of the Income Tax Officer to collect and  receive the taxes,  fines and penalties  imposed  by this ordinance.   It
shall also be his duty to keep a record showing the amount re-:eived by him from each per!ron or business  paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
(b)	Th  officer,  before  entering  upon  his  official duties  shall give and acknowledge to the Township a bond in the form and amount as is required by laW.   The bond shall be joint and several with  such sureties as are authorized  by  law.
The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful discharge by the officer,  his  clerks,  assistants  and appointees  of  all trusts  confided  in him  by virtue of his office, upon the faithful e."<ecUtion of all dut.ies required by him by'
virtue of his office, upon the just and faithful r:l.ccounting or paym nt over, accord­

ing to law,  of all moneys and all balances  thereof  paid to,  received or held by him by  virtue of his office and upon  the delivery to his  successcr or 5uccessors in office of all books r   papers r    documents or ntherofficial things h<;!ld  in right
of his office.

The bond  shall bH  in thf  nan1e of the.  Township and  shall be for the l,ISe of the Township_ and fo1· the use of such other porson or persons for whom money shall be collected or recoi1Jed,  or <:1.s   his or her interest shall othervvise appear,  ln c:asn  of a  b.rca.:::Ji   of drty of  UH! conditions  thereof  by  the  acts  or ne_glect o[ the principal on tho hand.   The Township or any per.son rnn.y  sue upon the said bond  in its or his own  name  for its or his own  use.
(c)	The Inuome Tax Officer is hereby empowered to prescribe,

adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulation relating to any matter per-: taining to the administration and enforcement of this ordinance, provided that all sucn rules and regulations must be iir.sc approved by resolution of the Township Supervisors.





-9-
 
·.



{d)  The officer shall refund,  on petition of, and proof  by

the taxpayer,  earned income  tax paid  on the taxpayer's  ordinar/ a "c necessary business  expenses,  to the extent  that such  expenses are not  paid  by the taxpayer's employer.
(e)	The officer and agents designated by him a.re hereby

authorized to examine the books, papers and records of any employer or of any taxpayer or of any person whom the officer reasonably believes to be an employer or ta payer, in order to verify the accuracy of any declaration or return, or if no declaration or return was filed, to ascertain the tax due .
.Every employer and every taxpayer and every person  whom the officer reasonabl.Y

believes to be an employer or taxpayer is hereby directed and required to give to the officer, or to any agent designated by him,  the means, facilities
and opportunity for such examination and investiga-tions, as are hereby authori ed.

(f)	Any information gained by the officer, his agents, or by any other offic.ial or agent of the Township, as a result of any declarations,
returns, .investiga.t1ons,  hearings or verifications-,required  or authorized by this

Ordinance,. shall be confidential, except for official purposes and except in accordance w th a proper judicial  order or as otherwise provided by law.
(g)  The officer is ·authorized to establish different filing,

reporting and payment dates for taxpayers whose fiscal years  do not coincide with the calendar  year.
(h)   The officer  shall,  at least quarterly,  distribute  earned income  taxes to the appropriate political  subdivisions9    If the officer,  within one  year after receiving a tax payment,  cannot identify the taxing jurisdiction­ entitled to a tax payment, .he shall make payment to the municipality in which the  tax •nas collected.
ARTICLE VL    Compensation of Income Tax Officer

The officer shall receive such compensatfonfor his services and expenses

f-2.S th Township Supervisors :Shall detennine.

ARTICLE VLI  Suit for Collection of Tax

(a)   The officer may sue in the  name  of the Township for the recovery  of·

tax1:•s,  jnterest und pc.!flaltie;; d11t' 0.nd un.µuid under this ordi1v1ncn,  or for the

-10-
 
--·- .··- ,_ ..--'.-  ---






recov-:;;ry of an erroneous refund,  subject ta such limitations as are provided by law.
(b)	Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by the ordinance shall

be begun within three years after such tax is due, or within three years after rhe declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is later: Provided, however, that this limitation shall not prevent the institution of a s·uit for the collection
of anY tax due or determined to be due in the follovv:ing cases:

. (I)  Where no declaration or return was filed by any person althbugh a declaration or return was required to be filed by him under provisions of the ordinance  or resolution,  there  shall be  no limitation.
(2)  Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any person,  or of other evidence relating to such declaration or return  in the· possession  of the officer,  reveals  a  fraudulent  evasion  of  taxes,  there  shall be·
 
no limitationa
.
 


·	(3)   In the case of substantial understatement  of tax liability of
 
twenty-five percent or more and no
 
-
fraud,
 
suit shall be begun within six years.
 

(4)	Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of the ordinance or resolution, and has failed to pay the amounts so deducted
to the officer, or where any person has wilfiilly failed or omitted to make the deductions required by this section, there shall be no limitation.
(5)	This  section  shall  not  be  construed  to limit  the  governing body from recovering  delinquent  taxes  by any oth<- r menns  provided  by this act.
(c)	The officer may sue for recovery of an erroneous  refund provided such suit is beQ-un two years after rnaking such refund, except that  the  suit may b0 brought within five years if it appe.-ar that any part of the refund waS induced  by  fraud  or misrepresentation   of  material  fact.
ARTICLE VIII.   INTEREST AND PENALTIES

If  for any reason  the  tax is not  paid  when  due,  interest at  the rate  of Si:·: :?£<:'"'":Gnt ;ir.;r a::n!Jm on the amount of said tnx, and an additli.. C'..3.l ;."Je·:: lty of one-half of one percent of th<- .1mount of the unpaid tax for euch :nonth or
fraction thereof  during which thetax remi:lins  unpaid,  shall be added  and collected.



-ll-
 
\




ARTICLE IX.   FINES !\ND PENALTIES FOR \/IOLAT!ON  OF ORDINANCES OR RESOLUTIONS
(a)	Any person who fails, neglects,  or refuses to make any declaration or return required by the ordinance or resolution, any employer who fails, neglects or refuses to register or to pay the tax deducted from his employees, or fails, neQlects or refuses to dcdt1ct or withhold the tax from his employees 1 any person who refuses to permit the officer or any agent designated by him to examine his books, reoords, and papers .1   and any person -i:vho knowingly makes
any incomplete,  false or fraudulent return,  or attempts to do anything whatsoever to a void the full disclosure of the amount of his net profits or earned income
in order to a void the payment of the' whole or any part of the tax imposed by the ordinance or resolution,  shall,  upon conviction thereof  before any jtStice of the peace, alderman or magistrate,  or court of competent jurisdiction  in the
county or counties in which the political  subdivision imposing the tB.x is located, be sentenced to pa ' a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500) for each offense, and costs, and, in default of  payn1ent of said fine and costs to be
imprisoned for a period not exceeding thirty days.

(b)	Any person who divulges any information whicl1 is confidential under­ the  provisions  of the  Ordinance  or resolution,   shall,  upon  conviction  thereof before any justice  of the  peace,  alderman  or magistrate,  or court of  competent jurisdiction,  be sentenced to pay a fine of  oat more than five hundred dollars ($500) for each· offense,  and costs, and, in default of payment  of said  fines
and costs to be imprisoned for a period. not exceedi"ng thirty days.

(c)	The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed by any other section of the ordinance or resolution.
(d}  The failure of any person to receive or pfocure forms required for

making the declaration or returns required by the ordinarice or resolution shall

not excuse him from making such de6lo.ra· 1on or return.1965,  Dec.  31, P.L.-1:.::.57

§13.

i\RT. CL:E.   :<..   11, CORPORATION  OF LC)CAL  ' AX  E:\JA13Li: )'(;   \Cl

All provisions  of the Act  <'Jo.  Sil of 1965_.  "The!,ocal Tax Enabling Act 11

and all subsequent a_1nendm(,:nts to sai.d  \ct are jncorporated herein by reference.


-12-

.-·._·'-':i
 



' '






.'BTIC.LE XI.   EFFECTIVE. DATE

This Ordinance shall become effective on



"	ARTICLE XII.   SE\IERAB!LlTY
 

'   ' ...
 
- - ,· -
 

The provisions of thls Ordinance are sevarahlc.  If any sentence,  clause:, or section if for any reason is found to be unconstitutional /    illegal or invalid, this shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions which are intende'd
to remain in full force and effect.



ARTICLE  X!Il,    MISCELLANEOUS

The provisions of this Ordinance  so far as they are the same as those of Ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of this Ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such Ordinances and not as new eriactrnents. The provisions  of this  Ordinance shall not affect any act done or liability incurred,  nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution  pendfng or to be instituted to enforce any right  or penalty or to punish any offense under the authority of any Ordinance repealed by this  Ordinance.
SO ENACTED AND ORDJ\lNED this	day of	,  A.D.,

1977, by the  Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township.


BOARD OF SUPERVISORS IT HAYCOCK  TOWNSHIP

l'
 

;:;
 
_ ..::.-- r----	--
 
---.  !!".	"""'..._	;...;::=====-'"·.-=-··::;·,·=--,-=--'"""'i'''"-'"'i:---_.,.._    _,,
 
-	'
 
I
I1I·

I
 






LEGAL NOTICE


NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN, that at a regular meeting of the Board of
 


:1
J
: i.
 
Supervisors of Haycock Township to be held on Wednesday,  May 5, 1976,
I at 7:30 P.M-.,  in the Township Building,  Harrishurg  School Board,  Haycock
I	.
·1 Tow ship, Pennsylvania, th Bo rd of Supervisors propose to_ consider and

_11I       enact  if  appropriate   the  following  Ordinance.
 
·..'l
 
I	ORDINANCE    NO •    .;a.;;i
'1
!J	AN  ORDINANCE   OF HAYCOCK  TOWNSHIP,   BUCKS  COUNTY,	,-
l'j'	PENNSYLVANIA,     CLOSING   AND   VACATING   A    CERTAIN    PORTION
OF A TOWNSHIP ROAD.

l1
I.
H	WHEREAS,  under  Section 1101 and  Section 1130 of the  Second Class
r11	.
!! Township Cade of May l, 1933, P.L. 103, as amended, the Boar of,Supervisors
IIi
has the power to vacate roads or parts thereof; and

h\!	WHEREAS,  it is  necessary  in the judgment   of  the  Supervisors  of
b	.,
j_I     Haycock  TownsQip,· Bucks  Courlty,  Pennsylvania,  to close  and  vacate  pursuant
!I to the  laws  of  the  Commonwealth ·of Pennsylvania  relating  to  Second  Class

"!1'   Townships a portion of Township Raad  45·9,  in the Township of Haycock,  Bucks    I'
I
!1  County,   Pennsylvania;   and
jl	-
ii	.WHEREAS,  the  Pennsylvania   Departme.nt   of  Transportation  has
d	.	.
l) requested the Board of Supervisors to so vacate said portion of Township Road
h	.	-
n 459: and
ii ii
 
"Jj
 

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors has specifically determined
 















'\'c""'.ft"..i
 
I .                                                   -           -
\1 that the road i useless, inconven16nt, and burdensome, and that the vacation
.
j! of said road is in accordance with the spirit and intent of the Township ·Com­
\J
Hfi prehensive  Plan; and
u '! H H" H '1
1;
ii n ll u
'IIi
 
 
•,:.




WHEREAS,  the Board of Supervisors  has .held a public  hearing in
r gard to the vacation of said road portion 1  after due·notice in writirig having been given to the abutting property owners.
. .	.	.. •.   -	..
·NOW, THEREFORE, be it ORDAINED and. ENACTED..by the Board of

Supervisors of Haycock Township,  Bucks County,  Pennsylvania,  and it is
 

he.reby ORDAINED and ENACTED by the authority of the same as follows:


SECTION 1. That a portion of Township Road 459 is hereby vacated. closed and a andoned, the same being more particularly described as follows,   to wit:
ALL THAT CERTAIN tract of land,  situate in Hayco9k  Township,

Bucks County and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,  more particularly described on a survey  plan dated September 27,   1974, made by Pickering,   Corts  & Summerson,  Inc., ConsUltih.g Engineers,  bOunded and described as follows:

BEGINNING at a point in the Northeasterly  leg.;! right-of-way   line of L.R. 386 Par.  A and in the centerline of Township  Road No.  459 (Camp Kahagan  Road) thence from the point of beginning and alorig the centerline of said road the eight following  courses and distances viz: (1) North   3.2 degrees
52 minutes 03 seconds Ea'il 199. 57 feet to an angle,  thence (2) North  34 degree
 

';\;·
;.·,.;
1 .'








,.''·


' ,






' i
<:;;;
,;_t
J
I -- -t
'·_i
\*
 

07  minutes  04 seconds East  432. 63  feet to an angle,   thence  (3)  North  39  de-	.'!,

·	grees 25 minutes 47  seconds East 232. 75 feet to an angle, thence (4) North

 
;'.
 
10 degrees 24 minutes  30  seconds East 170.• 04 feet to an angle,  thence  (5)
 

North 23 degrees 02 minutes 20 seconds. East 459. 63 feet to an angle; thence	.",

 
(6) North  23 degrees .07 minutes  52 seconds East 37 . 24  feet to ·an angle,

thence l7)  North 29 degrees  25 minutes 24 seconds 455. 01 feet  o an angle,
 

:-;,
·1· i'•·'
. ,_
 


::e::eS  t	:e::Yd :;: :l::t :;::: : n:e:fo: : a::Ol:: ·:::::::oo: :: nt  II
aforesaid plaJ?-.    Thence continuing along said centerline North 31 degrees  26 minutes  43  seconds  East  149  feet to a  point in the Westerly  right-of-way   line	!
of L.R.  09068  (Originally  33 feet wide).   Said road having a legal right-of-way I

width of 33 feet.

-2-	j
 
·1;if
n.	-·oo lli• -®'a'- •re ' oo rt.	-·.·l;I
 

as used on L. R.  386 ,  Par.  A.  The total length thereof is approximately 2611 feet, or 0. 49 miles as indica_ted by a Plan.,  a  ched. hereto and made part   hereof;
 
I ;:
II
:l
 
SECTION  2 •    That the map,  zoning map,   or plan  of  Haycock Township be a ended by striking therefrom the said portion of the road as· above described and hereby vacated.
 

I. ,",
I .'"}
 

SECTION 3. That all ordlnances or parts. of ordinances. incons!stJt :...
I  "'c
 
herewith  are  hereby repealed.
 
I
·	··	ti\<W\	'", I
 
ENACTED and ORDAINED this s'd-..day of Deccnil;i:s1, A.D.,	I.
I
I
 



11

FRANCIS X. GRABOWSKI, ESQUIRE
Township  Solicitor Jaczun & Grabowski
 
HAYCOCK  TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
I
 


I
,!.,
 
One South Fifth Street Perkasie,   Pennsylvania· 18944
 
AJAW	I
 




.;·,,.
 
·I	Earl  D ..   Winters
 
- P-aul·Hu-bne-r
\1
'I
11
lj
 
--11...
I

j  ,
 
11

/I

I,,

!,.I
ii
'1
11
I.'I

11

II
 
R0nald W. Walters
 


I '.
l'












I
 

II

IJ'
I
 

 








LEGAL  NOTICE
 


0    ' •; "Jf..-	···:.

-· .·.
 


 
1.!.·,
 

NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that at a regular meeting of the Board of
 

1,l Supervisors of Haycock Township to be held on Wednesday,  May 5, .1976, at 7:30 P.M., .in the Township Building, Harrisburg School Road, Haycock Township, Pennsylvania, the Bo rd of Supervisors propose to consider and enact if appropriate  the following  Ordinance.

ORDINANCE NO. 33
11
AN  ORDINANCE  OF  HAYCOCK  TOWNSHIP,   BUCKS  COUNTY,
PENNSYLVANIA,   CLOSING AND  VACATING  A  CERTArN'PORT!ON
OF A TOWNSHIP ROAD •.
l
 
WHEREAS,
 
under Section 1101 and Section 1130 of the  Seco,nd Class I
 
lIli Township  Gode of  May 1,  1933,  P.L.103,  as amended,  the  Board·of.·Supervisors
\I   has the  power. .ta  Vaoat n:iads ·or parts  thereof;  and .
I
·WHEREAS, it is necessary in the judgment of tha Sup rvisors of

Haycock. Township, ·Bucks County,  Pennsylvania,  to close and vacate pursuant

to the laws  of  the  Commonwealth  of  Pennsylvania  relating  to Second Glass  •

'.I         Townships  a  portion  of  Township  Road  463,  in  the  Township  of  Haycock,   Bucks  ·

_        County,   Pennsylvania;   and
I	"'WHEREAS,   the· Pennsyl va.nia   Department   of  Tran portation  has
 





'!"'
 
rI  request0d the Board of Supervisors to  o vacate said. portio of Tow ship Road
 
ii 463; and '
!
h
 




WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors has specifically ·determined
 
if  that the road is useless, inconvenient, a burdens.ome, and that the. vacation
1
.	of said road is in accordance with the spirit and intent of the Township Corn-
 






-·;.
 
1·:·,1
n prehensive  Plan; and
I'f!
II
ii f"
11
ii
II
 
I


WHEREAS,  the Board of Supervisors has held a public hearing in
 

}l
-...  1;1·:··.
OJ   .
 
rbegard .to thte vtahcatibontto f  said roartd  portion,. after due  notice  in writing  having	:.·.·.f·:.::.: .:.:.·
 
een given  o	e a u
 
1ng prope   y  owners.	_
t:1
 
NOW,  THEREFORE,  be it ORDAINED an ENACTED by the Board of	I ..',\.·.·.g.•.•.,:.;·····
Supervisors of Haycock  Township,   Bucks County,  Pennsylvania,  and it ls	, hereby ORDAINED and ENACTED by the authority of the same as follows:

 
SECTION 1.  That a portion of Township Road 463 is hereby vacated, closed and abandoned the same being more particularly described as follows,   to wit;
I	ALL THAT  CERTAIN tract of  land,   situate in Haycock  Township,
 

[_,
 
I Bucks County and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, more part!Cularly described
on a survey  plan dated September 27 /     1974,  made by Pickering,   Carts  &
'	'
I   Summerson,  Inc.,  Consulting Engineers,  bounded  and described as follows:

 




' --
 


BEGINNING at the intersection of the Northeasterly·side of

L.R. 09061 (originally 33 feet wide) with the centerline of T-463 In the bed of

L.R.  3B6 Par.   A as  shown  on  said plan; thence  along the  centerline  of  T-463
 
.,  -,



I-	,
 
I   and passing  thru the bed of L.R.   386 Par.  A the four following courses and	I -
'1   distances viz: (1) North  36 degrees 46 minutes 21 seconds East 794. 52 feet to

an angle thence,   (2) North 39 degrees 35 minutes 59 seconds.  ast 1 4 .16 feet

i to an angle thence,  (3)  North 36 degrees 24 minutes· 46 seconds  East 1041.11
I
feet to an angle thence,   (4)  North  l  d.egree  51 minutes 20 seconds West 20. 62 I
!	l
11    ::::;oa s:o: o:: ::::::::t ::: l:fg: :::::-: -:::.::i:: : h:::::r:n: II
I!  Edward M. Adams and land of The General 'state Authority.   Said road having	· i'

 

I/


11
11
ii
ii
/,!,
. i,i.
Ii
 
a legal right-of-way width  of 33 feet.


The bearings on the above description are tied onto the Meridian

as used on L.R.  386 Par.  A.   The total  length thereof is approximately

2050 feet,  or 0 39 miles as indicated by a Plan,  attached hereto and made a part hereof .
 
....,.......-.-.--  .r-
 








SECTION 2.   That the  ap, zoning-map,   or plan  of Haycock

Township be amended by striking therefrom the said portion of the road as
 

.:.1;




'.-·J
't
E•
 
'"->t-
above described and hereby vacated.	.	.	.

·	SECTION ·3.  That all ordinances or parts of ordinances i.nconsistent .1:1
 

herewith are hereby repealed.
•	.	.	.	rl\	.
ENACTED and ORDAINED this day of_.,e  e1,
 
. :----
 


 





. FRANCIS X.    GRABOWSKI,    ESQUIRE
Township Solicitor
Jaczun  & Grabowski One South  Fifth Street
Perkasie,  Pe sylvania  18944
 
HAYCOCK. TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS







····	I

·I.;
 
Paul Hubner




Ronald W. Walters
 
 










.-,_
 
3!1ttJUtt  imn <iralrofuuhi	.
...%W>
lfnlurai . '.J luatria	I
I
ORDINANCE NO. 34


AN ORDINANCE  PROVIDING  FOR THE LEVY,  ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION  OF A TAX FOR GENERAL REVENUE PURPOSES FOR THE YEAR ONE THOUSAND NINE
HUNDRED  SEVENTY-SEVEN  AND ANNUALLY  THEREAFTER,   UNDER  THE AUTHORITY
OF THE LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT,  UPON SALARIES,  WAGES,  COMMISSIONS AN OTHER COMPENSATION  EARNED DURING THE PERIOD BEGINNING JANUARY l, AND ENDING  DECEMBER  31.  BY RESIDENTS  OF THE TOWNSHIP  OF HAYCOCK, AND ON THE NET PROFITS EARNED DURING  THE SAME PERIOD,  OF BUSINESSES, PROFESSIONS  AND  OTHERACTMTIES  CONDUCTED  BY  SUCH  RESIDENTS;  AND  ON THE SALARIES,  WAGES,  COMMISSIONS AND OTHER COMPENSATION  EARNED
BY OR PAID TO ALL OTHER PERSONS EMPLOYED IN SAID TOWNSHIP OF HAYGOCK DURING THE SAME PERIOD, AND ON THE NET PROFIT EARNED BY ALL OTHER PERSONS DERIVED FROM BUSINESSES,  PROFESSIONS AND OTHER ACTIVITIES CONDUCTED IN SAID TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK  DURING THB  SAME PERIOD; PROVIDING FOR THE FILING OF DECLARATIONS,  QUARTERLY RETURNS AND
FINAL  RETURNS;  REQUIRING  EMPLOYERS  TO  REGISTER AND  TO  DEDUCT  THE  TAx
FROM THEIR EMPLOYEES' WAGES AND TO FILE RETURNS AND PAY THE TAX; MAKING AN EMPLOYER WHO WILFULLY OR NEGLIGENTLY FAILS OR OMITS TO MAKE THE DEDUCTIONS LIABLE FOR PAYMENT OF THE TAX; SETTING FORTH THE DUTIES  OF THE INCOME TAX OFFICER,  PROVIDING  FOR THE BONDING  OF THE OFFICER,  FOR  HIS  COMPENSATION,  AND AUTHORIZING  HIM  TO SUE;
PROVIDING FOR INTEREST AND PENALTIES FOR LATE PAYMENT; PROVIDING FINES AND PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF THE ORDINANCE; PROVIDING FOR SEVERAB!LITY OF ITS TERMS; AND REPEALING A PRIOR ORDINANCE.



WHEREAS, it is necessary in the judgment of the Board ·of Supervisors

of Haycock Township,  Bucks County, State of Pennsylvania,  to impose a tax an. the salaries,  wages,  Commissions and compensation ea ed by residents and on the net profits earned of businesses,  professions  and other activities conducted by residents and on the salaries,  wages,  commissions and other compensation earned by or pafd to all other persons employed in the said Haycock Township
for general revenue purposes, occasioned by increased Township Costs and

operating expenses; and

WHEREAS,  it is estimated that the revenue to be derived from thi tax

will amount to Thirty Thousand  ($30, ODO. 00) Dollars annually.


IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Townshi

under the authority of The Local Tax Enabling Act as follows;









I
 

ARTICLEI-GENERALPROVISIONS

SECTION I. Definitions:  The following words and phrases when used in this Ordinance shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section,
except where the context indicates a different meaning:

(a)   1!Association11 shall mean a partnership.  limited partnership1

or any other unincorporated  group of two or more persons,

(b)   11 Business 11   shall mean any enterprise,  activity,  profession or any other undertaking of an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for profit whethei by a  person,  partnership,  association  or any  other entity.
(c)   11Compensation 11   shall mean earned income as herein defined.

(d)   11 Corporation 1     shall mean a corporation or joint stock association organized under the laws of the United States of America,  the Commonwealth  of Pennsylvania,  or any other state, territory,  foreign country or dependency.
(e) 11 Current year" shall mean the calendar year for which the

tax is levied.

(f)   "Domicile" shall mean the place where one lives and has his permanent home and to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent.   Actual  residence  is not necessarily domicile;  for domicile  is the
fixed place of abode which,  in the intention of the taxpayer,  is permanent  rathe1 than transitory.    Domicile  is the  place  in which a  man  has  voluntarily  fixed the
.	.
habitation of himself and his family,  not for a mere special or limited purpose,

but with the present intention of making a permanent home, until some event occurs to induce him to adopt some other pennanent home.  In the case of businesses,  or associations, the domicile is that place considered as the cente of business affairs and the place where its functions are discharged.
(g)	11Earned Income 11    shall mean salaries,  wages,  commissions. bonuses,  incentive payments,  fees,  tips and other compensation received by a person or his personal  representative  for services rendered,  whether directly or



-2-
 



through an agent, and whether in cash or in property; not including,  however, wages or compensation paid to persons on active milita y service, periodic payments for sickness and disability other than regular wages received during a  period  of  sickness,  disability  or retirement  or payments  arising  under
Workmen's Compensation Acts, occupational disease acts and similar legislatio or payments commonly recognized as old age benefits .. retirement pay or pensions paid to persons retired from service after reciching a specific age or after a stated petlod of employment or payments commonly known as public assistance, or unemployment compensation payments made by any governmental agency or payments to reimburse expenses or payments made by employers or labor unions for wage and salary supplemental programs,  including, but not limited  to,  programs  covering hospitalization,   sickness,  disability  or death,
supplemental  unemployment  benefits,  strike benefits,  social  security and retirement&
(h)	"Employer"  shall mean a  person,  partnership,  association, corporation,  institution,  go ernmental body or unit or agency,  or any other entity employing- one or more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation.
(i)	11Income tax officer or officer" shall mean a person, public employee or private agency designated by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township to collect aiid adminiSter the tax on _earned indc::ime and net profits.
(j)	"Net profits"  shall mean the net income from operation of

a business,  profession  or other activity,  except corporations,  after prof1ision for all costs and'expenses incurred in the conduct thereof, determined either on a cash or accrual basis iit accordance with the accounting system used in such
business,  profession,  or other activity, _bu without deduction of taxe-s  based  on incomew
(k)	11 Nonresident 11    shall  mean  a  person,   partnership,  associatio or other entity domiciled  outside the  Township  of Haycock.
(1)	'1Person or individual 11    shall mean a  natural personw




-3-
 

(m)	"Preceding year 11   shall mean the calendar year before the

current year.

(n)	"Resident 11     shall mean  a person,  partnership,  association or other entity domiciled in the Township of Haycock ..
{a}   11 Succeeding year"  shall mean the  calendar year following the  current  year.
(p}   11Taxpayeru  shall mean a person,  partnership,  association or any other entity required hereunder to file a return of earned income or net profits,  or to pay a tax thereon.
(q)  "Township"  shall mean the Township  of Haycock,  County of  Bucks and  State of  Pennsylvania.
In this ordinance, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.

ARTICLE II,   IM-POSITION AND RATE OF TAX

The following taxes are hereby imposed for general revenue purpose under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act for the year 1977 and annually thereafter:
{a)  One percent  (1%) of all earned income received in the

period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of the current year by residen s of the Township.
(b)	One percent (!%) of all net profits earned in the period beginning J8.nuary 1 afl:d ending December 31 of the current year of businesses, professions and other activity conducted by residents of the .Township.
(c)	One percent {l%) of all earned income received in the period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of the current year by all other persons employed in the Township.
(d)	One  percent  (1%)  of  all net  profits  earned in the  period

beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of the current year of businesses, professions  and other activity conducted by all other persons  in the  Township.





-4-
 

ARTICLE III.  DECLARATIONS,  PAYMENT OF TAX AND RETURNS

(a)  Every taxpayer who anticipates net profits shall on or before April 15, of the-current year make and file with the Income Tax Officer on a form prescribed or approved by the officer, a declaration of his estimated net profits during the period beginning fanuary I and ending December 31, of the current year, and pay to the officer in four equal quarterly installments  the tax due thereon as follows:   the first installment at the time of filing the declaration, and the other installments on or before June 15 and September 15 of the current year, and January 15 of the succeeding year, respectively.
{b)  Any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profit after April 15, of the current year,  shall make and file the declaration hereinabove required on or before June 15, of the current year, September 15 of the current year, or December 31, of the Current year, whichever of these dates next follows the
date on which the taxpayer first anticipates such net Profit,  and pay to the

officer in equal installments the tax due thereon on or before the quarterly payme t

dates which remain after the filing of the declaration ..

(c)	Every taxpayer, earning net profits in the current year,

shall on or before Aprtl 15 of the succeeding year,  make and file with the officer on a form prescribed ·Of  approved by the officer a final return  showing the amount of  net profits earned during the period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of the cuirent  year,  the  total amount of tax due thereon and the total amount
of tax paid thereon.   At the time of filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay to the officer the balance of the tax due or shall make demand for refund or  credit in the case of overpayment.
Any taxpayer may, in lieu of paying the fourth.quarterly installment of hi estimated tax, elect to make and file with the officer on or before January 31, of the succeeding year,  the final return as hereinabove  required.
(d)	·Every taxpayer who discontinues busine s prior to December 31, of the current year,  shall, within thirty (30) days after the discontinuance
of business,  file his final return as hereinabove required and pay the tax due.




-5-
 

(e)   Every taxpayer who is employed· for a salary, wage,  commis   on,

or other compensation and who received any earned income not subject to the

provisions of Section IV of this Ordinance relating to the collection at the source shall make and file with the Income Tax Officer on a form prescribed or approved by the officer a quarterly return on or before April 30 of the current year, and
July 31 and October 31 of the current year and January 31 of the succeeding year, setting forth the aggregate amount of  earned income  not  subject to withholding  b him during the three month periods ending March 31 of the current year,  June 30 of the current year,  September 30 of the current year, and December 31 of the current  year,  respectively,   and  subject  to the  tax,  together with   such  other infonnation as the officer may require.   Every taxpayer_ making  such return shall at the time  of filing thereof,  pay to the officer the amount of tax shown as due thereon.
(f  Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15, of the succeedin year, make and file with the officer on a form prescribed or approved by the officer a final return showing the amount of earned income received durtng the period beginning January 1, of the current year, and ending December 31, of the current year, the total amount of tax due thereon, the amount of tax paid thereoJ the amount of tax thereon that has been withheld pursuant to the provisions of Article IV of this Ordinance relating to the collection at the source and the balance of tax due.   At the time of filing the final return, the taxpayer shall
pay the balance of the tax due or shall make demand for-refund or credit in the case of overpayment ..
(g)  Any taxpayer who has complied With those provisions  of  the Haycock Township Ordinance levying a tax of one -percent (1%) on salartes, wages,  commissions  and  other compensation  and on net profits  earned  and
received in the year one thousand nine hundred seventy-seven_, which relate to the filing of declarations shall be deemed to have complied with the requirement of this Ordinance relating to the filing of declarations for the year one thousand
1          nine  hundred  seventy-seven,  only.


-6-
 


ARTICLE  IV.   COLLECTION AT SOURCE

(a)	Every employer having an office, factory, workshop,

branch, warehouse, or other place of business within the Township who employs one or more persons, other than domestic servants, fa a salary, wage, commission, compensation or other earned income, who has not previously registered,  shall, within fifteen days after the effective date of this Ordinance or within fifteen days after becoming an employer, whichever occurs first, register with the Income Tax Officer his name and address and such other information as the officer may require a

(b)	Every employer having an office, factOry, workshop,
'
branch,  warehouse,  or other place of business within the Township who employs one or more persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage, commission, compensation or other earned income, shall deduct at the time of payment theI"eof, the tax imposed by this Ordinance on the earned income due
to his employee or employees,  and shall on or before April 30 of the current

year, July 31 of the current year, October 31 of the current year and January 31 of the succeeding year, file a retum and pay to the officer the amount of taxes deducted during the preceding three-month  periods ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the current year 1   September 30 of the current year and December 31 of the current year,  respectively.   Such return unless otherwise agreed upon between the officer and employer shall show the name and social security number of each employee, the earned income of such employee during such preceding three-month period, the tax deducted therefrom,  the political subdivisions imposing the tax upon such employee, the total earned income of all such employees during such preceding three-month period,  and the total tax deducted therefrom and paid with the return.
Any employer who for two of the preceding four quarterly periods

has failed to deduct the proper tax, or any part thereof, or has failed to pay ave  the




-7-
 




proper amount of tax shall be required by the officer to file his return and pay the tax monthly.   In such cases,  payments  of tax shall be made  to the officer on or before the last day of the month succeeding the monthfor which the tax was  withheld.
(c)	On or before February 28  , of the succeeding year, every

employer shall file with the Income Tax Officer:

(1)	An annual return showing the total amount of ·earned income paid,  the total amount of tax deducted,  and the total amount  of tax
paid to the officer for the period beginning January 1, of the current year,  and

ending December 31, of the current  year.

(2)   A return withh9lding  statement for each employee employed during all or any part of the period beginning January 1, of the current year  and ending December 31,  of  the current year,  setting forth the employee's name,  address and social security number,  the amount  of earned income paid to the  employee during said period,  the amount of tax deducted,  the political subdivisions  imposing the tax upon such employee,  the amount of tax paid to the officer.   Every employer  shall furnish two copies  of the individual return to the employee for whom  it is filed.
(d)	Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31, of the current year,  shall, within thirty days after discontinuance
of business,  file the returns and withholding  statements hereinabove  required  and
'
pay the tax due.

(e)	Every employer Who wilfully or negligently fails or omits to make the deductions required by this ordinance shall be liable for payment of the taxes which he was required to withhqld to the extent that such taxes have not been recovered from the employee.
{£)   The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductio  s

required by this  section shall not  relieve any employee  from the payment  of the

 
tax  or from complying with the reqLiirements

II"""""°'"°''"""""' re'"""·


I
 
of this ordinance relating to the
 



ARTICLE V.   POWERS AND DUTIES OF OFFICER

(a)	It shall be the duty of the Income Tax O.fficer to collect · and receive the taxes,  fines and penalties  imposed by this ordinance.   It
shall also b0 his duty to keep a record showing the amount received by him fro each person or business  paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
(b)	Th  officer,  before  entering  upon his official duties  shall give and acknowledge to the Township a bond in the form and amount as is required by law.   The bond shall be joint  and several with such sureties as are a uthoriz_ed by law.
The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful discharge by the

officer, his cle_rks, assistants and appointees of all trusts confided in him by j
.,	virtue of his office,  upon the faithful execution of all duties required by him byl

virtue of his office,  upon the just  and faithful accounting or payment over, ace, rd-

ing to law, of all moneys and all balances thereof paid to, received or held by

him by virtue of his office and upon the delivery to his successor or successor

in office of all books,  papers,  documents or other official things held in right

of his office.
The bond shall be in the name of the  Tovynship and shall be for the tJ.Se of the Township. and for the use of such other person or persons for whom

IIJ.Ofley shall be Collected Or received I  Qf as his Qf her interest Shall Othezwise appear, in case of a breach of any of the conditions thereof .by the acts or	j
neglect of the principal on the bond.  The Township or any person may sue upo the said bond in its or his own name for its or his own use.
(c)	The Income  Tax Officer is herel;>y empowered  to Rrescribe,  I

adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter per-I taining to the administration and enforcement of this ordinance,  provided. that a l such rules and regulations must be first approved by resolution of the Township Supervisors.





-9-
 


(d)	The officer shall refund,  on petition of. and proof by
the  taxpayer,  earned  income  tax  paid  on  the  taxpayer's  ordinary  anct· necessary I

business expenses /   to the extent that such expenses are no paid by the

taxpayer• s employer.

(e)	The officer and agents designated by him are hereby authorized to examine the books,_ papers and records of any employer or of any taxpayer or of any person whom the officer reasonably believes to be an employer or taxpayer, in order to verify the accuracy of any declaration or return,  or if no declaration or return was filed, to ascertain the tax due.
Every employer and every taxpayer and every person whom the officer reasonabl

believes to be an employer or taxpayer ls hereby directed and required to give to the officer, or to any agent designated by him, the mecins,  facilities
and opportunity for such examination and investigations, as are hereby authori  ed.

(f)	Any information gained by the officer, his agents, or by

anv. other official or agent of the Township, as a result of any declarations, returns,  investigations,  hearin s  or verifications  required  or authorized by this Ordinance,  shall be confidential,  except for official purposes and except in accordance with a proper judicial order, or as otherwise provided by law.
(g)	The officer is authorized to estab!J.sh different filing, reporting and payment dates for taxpayers whose fiscal years do not coincide With the calendar year.
(h)  The officer shall, at least quarterly,  distribute earned

J1 income taxes to the appropriate political subdivisions. If the officer, within one year after receiving a tax payment, cannot identify the taxing jurisdiction entitled to a tax payment, he shall make payment to t_he municipality in which
the tax wcis collected.

·ARTICLE VI.    Compensation  of Income  Tax Officer
I	The officer shall receive  such compensationfor  his  services and expense    -·

11   as the Township Supervisors shall determine.

 
11    ARTICLE  VI.I  Suit for Collection of Tax

(a)	The officer ma"y sue in the  name  of the Township for the recovery
ll taxes,  inter-est and p_enalties due and  unpaid  under this  ordinance  or for the
 


at I

I
 


recovery of an erroneous refund,  subject to such limitations as are provided by\·

 
law.
 

(b)	Any  suit brought to recover the tax imposed  by the ordinance shall   I
 
l.	be begun within three years after such tax is due, or within three years after thl

I!   declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is later: Provided,  howeverL
!	l
1    that this  limitation  shall  not  prevent  the  institution  of  a  suit  for the  collection   1
1
I!  of any tax due or determined to be due in the folloW:ing cases:    .	li
ii
11	(!)   Where  no declaration or return was  filed by any person alth  ugh
 
I:j  a declaration or return was required  to be  filed by him under provisions  of the
 

,i!
 
II ordinance -or resolution,  there shall be no limitation.	'I
I	(2)   Where  an  examination  of  the  declaration  or  return  filed  by   Ii
j!  any person,  or of other evidence relating to such declaration  or return  in the
"1.'i      possession of the officer,  reveals a fraudulent evasion - of taxes,  there  shall be I
no limitation.	I
 

111



I
Iii'
i'
11
!I
i!
!i
H'
II
.lj
!,1,
11
'1I.
II
11
"11
I
I,
11
1!
fl
ii
Ii•i
H
'll
 

(3)	In the case of substantial understatement  of tax liability o 'twenty-five percent or more and no fraud, suit shall be begun within six years. I
I
(4)	Where  any person  has  deducted  taxes  under  the  provisions  I

of the ordinance or resolution, and has failed to pay the amounts so d ducted to the officer, or where any person has wilfully failed or omitted to make the deductions,required by this section. there shall be no limitation.
(5)	This section shall not be construed to limit the governing body from recovering delinquent taxes by any other means provided by this act.
(c)	The officer may sue far recovery of an. erroneous refund provided such Suit is begun two years after making such refund,, except that the suit may be brought within five years if it appear that any part of the refund was induced by fraud or misrepresentation  of  material fact.
ARTICLE  VIII.   INTEREST AND PENALTIES	i

If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of	l,,:

six percent per annum on the amount of said tax, and an additional penalty of	!
one-half of one percent of the amount  of the unpaid tax for each month  or	I

fraction thereof during which thetax remains unpaid, shall be added and collecteid.
l
 
H	1
li
ll
 

ARTICLE  IX.   FINES AND PENALTITS FOR  VIOLATION   OF ORDINANCES  OR RESOLUTIONS
(a)	Any person who fails,  neglects,  or refuses to make any declaration

1.	or return required by the ordinance or resolution,  any employer who fails,

_	neglects  or refuses  to register  or to  pay  the  tax deducted  from  his  employees,
11
!· or fails,  neglects or refuses to deduct or withhold "the tax from his employees,
11


11   ::::i::::.w::0:f.u:::o::.e:: :::::: c:::::;YP:::: :::i:::: n: Yh::kt:s

1l   any incomplete,  false or fraudulent return,  or attempts to do anything whatsoev1r
11   to avoid the full disclosure of the amount of his  net  profits  or earned income	I

1

11     ::e:::n:n::o :r :o :::: ts::l: e u::: :o:v:::;a::r:::eb::::m::;:::i:e
ilil of the peace,  alderman  or magistrate,  or court  of  competent  jurisdiction  in the    I
!I county or counties in which the political  subd.ivision impcsing the tax is locate1,

11  be  sentenced to pay a fine of not more than five hundred  dollars  ($500)  for each I
11	.	1
!    offense, and costs. and, in default of payment of said fine and costs to be

imprisoned for a period  not exceeding thirty days.

1.·j	(b)   Any  person who divulges  any information  which is confidential  under!
11     :::::::::.::.::::.:.:::::·.:::.::·:::: ·.=ill   I
ii Jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than five hundred dollars
I
II ($500)  for each  offense,  and  costs,  and,  in default of  payment  of  said fines	\
n and  costs to be  imprisoned  for a period  not  exceeding  thirty days.	f
l	(c) The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of the ordinance or resolution.

(d)   The failure of any person to receive or procure  forms  required for
Ii making the declaration or returns required by the ordinance or resolution shall

1J   not  excuse  him from making  such declaration  or return.1965,  Dec.  31,  P.L.1257  1
I
11  §13.
!I,!   ARTICLE  X.    INCORPORATION   OF  LOCAL  TAX  ENABLING  ACT	!,·.
I	All  provisions  of the Act  No.  511of1965,   11 TheLocal  Tax  Enabling  Act'1
11
!1
jl  and all subsequent  amendments  to said Act  are incorporated  herein by reference .j
\1i1.
I'	-12-
1!
h
 




ARTICLE XI.   EFFECTIVE. DATE

This Ordinance shall become effective on	/?,?#y	;9.77



ARTICLE XII.   SEVERABILITY

The provisions of this Ordinance are severable..   If any sentence,  clause, or section if for a!!Y reason is found to be unconstitutional,  illegal or invalid,  this  shall  not affect or impair any of the remaining  provisions  which. are intende to remain in full force and effect.


ARTICLE XIII.   MISCELLANEOUS

The provisions of this Ordinance so far as they are the same as those of Ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of this Ordinance, are intended as a. continuation of such Ordinances and not as new enactments G The  provisions  of this  Ordinance· shall not affect any act done or liability incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be instituted  to  enforce any right  or penalty  or to punish any offense under the
 
authority of any Ordinance repealed by this Ordinance.
SO ENACTED AND ORDAINED this fAt	day  of 1977 1   by the  Board  of  Supervisors  of  Haycock  Township.


BOARD OF SUPERVISORS CF HAYCO    K  TOWNSHIP
 


, A.D.,







  : 	
 
-.--=. ..	·.
":>	'·
 

. ··-.
 





 

·'" .:-;..
 


--- ·--
 
·....:;,,·	;.-	--··	:· .	-·,..	-.:.:;-:.
·.' : :'·,' .; .  .	.   .:	.••i•.··: \	.	. ·": -.    .	. -     ,-_. ..  .	"\."".	.  .-     ·-'.; .:   ..· •.··
-   -	·...	·. ··-	.   .	-	•.•. ·.-:-  '-; - _·    ·/._,, -. .t-''     .  : ' <l ,;_.·--; -.   ''·
.	Haycock• Township,. pursuant   to: the·· authority  iritf.he'·•·>-  :  ··
 
Second :class. Township ·Act and .the .Locai· Government  bn:Lt!-·bebt Act,  ·the Act. of .July  12,·1972; · P. L;   lBS   (53 '.p·; S. '"678Q.• 1 et'  .·	..
:•·; , . . ..	.	. seq.) ,  as . amended,,_ hereafter• does  amend  that ordinance.  . . : .··  .
•· •,•.>:,;;,:;,enacted on Ma:i:;ch  7;  1977 which• authoriied the 'Township 'to·. ,:
;'i<.\t•·\;':;·   ·incur  non-electoraJ,:debt   in  an>amount   of	$28;5QO, .th,ioi.lgh ·.   ·.
i<•.:....:_:...·._.··_.>. ;;.j the. xecution ..o.f .a promisory note with \:iuake'rtowri'National (: ..	,	Bank:.	The   amending   ordinance   sball-'include  g.dditional   ·.•.
""'" .	- ...--	provisions  concerning. the 'establishment of  a· sinking <fund(  ... the .deslgna.tio ·of  a .sinking/J:und -depository, ·a: stat ment
 

- .._·  :i






.}.··
 
•	·	to·tpe  fact  that :this is a .general  9bligati61i•'of'the  Tow-riship	.. •-,.
 
& -'.'. ,·;  .  ::_·:: \
 
at nd. t}le' form  of'- .th.'. e  note.	0..;"·,::. .} ..	·	·•· >,.:\:,:	·\ !:: · ·
 
'·
<-  ::  {i .....· ·--·	,_.   ·: .-
 
"':
 
,--_.
 
-::;c•' ··	••Now,· THE:il.EFORE; :•b '.it'eri cted lilld  ordained by· the :aoard  •...
\k.·.:..•.·.:··-·· ,.),; •	of   Supe;i:'visors  -Of>Haycock   Towris4ip,   Bucks   cOun:ty; •   Pen;:isylvania
!"·   ..... ·	.an  amendnient  to'.- the  ordin·ance  enacted :,oh·tl:ie' _7th  day-'.o.f	·..· •. ·....- :
 
f i\..••.••!: ?· .' :	: =   { :   :tfI;  j  ". ;,0
 
f   .;.·····.· 
-·   -  '
 
.'...:'-_	: - ;-.;·:_;._..h¢re·inaft r 'provided	rid  shall  be  -iri  the  principal  sum  o'f .-:.,'   ..
·-- .  .- . :	Twenty-eight    Thousand· Five   Hu  dred    Dollars   :.($28., ·;;oQJ:•i:and\'."'<'./•·':  ·.
't.':f:.'   · .>·:  "." shall  be 'dated  arid. shall  beax:'•interest  at.· a ·:rate hereinafter'·•;:•
 
\;fo;,/{.  ;/.'r·;; :!t · 0 ii!u	d ·..   !;16 f	i;1
,;;?''..	,  ,  ,: { eve:r:y  ·year·; .CO!rifuencl.ng   January\
 

n ;	: i¥	t	·,	..1;,,;·····.'  .
'arid  Shf;lll  be  payable!)':':<•
 
. -.,.
,	;.,.
,.
 
2 / ·:197,8	.,
j;·> · ·	'-,,, as  to  principal: in  the'. amount  of  Nixie. Th0t1sanCl;:.Five  Hundred·>. ._
 
ij, : ;" _:_ . '.,: i	a	, ! ·f	i	ng	Yu i:!se:	= dP:r:.):ii : ;::L!0
··.:; .\ :. ._,   part ·without  penalty.·	However,  .the minimum" payable  ·e·ach..
.... ,o,·"	year -shall.be  $9,soo ··L	·	·-· ,..., ·	._·'•<
· i(. .•	.	··	·se6ti  · 4:'.b2·:·>  Thci·: r - o ·	e r1 fi- ha_ll ·be ·
'•'  -, .  substantially as" follows;	>·:;:,- ·	.. ·· ·	·	,:..-::.	·  ·•
 

cing:




•._-
 





..·:.
 









1:•.•·_·,.
 
.·.::··- :	- .,"': ;:::·-  ,,
 
. :-•·..     . . ' .•
 
:. ---..··' :.--!h'· .  '
 
t    i:'{''.{   ':.•·,·'' ··	. , .·• •
 
·	·wrTE·o sTA'I'EifoF AMERICA:''.'_,,,;;:,.	:;;.
'c	-	- .... '.  cOMMONW	; z;l?   i I,VANI1(  1
,,	.	':  ·'.TOWNSHIP"OF  II.AYCOCK	,,	.,	_,
•·	GENERAL. O,BLIGA',I'ION   NOTE	·,
 


i . .

·.-·

·' .,-.:   -
 



: ·..
 
._	FOR v '(JE. RE Erk'.5;	th \T w ship •of  Hayco<;:k.c. :Bucks;  . " '	·
•.. •·county;· Pennsylvania,	acknowledges· itself	indebted' .and:·· 'i "
, •promises. to pay to 'the Quakertown National .Bank the' sum
 


? -

-·  '·'·
 
-.•!...'.;.{: ·-	1-  ..: Twenty-eight  Thousand  Five  Hundred  Pqllars  '($is-,500) : payable
>if	. as. to. P,rincipCll  in the ainount_;of 'Nine 'rhousand·Five':Eµndreqj ,
 
IE--.
 
,:·
 

1980   inclusive-(unlessthis  Gener8l;.;-Pl?:l gatiori.. ,ot ,);'J:i.all   .. ,•.. •...·:	•.
 
.-_;_..·.•.·..,:.._.'.:'..·'.".·.·,----,···.•.....··.·   ...,	..  Dollars	($9, ?OO)    on •January. 2"'of. each. of   the  years. ,19:78   to  :· ··
e}:'	>	...·
c	••	. .·	••  :
-t

-   .. -- •	..-  ·'	':: · -- ·. ' . '.\ '·, g    ,_,7.. -
 

..:
 

.-  .
 


' ·:	.:.·:,.'
 
..,·.
 


.·...
 




. . ·. ·• ..·


::'.-   .
 




 


. '	B th principal  of  and 1nterst ori  this  Generb..rohliga lon
.,.	:·:Note  are payable  at the principal .office  of· the>Quak;ertown: i
:,:.:, .National Ban ;.<at .Quakertown:, Pennsylvani.;i. ·(:t:he"Payirig.	..
, /' ' : <·:i.Age t") •.	,,	.·>..	, ,  '  '•'	::	..···,·  ··.	,...
r.:..:.	•"	;his  General   Obligation. Note   hi issued: :in  accor,dance
.  with  the  provisions.of	the.Act.of	the GeneraJ,:Assembly of.	,	·	· ·
··'the Conunonwealth of Pennsylvania,	appl:9ved J1.1l,Y. 12, .1972,...· ..
No:. 185; as amended	(the''Act"),•; and  by. virtue·.or an, .Ordinance
of, the  Township  duly  eriacted ·<and  the ·sworri  statement :of  the
.: duly  authorize.¢! offi'cers of  the Township  as '.appears :of  .  • ....
 
. ,;·
-· .:··,




. _-)

."" .
 
·; reco,!:d 'in  the  office· '0£  the Pennsylvania  Department  of  .
·conununity  Affairs .... ·	<	·	.. '_	·.'•·•	·	"·" ..	'-
.. :  ' Th s Gene  l obiigati n .NC>te   mai''be  paia i i\lii: i	6ut
 
..-.- -  .

.-.,  .
 


,,,·.
 
.· peria1ty . at. any . time  upon  the· option. 01;  the  Township .., . Additional
partial paYnien'ts may.,'be made;	any: time without penalty.:.: ':·.   "
-However'· the minimum ·payment for· any  year  shalL·be ··the. saicf'"
 






,._.
 
$9' 500:	.. '	'	'	'	'	.	,
'	...	'   .'	--   '
'i..· . It {s c v 'na t d	it ' thi3\:.ioldei;  ; o imE?;:tc.; :time 8£'
<· · . ,. this. General. Obliga'.tio:ii'•Not.e;-that.the,·Towriship. ·Shall .include
'  the aniount  of' the dE)bt' J3ervi,ce 'f'or eac.h fiscal 'year:in which
'.the  sums  are  payable  .·in.its, bUdgE>t:.for. that. year,  shall	... :· ·. ·.
 

_<,.'
 
: ·:·:
 
. :	::appropriate' SUCh  am6'unts  to' .the payment  Of. such debt  servic;e', ·.·
:/> ·  · ·	..:;and· shall  duly and  punctually· pay  or  cause  :to  be'·• paid  the· ·· ·
:·.. · ·  .....,»,,principal· of  this General ·Obligation Note  and the interest	:.. : ·
;\•·  .	.. .,:"'   ·" thE>reon at the dates and places· and in the 'manner stated in'	.	· .. ''
'''..,'.:	.  -  .. this.Note  according  to the .tJ:'ue 'intent 'and' tneariirig  hereof/	.. ,	::
>Y\:	· , .	and. :for  such  budgeting,:  appropriation   ?-nd   pay,inerit,	the:	·	·· .: ::	",
f"·	Township:pledges its 'full faith, credit and ..taxirig .power.
This  covenant .. shall. be  ,specifically. enforcehlJle. ·	.':; · ·     · ···  ·	..
··  ,,;·..;.	'"	.   ·:	; T ;rishiJ· « ov;;riari'ls  · lt if;th Qtiak r 6wn. N tio al.'B hk;· ·, ·  · ···
'.tf< ;_;'	.·...· ; that it will make ·no use o:EJ:he.'prdceeds  of':·this. note  at ariy ·
·.;:"\ti :.'during  the:d:·errn  thereo:Etwhich, ·if such'. use  J:iad .been.,: .  · , , ·
..  reasonably  expected  at:::the  d;lte of  ls'sua:nce  0 f'.the note  . :.
·would have caused suc)l note to be' an:arbitrage bond within···'
,, the mE>aning	Section ·103 (d)·of  the. United  States ·Internal·
·.·.Revenue Code of:·l954.and  its"'a.P.J?licabie  regulations.·	·	.•..
 





·. , ·
..., .. : '
 
...' ·">'" . ·:. IN  WITNESS  WHEREOF,.- th ·:·; wri hip	·f    Ha;co   ,; Bue  ...
·	•. County, Pennsylvania, ,has· ca.used this Note;:1:.ea ..be signf'd by' a ..
. 'majority of the Board .of Supervisors along w:ith the· corporate 'seal being affixed thereto and to be.'dated the 22nd day of\.
.'...:July,  A..b.,	1977.	·  ...	:	.	.	....	.....	·   <
 
,_..
 
.· ·  .:...'. ;.·.,= , ;-  .;..  -·	.........;;' .··	.
 
HAYCOCK	TOWNSHIP	SuPj!;R.VISORS
"-< .•.•.. ·s/ ......... .
 
.-   ....
-'- -"'"- ""'--"'- . -.  "-'"  ---.,.-":-
 
s!' .·
 
..• --.-. =.·-."    -- ·.:.' ·.  -	,...
 

··.-
 

. '· o;_/-_  ·.-:
,•       ..
 

...\-
 
": :::\.
 
-  ..,_ ..	·-.	. . -      - -·     ..,_,·_,_,    .	- " ..- '	.··-.'·	.:-·_    ,
 
-,.;_ ..

-   ,-,:	- ·-'  :·	'.      ..';
;..:..._
.i'.- -., -	.._,_ ...
,	' '
 
:._,_.-,::_   ,.--
. ;.;;-.
' ;_--
 

'   ,' '',	'The. Note §l1all be executed in	tlb taritf lly the  foim:il .· •··	., .  '"':.::
., .· ;_, hereinabove  set .forth·.·with such appropriate ·changes,, additic;ms ·
.:- ,-; or deletions  as may  be approved  by  the  cifficeis. executing  ·•	-
.,., the-no'te  in the manner  prc::ivide  herein; -;such  execution  shar:l
..;:::•!'!''"•:::·'constitute   approval  by· such·officers  on  behalf  o'f   the  .	,, .., ·
/.Towriship -•-:;_,•.·,::".·	..-....	···.]':·,,	.	,	..	- ,
.. -	-·	.•;:     ;,,   •.:, }·.- ·11."i>{, .'-
'.'">••<«.'Y:",..	.	.	.  .. ·:·-.. ·_.  · •   ; s ction4.03.(::;.-rhe  chairman 31hd §ecretacy,of  .·.· ...·
····the  Township  afe. authorized· and  directed .. to  contract with
(·::,. ·. , ... Quakertown National Bank· fof :its services as ·sinking; fund
}3: '.	:	:i; ry,s	l	r;	.:oG:rl t iid	tg: {	n	f !; a d-	to	·· .	:  ·	';'
t,..r.·_r. ·::_'.::.'_;_;  _.    ,	said 'fund. there· shall -'he  paid  al;L moneys  necessary" to pay
.··	.	the:debt  service·on'the.•note'w.llen   and:as:the.·saine   Ftr13	·	:·

_·_:_i_<_._·_.·_:.-_•.•·_-.-_'. --·,';:,·_•_,_·_._·_:,•.:_,< , - . ·.	l	t;	rn=	-	i h!	!	e!	o	t	p ! :a	c	vely,.	. .?	; '::
._	•the·note   and   tci   the  pi;incipal'..·therebf:and:tci	no othe:i::. purpose	,





;;;;,_,:·_,_'.·.·.·..'._-_., '._':	and  prin ipk_   <:1anddsuch  ,am6,µn:ts"  are.  anth_ntiallyf	JjerE;lby   appropriated-   . ·,	,';:'.
,-,_	'"	to _th; Sin in Fun	f r<the payment  :)ireo (:''	"	,  '..  ,
 
\-/';; '··	.. ,	·.  Fi'sca:1· "Y.ear  E aiii'g  · ·	--  Aincun.t  "·	,	.:  Debt serV'ice · '. ,	·" ·
 
- ' -
 
I-.'.n.,--'"     ·:.:·   _
 
..·.·.·.···
 
· .D..ec:em::b.er··31
 
...··	't:::	.,:'· :':t t ··.·.· ·
 


·:' : -
 







'	, . ·· ·-- -General obiig	1	t	e
 



t:T	w	r;, n i:::  !1i: ;+;. :1i-- ..
 


-- -.
 
.._,
-·;;

- •··..: ·--;
 
4	4

"'"	.   "   faith  and. credit  of. the  Township  in payment'•thereof ·.which''•

!	o	=	la	b Ya	=P	a	t •	i::1n !riks l1l ;ea; ·· ·
·	••'.':·price of par and accrued intE;Jrestc to the -aate':of .deli,very
);	·.	·  :. an!i authorizes  the chairman ·and secretary to  J\'.ecute .'same.
!	t:n	:	!: 'I£ ;	i:f ;,.y···
 



_---;.
 
-   '  -  . -
.-   .


.:.,·.
;·,·


.'·

' r.i•
 
J·q"·"
 
.··....              -;
 
.  :r5.
 
:·  S:ec:tiotri'4.;0rSi.
 
:The saEid ch :irtma:n·Hand ;sgec,reyta.ry
 
,. <.
 

I'"i';!-".,·'";-
 

;.;·,·,"\	':  ···..·.·.....'... ......
 




.....\•'	',.-•••	,',.--•L.	-.
 
. •..   . .;..
 
',o/{;''::, •.	i;ieht  lirnit  as  self .liquidating  debt or·,;subsidized  debt.

<	> . .	•

 
.,._.
;{'
 

-•,..-.-
- . _:_ ::  .   .. -;-·,,
 


.-;-,
 

. '··.>..'."
 

' ..
 
.., .
 
;. \. !,)





'·;._ > _:,.:·' ..
..-  ---: -, '.!:
....._,.:
J_···  ···















.•,_
,·,,_,


.,
.,'


 

' .-. ',  .
 


:.··
 
..,,.     _·,_...
 


 
._.,;_,
'·


···:·	..·;-·-··
 

,I'_·	!.-.



. " ._
"i  .

.<·•.
 



.:•.>
 

-!  •••
- --:	.,.  -
.·:


 
."s::.- ·. :.  >"·<..' .
. :·_;;.
 

·.- .    .: -;. •·'"
 

.._;
 


.' :
 

_·\ · -	.:-.	. -. '.,•;)· ·: ..
·;·.
 

"'/,:
 

,-
..·
 


"'	·,_-,.-
 
-...;i-·
 
.':·
.··,.	·<;
 
..·. -  .	,.	···. ·-
 
.-, .
-·\
,1::-:'.!•     ,.,.,,
 


 

. •.
•_)";:-.,...  ;,-
·,.._..
 

··..·
 




._.·. ' t
 
';-' •.- ..
,.
 


-:·.	:..-._


'···_.t·.·
 

:.';!:
 
..,,,,,-	;... ·
 
-..	·' _;	-::
. "	-·•.:-"·
 

 
ORDINANCE NO, i

HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP SUBDIVISION  ORDINANCE  OF 1979

The Supervisors of Haycock Township pursuant to the authority granted to them in the Second Class Township Code and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and acting upon the recommendation of the Haycock Township Planning Commission and the Bucks County Planning Commission do hereby enact and ordain the following ordinance which contains certain provisions which
are hereina er summarized:

ARTICLE   1.  AUTHORITY   AND  PURPOSE:	Thia   article  states  community  developnent objectives and the pUrposeS ot the ordiflance which are to promote, protect, and facilitate the orderly ff1c1ent development of' land within the Township and to
promote the health, ·safety, morals and general welfBre of t:qe Township as well
as to insure conformance to larid  utilization of the Comprehensive Plan of the
Township.

ARTICLE II. DEFillITION:  This art1C1e   contains the definitiona of words and terms used in the ordinance and defines agent, alley, applicant, block, building, building setback line, cartway, clear-sight triangle, condominium, crosswalk or interior walk, cul-de-sac, density, developer, drainage facility, driveway, dwelling unit, easement, engineering consideration, erosion, flood plains, f1ood plain soils, floor area, floor area ratio, forest, half or partial street, impervious surface, impervious surface ratio, improvements, land de­ velopment, lakes and ponds, lot, lot srea, average lot area per dwelling unit, marginal access, street, multi-family building, open space,. open space ratio, owner, final plan, preliminary plan, record plan, sketch plan, plot, re-sub­ division, retenti.on basin, reverse frontage lot, right-o:f-wa.y, .runway,  sedi­ mentation, sewage facility, site distance, site area, base site area, net buildable site area, slope, steep slopes, s reet, street line, structure,
major and minor subdivision, perfol"Jllance  standard subdivision, undeveloped land, utilities, water facility, wet ianda, yard, front yard, rear yard, side yard ..

ARrICLE III. PROCEDURE: This article provides for the procedures to be followed by B land owner  in submit;ting sketch plans for ma,jor and minor sub- 1ivisions as well as the filing of preliminary and final plans for the sub division. It f\lrther discusses procedures such as feasibility review, tenta­ tive approval and   final.  approval.

ARTICLE  IV.    DESIGN   ffi.IANDARDS:	This article .states the principles, standards,  and requirements  that will be applied in the  evaluation of plans for prbposed subdivision. It states therein the general standards tha_t are applicable to all subdivisions making reference to reserve strips, lot lines and the desirability of avoiding excessive excavation. It also speaks to the subject of flooding and other hazards to life and the adequacy of existing
or proposed community facilities that may serve the proposed subdivision. In addition, streets shall be designated on the plan, prohibiting dead end streets or excessive length of streets ending in cul-de-sacs ·and laying out
a procedure to classify streets within the Township as either arterial street, collector street, primary street, secondary street·, marginal access street, residential street arid other. Further sections within this article refer to street.standards to be in compliance with other Township ordinances and the requirements of PennDOr, street alignment, grades, intersections, and accesa as e11 as site distances.  In addition deaigo standards for erosion and
·,,,	sedimentation control, storm management are contained therein.  In addition
design  standards  :f'or parking  facilities are  contained  therein.   Pedestrian
aths, sidewalks, street tree plantings crosswalks and design standards for
single-family developnents, performance standard subdivision, planned resi­
dential developments and mobile home perks are included.  In addition there
are provisions for non-residential developments and for varying design standards and per:formance standard subdivisions and planned residential develOpments.

ARTICLE  V,    REQUIRED  IMPROVEMENTS:	The   purpose    of   this  article  is  to establish and define public improvements required to be constructed and makes reference for maintenan e of streets, street signs, street lights, monuments, sidewalks, curbs and storm sewerage systems. It- also provides for public water  supply systems and centralized water _supply and distribution systems,
on-lot water distribution system, public sanitary sewers, private sanitary dis­
osal systems, on-lot sewer and water locations, electric, tele hone and
ommunications facilities, grading, -planting, community facilities alld special drainage problems such as flood plain areas&
 

 



ARTICLE VI..   PLAN REQUIREMENTS:   This article regulates the necessary content for sk.etcb or 1'4'asibil.ity plans, preliminary plans and final plans designating the size of the documents to be submitted to the Pl.anning Commission and the required content of' them showing what   is upon the  property in its natural state and what will be  laid on there after constr-uction..   Th:is article gives further direction
as to what shall. be  in major and minor  subdivision plans  and specifies the quality and quantity of the plans that are to be filed also providing :f'or a modification procedure  to be  granted by the   Board  of Supervisors on application  of the   land owner and public hearing  and after payment  of required.fees.

ARTICLE   VII.    AIMINis:rRATION:	This article .Pl'OVides for the enforcement
of the subdivision ordinance to be by the  Township Zoning Officer as the designated
officer of the Supervisors for this and the Plan.Ding Commission is directed to
review plans and sJiecifications submitted by land owners and further provides f'or
the c;harging of' certain reasonable fees as determined by the :Soard of Supervisors
by re-solution.  This section also provides f'or certain reqllired contracts or
improvements. This section also provides that under certain limited circumstances
the Board of Supervisors may bave a hearing at which the land owner may request
a variance or modification from the strict application of this ordinance.

ARI'ICLE VIII. AMENDMENTS: This article contains 'Pt'Ovisions in strict con.. fomity to the PennsyJ.van.ia MuniciIJB11tiea Planning Code concerning the pro­ cedure for making amendment to this subdi'Tiaion ordinance and any appeal pro­ cedure to the Court of Common Pleas of Bucks County a er going to the Township Supervisors again as provided by the MuniciIJalitiea Planning Code. This article also establishes.penalty provisions for violations of the ordinance and indicates that the ordinance will become effective five (5)days after approval.

A copy of the proposed Su.bdivision Ordinance may be reviewed at the Town.ship office during normal business hours. The Township office is located on Harrisburg School. Road, Haycock Township, Pennsylvania.



This Ordinance  has been unanimously  adopted by the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors on this.20th day   of J'lllle, 1919




Witness:
'-i;f,,rtt ..,}1;, 'l3et...I- 	

V ce-Chairman  of the Board



Supervisor
 
J'.!1='11• "I
lfalueoU, l!Jmm•llfwntill


ORDINANCE NO. 31


AN ORDINANCE AMENDING HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP ORDINANCE NO. 3 SO AS TO INCREASE THE PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF THAT ORDINANCE


PREAMBLE

The Haycock Township Board.of Supervisors, concerned with the welfare of Township residents amend Ordinance No. 3 which regulates a junkyard in Haycock Township thereby increasing the penalty for violation of that Ordinance.

Section I.	Repeal

Section 4 of Haycock Township Ordinance No. 3 is hereby repealed.

Section II.	Penalty

Section 4 of Haycock Township Ordinance No. 3 shall hereby read as follows:

Any person, co-partnership or corporation violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall, upon summary proceeding brought in the name of the Township before any district magistrate, be fined upon conviction in an amount not exceeding
$300.00.	Each week for which the violation continues shall constitute a separate and new offense.

Section III	Effective Date

This Amendment to Haycock Township Ordinance No. 3 shall become effective five (5) days after enactment.

 
Section IV	Enactment Enacted and ordained this
 


st/day of /t{)-r.}	, 1980.
 




  ··--
 



.-: .•.c  .
 
.-- -  --  -1 --  -1.--
 




HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP ORDINANCE NO. 3_$£._

AN ORDINANCE TO ,\MEND THE EAYCOCK TOWNSHIP POR'rION
OF  THE QUAKERT0\'1N AREA  SUBDIVISION AND LANb DEVELOP­ MENT ORDINANCE UNDER THE PROVISIONS OF SECTION 902
AND TO PROVIDE FOR COMPLIANCE WITH REQUI MENTS OF 'l'HE NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM.

BE  IT ORDAINED by the .Board of Supervisors of Haycock 'l'ownship, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, and it is hereby enacted and ordained by authority of the same:

Section 320	Flood Plains is amended as follows:

(a)	Areas adjoining any streams, ponds, or lakes subject to a 100 year recurrence interval flood; or areas identified by the presence of Flood ?lain Soils as identified in Section 321.	The following studies may be used to identify the Flood Plain;
however, the study which jndicates a  Flood Plain
of greater del ineat.ion shal 1''be used.

(1)	Flood Insurance Study prepared by the Federal Emergency Managment Agency, Federal Insurance Administration.

( 2)	Soil Survey of	Bucks and Philadelphia Counties prepared by the U. S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service.	See Section 321.

(b)	Studies conducted by a  registered engineer or Soil Conversation Service representative expert in the preparation of hydrolo ical	studies may be sub­ stituted for the studies listed above subject to the review and apµroval of lhe governing body on recommendations of	Lhe municipal engineer.

Sect ion 6 21 {a)	§_pc,_c).".!._!:!_i: la g'=--._Pr<?_l:>!e111 ..:-- !:.?.
 
P-l-a-i-n··
 
Are--a-·is·amended as .,fol-
 
ows:
 

Add the words "and Flood Plain" after the word
"Floc)dways'' in sentence two.

Section 621	Special  Drainage  Problems - Flood Plain Area is-ii.men.ded-as-fiilTows_:	.	_


Add the following subsection	(d):
 
'



(d)	Within the Flood Plain the following additional provisions shall be met:

a.	Drainage
Storm drainage facilities shall be designed
to detain or convey the flow of. storm water run­ off in a  safe and efficient manner·.	The system shall insure drainage at all points along streets,
and provl:i.de positive drainage away from buildings and on-site waste disposal sites,	Plans shall be
subject to the approval of the Governing Body. Drainage plans shall be consistent with local and regional drainage plans.	The facilities shall be designed to prevent the discharge of runoff onto adjacent properties.		·	.

b.	Sewer Facilities	l
All sanitary sewer systems located in· any
designated Flood Plain; whether public or private,
shall be floodproofed to one f-Oot above the 100-
year flood elevation.	No on-site sewage system
shall be located in the Flood0   lain.

c.	Water Facilities
All water systems located in any designated
Flood Plain, whether public or private, shall be
floodproofed to one foot above the 100-year flood elevation.	·

d.	Other Utilities and facilities
All other public and private citilities and facilities including gas and electric shall be elevated or f loodproofed to one foot above the
100-	year flood elevation.

EFFECTIVE OATE

This Ordinance shall become effective within five
days after enactment.

SO ENAC'l'ED AND ORDAINED by the   Haycock Township
13oard  of Supervisors this	;fl/.-	day of	Ft:.h	,  1981.

I
HAYCOC	TOw	SH	/l	1
BO	!}/foRV1}_0	-;	J. i
 

ATT  ST:
 
///	-7) -;Z?:-/2£
c.  /,	--	/	)r	i...cz.
. //(_.ft - _?-'[.,.
. -------·---······--  -·-----·-
-)	-'/'	£?
t-	-··----
 
ORDINANCE NO .. 8 B

BY THE SUPERVISORS OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS
·COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, GRANTING A FRANCHISE TO SERVICE
ELECTRIC CABLE T.V., INC., ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS,
TO OWN, OPERATE AND MAINTAIN A CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM IN·THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, SETTING FORTH CONDITIONS ACCOMPANYING THE GRANT OF SAID FRANCHISE, PROVIDING FOR THE REGULATION AND USE OF SAID SYSTEM, PROVIDING FOR
THE PAYMENT OF CERTAIN FEES, AND PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF.


WHEREAS, Service Electric Cable T.V. , Inc., a corpora- tion with office located in the City of Allentown, Pennsylvania (herein referred to as "Company"), is desirous of having the Township of Haycock grant to it a franchise to operate a
cable television business within the Township; and


WHEREAS, the Township of Haycock deems it advisable and in the best interest of its citizens to'grant such franchise to Company and, in any event, to regulate in part, the Company's operation of its cable television business in the Township.

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED, and it

is hereby ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Supervisors of the Township of Haycock, Bucks County, Pen sylvania, as follows, to wit:

SECTION 1.	Definitions.	For the purpose of this Ordinance the following terms, phrases and words shall have





 
 
 







the meaning given herein. ·when not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.	The word "shall" is always mandatory.
(a)	"Township" is the Township of Haycock,

a Second Class Township,· located in Bucks County, Pennsylvania.

(b)	"Company" means SERVICE ELECTRIC CABLE

 
T.V.,  INC.
 



(c)	"Person" is any person, fi= partnership,
 

association, corporation, company or organization of any kind, and the partners in partnerships and officers of corporations.
(d)	"Cable Television System" or "System" shall mean a system of antennas, cables, wires, lines, towers, waveguides, or other conductors, converters, equipment or facilities, designed and constructed for the purpose of pro- ducing, receiving, amplifying, and distributing, audio, video and other forms of electronic or electrical signals, located
in the Township.

(e)	"Gross Subscriber Revenues" shall mean only those revenues derived from the monthly service charges by subscribers located within the Township for the regular cable television reception service, which service includes only the transmission signals on VHF Channels 2 through 13.
 
 







As required by the Federal Communications Commission, .Gross Subscriber Revenues shall not include any revenues received:
(a) as reimbursement of expense in the operation of any access =channels;	(b) as adverti ing payments; (c) from the leasing of cable channels; (d) from programs for which a per-channel or per-program charge is made; and (e) from furnishing other communications and nonbroadcast services either directly or as a carrier for another party or any other income derived from the system.	Gross Subscriber
Revenues shall also not include revenues received as install-

ation charges and fees for reconnections, inspection, repairs or modifications of any installations.

SECTION 2.	Qualifications of Grantee and Grant of Authority.	A public hearing concerning the granting of the-
 
franchise herein granted to Company was held on the
 
day
 

 
of .l/! 1,../;Jv	,  19	, at
 
 	E:o  o 	  o'clock, at  	
 
H'1M<I JL>AJ1obf	fflu>«•co•l...t	,£,;.I	o

Bucks County, Pennsylvania.	Public notice of said hearing was given by advertisement in Wv..u.t -k-- Fu  p .. 'C>-	, a

newspaper of general circulation in the Township of Haycock,
1980, and	-	1980, which notice
invited interested parties to participate in said hearing and comment upon the legal, character, financial, technical and other qualifications of the Company to continue to operate a Cable Television System in the Tm-mship.	Said
hearing having been held on ·the date and at the place stated
 



above, and said hearing having been fully open to the public, and the Township having received at said hearings all comments
regarding the qualifications of the Company to receive this
,.
franchise, the Township hereby f1nds that the Company possesses the necessary legal, technical, character, financial and
other qualifications and that the Company's construction arrangements are adequate and feasible, and that therefor the Township.hereby grants to the Company a non-exclusive
franchise, right and privilege to construct, erect, operate,

modify and maintain, in, upon, along, across, above and over and under the highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, public ways and public places now laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto, in the Township, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other television conductors and fixtures necessary for the
maintenance and operation in the Township of a Cable Television System for the purpose of distributing television and radio signals, and other electronic impulses in order to furnish television and radio prograns, and various communications
and other electronic services to the .public.	The right so granted includes the right to use and occupy said streets, alleys, public ways and public places and all manner of easements for the purposes herein set forth but does not include or purport to include the right to utilize the private property, real or personal, of any other person or firm.
 

-SECTION 3.	Franchise Term.	The Franchises granted herein shall terminate_l5 years from date of grant, subject to renewal for periods of reasonable duration on the same terms and conditions as contained herein, or on such different or additional terms and conditions as may be lawfully specified
by the Township's governing body and as are consistent with the requirements of relevant Regulations of the Federal Communications Commission.	The Company's application for franchise renewal shall be granted.provided:	(1) the Company shows that its CATV service during the preceding franchise period has reflected a good-faith effort to serve the needs and interests of its subscribers and service area, and
(2)	the Company has not demonstrated a disregard of the law

or relevant Regulations or Ordinances.


- SECTION 4.	Payments to the Township.	The Company shall, during each year of operation under this Franchise, pay to the Township an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the annual Gross Subscriber Revenues received by the Company for regular monthly cable television rendered to customers located within the Township.	Each annual payment shall be made the first day of March for the preceding calendar year and along with said payment, the Company shall furnish the Township with an operating report showing _the Company's annual Gross Subscriber Revenues during the prec-:=ding year and such other information as the Township shall reasonably require.
 


SECTION 5.	Records and Reports.	The Company shall keep full, true, accurate and current books of account, which books and records shall be made available for inspection and copying by an authorized repres ntative of the Tmmship .at all reasonable times.

SECTION 6.	Local Office; Comulaint Procedures.

(a)	During the term of this Franchise, and any renewal thereof, the Company shall maintain within the Township, a local business office or agent for the purpose of receiving and resolving all complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and similar matters.	The provisions of this Section shall deemed to be complied with if Company maintains a local business head­ quarters ...Qffic_e within 25 airline miles of the principal coordinates of the Township, which office may be reached by
a local, toll-free telephone call, and provides the Township Manager's office with the name, address and phone number of
a person who will act as the Company's agent to receive
-.
complaints regarding quality of service, equipment malfunc-
tions and similar matters. The local office shall be open to receive inquiries or complaints from subscribers during normal business hours, and in no event less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p ..m. , Monday through Friday. ·Any complaints from
 

subscribers shall be investigated and
 
'
acted
 

upon as soon as
 

possible, but at least within three (3) business days of
 

their receipt.	The Company shall keep a maintenance service log which will indicate the nature of each service complaint, the date and time it was received, the disposition of said complaint and the time and date thereof.	This log shall be made available for periodic inspection by Township.
(b)	The Company shall, by appropriate means

such as a card or brochure, as subscribers are connected or reconnected.to the system furnish information concerning the procedures for making inquiries and/or complaints, including the name, address and local telephone number of the employee or employees or agent to whom such inquiries or complaints are to be addressed.	The Township appoints its Manager or
his designated Township employee as responsible for implemen-

tation of the complaint procedures and continuing adrninistra- tion of the Franchise.

SECTION 7.	Liability and Indemnification.	The Company shall pay, and by its acceptance of this Franchise expressly agrees that it will pay, all damages and penalties which the Township may legally be required to pay as a result of the negligence of the Company, its agents, contractors,
or sub-contractors, in the installation, operation, or maintenance of the Cable Television System authorized herein. The Township shall notify the Company's representative within fifteen (15) days after the presentation of any claim or demand to the Township, either by suit or otherwise, made
 

against the Township on account of any negligence or contract as aforesaid on the part of the Company. The. Company further agrees as follows:
(a)	Company shall carry Workmen's Cqmpensation insurance, with statutory limits, and Employer's Liability insurance with limits of not less than One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000) which shall cover all operations to be performed by Company as a result of this Ordinance.
(b)	Company shall carry Comp_i::.ehBn.s.i:ye General Liability and Comprehensive Automobile Liability insurance with bodily injury and/or death coverage	of	not less than Five Hundred Thousand Dollars ($500,000) per occurrence, and property
damage limits o'f  not less than Three Hundred Thousand Dollars

($300,000).

(c)	Company shall carry	ractual Liability insurance coverage for all liability which Company has contrac­ tually assumed hereunder, including the indemnification obliga­ tions assumed by Company in this SECTION 7, the coverage under said policy to be the same as the limits set forth in the preceding sub-section 7 (b) of this Ordinance.
(d)	Wm.lpany's Workma 's Compensation, Compre­

hensive General Liability and Comprehensive Automobile Liability insurance and all other insurance which Company
is obliged under the terms of this Ordinance to carry shall be written by an insurance company authorized to do business
 


in Pennsylvania with capital and/or surplus of not less than Three Million Dollars ($3,000,000).	Company agrees to furnish Township with certified copies or certificates of
insurance of said policies, which shall provide that insurance

·shall not be cancelled unless ten (10) days prior written notice shall first be given to Township.	Township shall be given a certified copy of the policy written to provide the contractual liability coverage required by sub-section 7 (c) of this Ordinance.

SECTION 8.	System Construction, Maintenance and Procedures.
(a)	Upon grant of this Franchise to construct

and maintain a community television system in the Township, the Company may enter into contracts with any Public Utility Companies or any other owner or lessee of any poles located
within or without the Township to whatever extent such contract or contracts may be expedient and of advantage to the Company for use of poles and posts necessary for proper installation
of the System, obtain right-of-way permits from appropriate State, County and Federal officials necessary to cross high­ ways or roads under their respective jurisdictions to supply main trunk lines from the Company's receiving antennas, obtain permission from the Federal Aviation Authority to erect and maintain antennas suitab.le to the needs of the System and
its subscribers and obtain whatever other permits a Township,
 

County, State or Federal Agency may require.	In the construc­ tion, installation and maintenance of its System, the Company will use steel, cable and electronic.devices, all of specialized and advanced design and type; i the operation of its Systems, the Company will employ personnel with training, skill and experience in electronics and communications.		Material and/or.personnel of this sort may not be available to the
Company for its System in the event of war or other similar

national emergency.

(b)	. The Company is System, poles, wires, and appurtenances shall be located, erected and maintained so that none of them shall endanger or interfere with the lives of persons, or.interfere with any improvements the Township may deem proper to make, or unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the free use of the streets, alleys, bridges, easements or public property.
(c)	The Township acknowledges that the proposed System of Company will serve an acceptable portion of the Township.	However, in the event that the Township should
further territory as authorized by law and if Company's System is in the area of the Township which abuts the annexed territory, the Company shall extend energized trunk cable to the remaining portions of the Township so annexed within one (1) year thereafter, unless additional time is granted by the governing body of the Tmvnship upon
 

request of the Company for good cause shown.	Extension of Service shall not be required into an area which does not meet the requirements set forth in SECTION ·9 of this Franchise.
(d)	All transmission and distribution struc­ tures, lines and equipment erected by the Company within the Township shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any
of the said streets, alleys or other public ways and places.

(e}	In case of any disturbance of p ent, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, the Company shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the Township, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway or surface of any street or alley disturbed, in as good condition as before said work was commenced.
(f}	In event that at any time during the period of this Franchise, the Township shall lawfully elect to <l.J_tg_r or change th.e grade of any street, alley or other
public way, the Company upon reasonable notice by the Township, shall remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its
own expense.






-11-
 

(g)	The Company shall not place poles or other fixtures where the same will interfere with any gas, electric or telephone fixture, water hydrant or main, or sewer main or appurtenance, and all such poles or other fixtures placed in any street shall be placed at the outer edge of the sidewalk and inside the curb line and those placed in alleys shall be placed close to the line of the lot abutting on said alley, and then in such manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on said streets, alley_s and public ways.
(h)	The Company shall, on the request of any

person holding a building moving permit issued by the Township, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving
of buildings.	The expense of such temporary removal, raising, or lowering of wires shall be paid by ·the person requesting
the same, and the Company shall have the authority to

require such payment in advance.	The Company shall be given not less than forty-eight (48) hours advance notice to arrange for such temporary w.iJ:_e. cli. .
(i)	The Company shall have the authority to

trim trees located within the legal right-of-way of any streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the Township so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the Company, all trimming to be done under the supervision and direction of
 



the Township and at the expense of the Company.	As a condition for granting approval for the cutting of any trees, if such cutting could result in liability on the part of the Township the Township may require Company to provide, in advance, such security as the Township may reasonably require to save harm­ less the Township from and indemnify the Township for any such liability and, in any event, Company does hereby agree to
save harmless and indemnify Township of and from any claims

for damages arising out of any such cutting, whether or not Township has requested security in advance.
(j)	The Company shall provide, upon request

and without charge, service to any municipal buildings owned and operated by the Township and to any public or parochial elementary or secondary school.	This shall mean only an energized cable to such building.		The cost of any internal wiring shall be borne by the institution.

SECTION 9.	Line Extensions.

(a)	It shall be the obligation of Company to serve all.J:_esidents of the Township except to the extent that density of homes, adverse terrain or other factors render providing service impracticable, technically irtfeasible or economically noncompensatory.	For purposes of determining compliance with the provisions of this Section, and to provide for a reasonable and nondiscriminatory policy governing
 


extensions of cable service within the Township, which policy was subject to public review in the public proceeding leading to the award of this Franchise, Company shall extend service to new:subscribers, at the normal installation charge and monthly rate for customers of that classification, under
the following terms and conditions:

(1)	Where the new subscriber or nearest subscriber of a group of new subscribers is located within
200 feet of existing trunk cable, and

(2)	Where the number of homes to be passed by such new extension cable plant bears the same pro­ portional ratio to the total amount of new cable plant as
the average number of homes passed per mile of existing

cable plant..

(b)	In the event the requirements of sub­ sections (a)(1) and (a)(2) are not met, the installation cost per subscriber shall be determined in accordance with Company's rate schedule in effect at the time, which rate schedule shall be fair and reasonable in the circumstances.

SECTION 10.	Compliance with Standards.	All facilities and equipment of Company shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the req irements and specifi­ cations of the National Electrical Safety Code and such applicable ordinances and regulations set forth by  the Tovmship and/or any other local, state or Federal agencies.


-14-
 


SECTION 11.	Company Rules and Regulations.		The Company shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonqbly necessary to enable the Company to exercise its rights ·and perform its obligations under this Franchise, and to assure an uninterrupted	service to each and all ·of its customers.	Provided, however, that such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be
in conflict with the provisions hereof or of Federal and State laws.

SECTION 12.	Procedures.	No renewal of this
. ,,J-1..,,!»
Franchise shall be effective··• pursuant to a public proceeding
affording due process.	The Company shall be a party to any

such proceedings and any other proceedings in which its rights, privileges or interests would be affected and shall be fully entitled to such due process rights as may be available under applicable laws, ordinances, rules or regulations.

SECTION 13.	Approval of Transfer.	The Company shall not sell or transfer its System to another, nor transfer any rights under this Franchise to another, without
written approval by the Township, provided, that such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld if the vendee, assignee
or lessee has filed with the appropriate official of the



-15-
 


Township, an instrument duly executed, reciting the fact of such sale, assignment or lease and accepting the terms of
this Franchise and agreeing to perform all conditions thereof.


,SECTION 14.	Compliance with FCC Rules and Regulations. The Company shall, at all times, comply with the rules and regulations governing CATV operations promulgated by the
Federal Communications Commission ("FCC").	This shall·

include adherence by the Company to FCC rules regarding technical and engineering specifications involved in the construction of the CATV System and signal carriage therein.

'- SECTION 15.	Publication Costs. . The Company shall assume the costs of the publication of all notices in connec­ tion with the grant of this Franchise, the adoption of this Ordinance and the public hearing held in connection therewith:
'SECTION 16	Legal Costs.	All expenses for legal services reasonably incurred by the Township in connection
)
with the grant of this Franchise, the adoption of this Ordinance, and the proceedings held in connection therewith shall be reimbursed to the Township by Company.

SECTION 17.	Activities Prohibited.

(a) The Company shall not allow its cable or other operations to interfere with television reception of persons not served by the Company, nor shall the System




-16-
 


interfere with, obstruct or hinder in any manner, the opera- tion of the various utilities serving the residents of the Township.
(b) Except for service to be supplied to
.
the Township itself and to schools in the Township, the Company

shall not, as to rates, charges, service facilities, rules, regulations, or in any other respect, make or grant any pre- ference or advantage to any person, nor subject any person
to any prejudice or disadvantage.	Provided, however, that

nothing in this Franchise shall be deemed to prohibit the· establishment of a graduated scale of charges and classified rate schedules to which any customer coming within such classification would be entitled.

SECTION 18.	Landlord - Tenant.

- (a) No landlord shall demand or accept pay- ment from Company for permitting Company to provide cable television service on or within said landlord's property
or premises.	Provided, however, that such landlord may
..
be entitled to reasonable reimbursement for any direct

expenses incurred by him in connection with the installation of cable television service.
\ (b) No landlord shall interfere with the

installation of cable television facilities upon his property or premises nor shall such landlord discriminate in rental
 



.c	harges or otherwise, between tenants who receive cable service and those who do not.	Ho landlord shall demand or accept payment from any tenant, in any form, for permitting cable television service on or within his property or premises.

SECTION 19.	Theft of Services and Tampering.

(a)	. No person, whether or not a subscriber to the cable. system, shall willfully, maliciously or other­
wise damage or cause to be damaged any wire, cable, conduit,

apparatus, appurtenance, or equipment of a Company operating a cable television system within the Township, or commit any act with intent to cause such damage, or to tap, tamper with or otherwise connect any wire or device to a wire, cable, conduit, apparatus, appurtenance or equipment of such Franchisee with the intent to obtain a signal or impulse
from the cable system without authorization from or compensa­

tion to such Company, or to obtain cable television or other communications service with intent to cheat or defraud said Company of any lawful charge to which it is entitled.
, (b) Any person who violates any provision of

this Section shall upon conviction thereof in a summary pro­ ceeding be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed Three Hundred Dollars ($300) plus costs of prosecution and in default of· payment thereof, or any part thereof, shall be sentenced to
 
9/26/80








i.	Jndergo imprisonment for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days.

SECTION 20.	Severability.

(a)	Tf any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any Court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.

(b)	Should any provision of this Franchise be inconsistent or at variance with any rule, regulation
or policy, in whole in the part, of the Federal Co=unicati.ons

Commission or any other agency having jurisdiction, such pro­ vision shall be invalid, but the remaining provisions hereof shall not be affected thereby.

 
ORDAINED AND ENACTED into an Ordinance this  	 of  -------'1980.
 
day
 

 
ATTEST:
 
TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK

By 	
 














-19-
 
 



ORDINANCE NO.	- ?q -

AN ORDINANCE A.MENDING THE HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP PORTION OF THE QUAKERTOWN AREA ZONING ORDINANCE OF 1975, AS AMENDED.

BE IT ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, and it is hereby enacted and ordained by Authority of the same that Sections 405(B2) (d) and 254 of the Haycock portion of the Quakertown
Area Zoning Ordinance of 1975 as amended, are hereby amended.

Section 1

Section 405(B2) (d) of the Haycock Township portion of the Quakertown Area Zoning Ordinance is amended as follows:

Delete subsection (d), and insert the following in its place:

(d)		"Each mobile home shall be placed on at least eight (8) poured concrete or masonry pillars set on a concrete base at least eight (8) inches thick.	The pillars shall be at least one (1) foot by two (2) feet in size and at least thirty
(30) inches below grade.	Each pillar shall have
installed a tie-down ring to which the mobile home shall be secured."

Section 2

Section 254 of the Haycock Township portion of the Quakertown Area Zoning Ordinance is hereby repealed and shall be amended to read as follows:

Wetlands or lowlands greater than one-quarter acre which are covered with shallow and sometimes temporary or intermitted waters.	Wetlands lie along streams, channels, or swales or are adjacent to flood plain soils and have a slope of less than one-half of one percent	(.5%).	In addition, wetlands may be areas identified as marshes, swamps, and bogs.

Section 3

This Ordinance shall be effective five days after enactment.

ENACTED AND ORDAINED
Haycock Township this 21st






 
Ronnld W. Walters
 
. ·l.:..2/13/82	ME/fg	WI-30








AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE QUAKERTOWN AREA SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE TO PROVIDE COMPLIANCE WITH ACT 166, THE PENNSYLVANIA FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT ACT OF 1978


BE IT ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township that the Quakertown Area Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance be amended as follows:

Section 320(d) Flood Plains is amended as follows:

(d)	Within the Flood Plain the following additional provisions shall be met:

a.	Drainage  .
Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
detain or convey the flow of storm water runoff in a safe and efficient manner.	The system
shall insure drainage at all points along streets, and provide positive drainage away
from buildings and on-site waste qisposal sites. Plans shall be subject to the approval of the Governing Body.	Drainage plans shall be con­
sistent with local and regional drainage plans.
The 'facilities shall be desig.ned to prevent
the drainage of runoff onto adjacent properties.

b.	Sewer Facilities
All sanitary sewer systems located in any designated Flood Plain, whether public or private, shall be floodproofed to one and one-'half (1-1/2) feet above the 100-year
flood elevation.	No on-site sewage system shall be located in the Flood Plain.

c.	Water Facilities
All water systems located in any designated
Flood Plain, whether public or private, shall be floodproofed to one and one-half	(1-1/2) feet above the 100-year flood elevation.

d.	Other Utilities and facilities
All other public and private utilities and
facilities including gas and electric shall
be elevated or floodproofed to one and one­ half	(l-1/2) feet above the 100-year flood
elevation.
 




EFFECTIVE DATE

This Ordinance shall become effective five (5) days after enactment.

 
ENACTED AND ORDAINED this A.D., 1982.
 
15th	day of	Dec.
 

 



.  Witness:

6..<£n,, kn&a&k­ I?athleen J!I. Babb Secretary
 
HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOAP OF SUPERVISORS
 
---11/19/82	ME/fg	WE09


AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE .QUAKE'.R'll.OWN AREA ZONING ORDINANCE AS M"iENDED TO PROVIDE FOR COMPLIANCE WITH ACT 166, THE PENNSYLVA..1\l"IA FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT ACT OF 1978, AND TO AMEND SECTION 1102(3) (i) REGARDING NOTICE OF HEARINGS FOR REZONING; AND SECTION 1125(c) REGARDING TRAFFIC FLOW ESTIMATES


 
BE IT HEREBY ORDAINED by the Board of Haycock Township that the QU:ake:rtciwn :Area be amended as follows:
 
Supervisors of Zoning Ordinance
 

Section 220 B	Floodway

The following section is added to the Ordinance: Section 200 B	Floodway
That portion of the Flood Plain as identified in Section
220 including the watercourse channel and adjacent land areas which must be reserved to carry the 100-year­ recurrence-interval flood without cumulative increasing that flood elevation more than one (1) foot.

Section 518 (b)	Building Elevation This subsection is runended as follows:
(b)	Building Elevation -

(1)	No building or any portion thereof shall be erected unless the finished surface of the ground is higher than, or is raised by filling to, an elevation of at least one and one-half (1 1/2) feet above the 100-year-floor-elevation except as provided in subsection (f) below.

(2)	No first floor, basement floor, or cellar floor of any building shall be constructed at an elevation of less than one and one-half	(1-1/2) feet above the elevation of the 100-year-flood.

(3)	The Zoning Officer shall require the applicant to submit an elevation certified by a registered engineer, architect or surveyor where necessary to determine compliance with building elevation requirements.

Section 518 (e)	Storage of Materials This subsection is amended as follows:
(e)	Storage of Materials - No materials that can float, that are explosive, or that are toxic to humans,
 
·..




animals or vegetation shall be stored in the Flood Plain.	In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, and :the regulations adopted by the Department of Community Affairs as required by the Act, any new or substantially improved structure which will be used for the production of
·storage of any of the following dangerous materials or substances or which will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply (more than 550 gallons or other comparable volume or any amount of radioactive substances) of any of the dangerous materials or substances, including but not limited
to the following, on the premises, shall not be
permitted in the Flood Plain:

1.	Acetone
2.	Ammonia
3.	Benzene
4.	Calcium carbide
5.	Carbon disulfide
6.	Celluloid
7.	Chlorine
8.	Hydrochloric acid
9.	Hydrocyanic acid
10.	Magnesium
11.	Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen
12.	Petroleilln products	(gasoline, fuel oil, etc.)
13 •	Phosphorus
14.	Potassium
15.	Sodium
16 •. Sulphur and sulphur products
17.	Pesticides	(including insecticides, fungicides
and rodenticides)
18.	Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise regulated.

Section 518 (h) (3)

This subsection is amended as follows:

(3)	No hospitals	(public or private), nursing home (public or private), jails or prisons shall be placed in the Flood Plain.	No mobile homes, whether on an individual lot or in an existing or proposed mobile home park, shall be placed in the Flood Plain.

Section 518 (h) (6) c.

This subsection is amended as follows:

c.	If a variance is granted to the elevation of Section 518(b) (2), any portion of the building built below one and one-half	(1-1/2) foot above
 



the 100-year-flood elevation shall be foolproofed to that level according to the classification
Wl---W2 of the Floodproofing Regulations, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, pamphlet EP 1165 2 314.

Section 1102 (3) (i).

This subsection is amended as follows:

(i)	That the municipality had resolved to consider a particular scheme of rezoning by publication of notice of hearings, proposed comprehensive plan, proposed zoning ordinance or otherwise,

Section 1125 (c)

This subsection is amended as follows:

 
Apartment Mobile Home
 
6.9 trips/DU
6.1 trips/DU
 

EFFECTIVE DATE

This Ordinance shall become effective five days after its adoption by the Supervisors of Haycock Township.

Enacted this	15th	day of	December	, 1982.


 


ss:
 
HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
 


een M. Babb,  Secretary



Ronald W.
.•O  \\-:
 

 




AN ORDINANCE OF THE HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS PROHIBITING PARKING ON CERTAIN PORTIONS OF COVERED BRIDGE ROAD

PREAMBLE

The Haycock Township Board of Supervisors hereby enacts the following ordinance prohibiting parking on certain areas of Covered Bridge Road.

Section 1

Parking shall be prohibited on both sides of that portion of Covered Bridge Road from the covered bridge to a   point 150 yards north of the covered bridge between the hours of 8 P.H. and 8 A.f.1.

Section 2

The proper authorities of the township are hereby directed to erect official signs restricting parking as aforesaid on
both side of Covered Bridge Road as required and in conformity with the provisions of the Pa. Vehicle Code.

Section 3

Violations and penalty.	Any person violating the provisions of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof and swnmary proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $10 and in default of such fines shall undergo imprisonment for a period not exceeding five (5) days.

Section 4

This Ordinance shall be effective five (5) days after enactment.

 
ENACTED AND  ORDAINED this A.D., 1982.
 

29th	day of	December
 

 


Witness:
 
HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
 

 





 
 
--



Hl\YCOC:< ORDINANCE NO. fiL

AN ORDINANCE BY THE BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP AMENDING Tl-IE QUAKERTOWN AiIBA ZONING ORDINANCE SO AS TO REVISE THE TABLE OF USE REGULATIONS	(SECTION 404) REGARDING B3 CONVERSIONS


IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township upon recoI1U11endation of the Haycock Township Planning Commission and Lhe Bucks County Planning Commission that the Quakertown Area Zoning Ordino:lnce Table of Use Regulations section 404 B(3) is hereby amended.

Section 404 13(3) of the Quakertown Area Zoning Ordinance is hereby amendctl to read as follows:

 
B(3) Conversion RP RA RD FC SHC
c	c	c	c	c
 

sr..r. Slli'l SHH URL UR:-1 PC cc  SC PI er  EXT HOS
C	C	P	P	P	N	N	P	N	N	N	N
 

Section 2	EFFECTIVE DA'l'E

This Ordinance shall be effective five tlays after enactment.

Enacted this	/,:?.,tL  day of	:7/Jft/UA-<' (:!	I	1983.


 

Witness:
·t/.,; .<" '.ht	'B&t-/,.­
athleen M. B bb, Secretary
 
Hl\YCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISO
 
·--..	--




AN  ORDINANCE OF THE HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
PROHIBITING PARKING ON CERTAIN PORTIONS OF OLD BETHLEHEM	ROAD


PREAMBLE

The Haycock Township Board of Supervisors with
the approval of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
hereby enacts the following ordinance proh,;i.biting parking on
certain areas of Old Bethlehem Road	(LR 09't8)  •

Section l

At no time shall parking be permitted on either side of those portions of Old Bethlehem Road which are five hundred	(500) feet north and five hundred	(500) feet
south of the intersection of Old Bethlehem Road and Pullen Station Road.

Section 2

The proper authorities of the township are hereby directed to erect official signs restricting parking as aforesaid on both sides of Old Bethlehem	Road as required and in conformity with the provisions of the Pa. Vehicle Code.

 
Section 3
 



Violations and pena.lty.	Any person violating the
 
provisions of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof and summary proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine not
exceeding $10 and in default of such fines shall undergo imprisonment for a period not exceeding five (SJ  days.

Section 4

This Ordinance shall be effective five (5) days after enactment.

ENACTED AND ORDAINED this	25th  day of	Ma!f
A.D.	I	1983.
 


WUneu,:

,	- ,	, )n, &4-c:_
- 'a!ttj
 
HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
 



ORDINANCE NO.	45
•

AN ORDINANCE OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP AMENDING THE HAYCOCK PORTION OF THE QUAKERTOWN AREA ZONING ORDINANCE TO PROVIDE FOR A FINE OF
NOT LESS THAN THREE HUNDRED DOLLARS	($300.00)
NOR MORE THAN FIVE HUNDRED DOLLARS ($500.00)
UPON CONVICTION OF A ZONING VIOLATION BEFORE A DISTRICT JUSTICE.


SECTION 1.	Section 1202 (a) is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 1202. Fines and Penalties

(a)	For any and every violation of the provisions of this Ordinance:
(1)	The owner, general agent, contractor of a building or premises where such a violation has been committed or shall exist;
(2)	The owner, general agent, contractor, lessee, or tenant of any part of a building or premises in which part such violations have been com- mitted or shall exist; and
(3)	The general agent, architect, builder, con- tractor, or any other person who knowingly commits, takes part, or assists in any such violation shall exist, shall be liable on conviction before a District Justice to a
•
 



fine not less than Three Hundred Dollars

($300.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars
'
($500.00) shall be paid over to the treasury of the municipality.	In default of payment, such person shall be committed to the Bucks County Prison and confined for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days.
ENACTED AND ORDAINED this	        day of	h,Ct/ '"(} ,A.D.,

1984.






WITMESS:

 



Ronald w. Walters Charles A.
 


ORDINANCE NO. 46


AN ORDINANCE PROHIBITING AUTOMOBILE SALVAGE YARDS AND/OR AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARDS, PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF THE ORDINANCE.


SECTION 1.	DEFINITIONS:	Unless otherwise expressly provided, the following words shall for the purposes of this Ordinance have the following meanings:
(a). MOTOR VEHICLE :	Any and all types of motor vehicles, including self-propelled machinery of all kinds, with the exception of useful farm machinery.
(b)	PERSON.	Any natural person, partnership, firm, corporation or other legal entity, including singular and plural, male and female.
(c)	TOWNSHIP.	The Township of Haycock, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
(d)	BOARD.	The Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
(e)	AUTOMOBILE SALVAGE YARD AND/OR AUTOMOBILE

GRAVEYARD.	Any premises as herein defined whereon three or more motor vehicles on which either a Certificate of Junk has been issued, or which display no current Pennsylvania Registration plates are stored outside of an enclosed structure, shall be deemed a junk yard.
(f)	PREMISES:	Any parcel of land situate in Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, having a separate
 


tax map parcel number for County assessment purposes.

SECTION 2.	It shall be unlawful for any person to own, lease, operate or maintain an Automobile Salvage Yard and/or Automobile Graveyard within the Township.	The use or occu­ pation of any premises within Haycock Township in a manner
so as to violate the provisions of this section is hereby declared to constitute a nuisance per se as well as a summary offense.
SECTION 3.	Any person violating any of the provisions of

this Ordinance shall come upon Summary Proceedings brought in the name of the Township before any District Magistrate, be fined, upon conviction in the amount of 'rhrec Eundred Dollars ($300.00), or in default thereof be sentenced and committed
to County Jail for a period not exceeding thirty	(30) days.

SECTION 4.	The 'l'ownship may institute proceedings in Equity for the purpose of inforcing the provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 5.	Ordinance No. 3 and Ordinance No. 37 are hereby repealed.
SECTION 6.	All sections and parts of this Ordinance are severable, and .if any section or portion shall be declared invalid the same shall not affect the validity of any and all other sections and protions.
 






ENACTED AND ORDAINED this 1984.
 






day of
 




llfll cll
; '-	I	A.D.,
 


HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS










 
 

 








ORDINANCE NO.	'-17


AN ORDINANCE BY THE HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS AUTHORIZING THE HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP FIRE COK ANY TO ENGAGE IN APPROVED FUND RAISING ACTIVITIES.

PREAMBLE

The Haycock Township Board of Supervisors, upon recommend­ ation of their Township Solicitor and Townshil? insurancE! representative, recognizing the potential liability for injuries received as a result of unauthorized activities, do hereby adopt this Ordinance authorizing the Haycock Township Fire Company
to engage in approved fund raising activities.

Section 1.

The Haycock Township Fire Company is expressly authorized to engage in and conduct those fund raising activities which
are specified as being approved by the Township Board of Super­ visors.	Approval for fund raising activities shall be ·secured in the following manner:·	.

The Fire Company, shall, no later than June 1, 1984, sub­ mit to the Board of SuJ?ervisors, a list of proposed activities. '.l'he Supervisors, shall, by June 30, 1984, issue a list of activities which have been approved.	This procedure shall be repeated each year.	If, in any given year, the Supervisors
fail to issue a list of aJ?proved activities, those activities approved for the previous year shall remain in effect .

 
Enacted this	day of	. '-1.i "'
'
 
I	1984.
 


 
 


ORDINANCE NO.	'fl'


AN ORDINANCE BY THE HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS, AUTHORIZING THE HAYCOCK FIRE COMPANY TO ENGAGE IN RESCUE ACTIVITIES
INCLUDING MARINE RESCUE, EXTRICATION, SEARCH AND MEDICAL ASSISTANCE, AND FURTHER AUTHORIZING THE FIRE POLICE TO CONDUCT TRAFFIC CONTROL OPERATIONS.

PREAMBLE

The Haycock Township Board of Supevisors, upon recorrunendation of their Township Solicitor and Township insurance representative, recognizing the potential liability for injuries recieved as a result of unauthorized activities, do hereby adopt this Ordinance authorizing the Haycock Township Fire Company to engage in
certain activities which the Supervisors find to be necessary and proper.

Section One

'l'he Haycock Township Fire Company is expressly authorized to engage in rescue activities including marine rescue and all marine activities necessary for the furtherance of marine rescue, including, but not limited to operation of the rescue equipment for drills, maintenance, and inspection.	The Fire
Company is further authorized to become involved in extrication,
search, and medical assistance attempts.	The Fire Police arc
authorized to conduct traffic control operations.

Section Two

The Haycock Township Board of Supervisors shall review this Ordinance annually to insure that the authorized activities are being conducted properly.	Upon finding that the activities, in the Supervisors opinion, are not being conducted properly, the Ordinance shall repealed.	If, in any given year, the Supervisors fail to review the Ordinance, or take no action after review of the Ordinance, the Ordinance shall remain in effect.

Section Three

Enacted this	c;snl day	1984.

BO OF SUPERVISORS
4
 
-



ORDINANCE NO. 47

AN ORDINANCE OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP REQUIRING OWNERS OF CERTAIN LEASED PROPERTY SITUATE WITHIN HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP TO REPORT THE NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE TENANT OR TENANTS OF LEASED PROPERTIES AND PRESCRIBING A SYSTEM OF TENANT REGISTRATION,

PREAMBLE

The Haycock Township Board of Supervisors, in order to collect Township taxes in a more efficient and equitable manner hereby enacts the following Ordinance.	This Ordinance requires owners of certain leased properties situated within the boundaries of the Township to report the name and address of the tenant or tenants of the leased properties and prescribes a system of
tenant registration.

SECTION l

It is hereby ordained that all owners of property leased for either residential or commercial occupancy shall annually report the home address of such residential and/or commercial building tenants.	Such reporting shall occur by January 31 of each new year.

As tenants change from time to time during the course of the year, the owner of such leased property shall report such change within thirty	(30) days of each occurrence, regardless of the frequency of the occurrences.

SECTION 2

The Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township shall appoint a person or persons whose duty shall be to compile and maintain a compilation of all residential and commercial real estate leased within the boundaries of the Township.	In addition, the above-appointed person or persons shall maintain a compilation of the tenants occupying said leased real estate.

The appointment of said person or persons responsible for the previously indicated data compilation shall occur within forty-five (45) days of the passage of this Ordinance.	Resigna­ tions from this appointed position shall be filled within thirty
(30) days.

The Appointee shall not be a member of the Township Board of Supervisors, the Township Secretary, the Township Treasurer or any combination of these individuals.
 


SECTION 3

The Township shall provide forms to be used for the registration of tenants of leased properties within the boundaries of Haycock Township.

The "preparation of these forms shall be accomplished within sixty (60) days of the passage of this Ordinance.	The initial mailing of these forms shall be accomplished within ninety (90) days of the passage of this Ordinance.	All subsequent mailings shall be accomplished by December 15th of each calendar year
and as additional forms are required, to account for interim
changes in lessees, the forms shall be requested by the lessors.

SECTION 4

The provisions of this Ordinance are declared to be  for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Township and persons violating any provisions of this Ordinance, upon conviction before the Distsrict Justice of the Court of Conunon Pleas of Bucks County, shall be subject to a minimum fine of Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00).	Each quarter within which a report is not filed shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.

SECTION 5

Enacted and Ordained this	/5d,	 
A.D., 1984.





 
\' _ _..:. ;t.·4·
 

CA Fer &
 

lL7. }•
 

/:/cJ/Ltb
 
;	'








Charles
 
ORDINANCE NO. 50

AN ORDINANCE BY THE HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS FIXING THE METHOD AND AMOUNT OF COMPENSATION TO BE PAID TO TOWNSHIP SUPERVISORS PURSUANT TO ACT 68 OF 1985.


PREAMBLE

The Board of Supervisors of Haycock Towr.shj p, ':per. recom­ mendation of their Township Solicitor regarding tl'rn provisions of Act 68 of 1985 hereby adopt the following Ordi.mrnce revising the method and  amount of  salaries payable  to tbe members  of the Board of Supervisors.


SECTION  1.	Each	Supervisor	of	Haycock	T".l msl1ip	shall	receive compensation for attending duly advertised <;eneral  and  special public meetings of the Board of Supervisors at th rate of Forty Dollars ($40.00 J per meeting attended by  such  Supervisors. Supervisors not eligible for  the  increase  hccause  c  ticlc III, Section 27, of the Constitution cf the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, shall receive the increase  at the start  of  their next term of office, if re-elected.

SECTION 2.	No	Supervisor	shall	receive	compensation	of	more than One Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($1,500.00)  annually.

SECTION  3.	No	Supervisor	shall	be	compensated	for	attending meetings of the Board  in excess of tl1irty-six  (36) meetings per year;  such  absences  of  compensation  shall not  negate  or in any way effect such Supervisor's duty or obligation to attend uncompensated meetings.

SECTION 4.	The	compensation	as	described	above	shall	be	pa.:.d in monthly installments.

 
SECTION  5. 1986.
 
This	Ordinance	shall	become	effective	January
 

So or.,ained	this	/01vdh	day of December. 1985.


w17NlSS:
.j	y---<- I	,4-.,.d..: u
'- joyC2 R. Hun,;li.vigR./I.
Se.C/U'.iuAy
 

ORDINANCE NO. S/

TOWNSHIP  OF  HAYCOCK


ORDINANCE PROVIDING ·FOR. THE ADOPTION AND REGULATION OF AN EMPLOYEE  PENSION.  PROGRAM FOR  THE   FULL-TIME   NON-UNIFORMED   EMPLOYEES OF   HAYCOCK    TOWNSHIP,    PENNSYLVANIA.

WHEREAS, it is deemed in the best  interest· of  Haycock Township· (hereinafter referred to' as "Ml:lnicipa·lity") ari the maintenance of  good  gover-nment  that  a  pension  plan· ·be establ.ished to provide for the retirement of certain members of the non-un:Lfo:tmed employees;

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by  the  governing  body  of thj,s· Municipality   as  follows:

S CTION l - ELIGIBILITY

1.0 0 The:· following persons shall be er'1ti tled  to  receive pension   or  retirement  benefits  as  hereinafter  provided:

(a)·	Each	non-uniformed		employee	employed	by	this Municipality	on		a	full-time	basis	(at		least	thirty-five
(35) regularly scheduled hours per week) who shall have completed  twenty  (20)  years  of  service  and  ha,s  attained the age of  sixty-five· (65) years,  whichever  comes  later.

1.01		Any		non-uniformed		employee	who	has	been	a	regularly appointed	employee of	this   Municipality		for  a  period	of	at	least six· ( 6)	months	and  who		thereafter	shall  enter	into  the  mi.ii tary service  of		the	United		States		shall  have	credited   to  his	employ­ ment..  :tecord		for		pension	or	retirement	benefits		all	of(    the		time
spent· by·· him   in· such  mili tp.ry   service,  if   such  person   recturns
o:i;-    ha's   heretofore   returned   to   his   employment   within   six   (fr)
months  p.fte:t  his  separation  from  the  service.

SECTION .2 .. - .RETIREMENT J;)ENEFITS

2.	O 0 The amount  of  the pension  or  retirernent  berie.£ it·payable tel  any   non-uniformed   employee   under   this  program·  :Shall  be   a
:!iurrt  equal to' one-half  of  one percent  ( 1%)  for eaC:h ye.a:r.· o'f, sei'vice
(to a maximum   of   forty  ( 4G)   years  times  the  average  io:iilpensati.on
tor   the    twentY-fou:z:    ( 2 4 J ·   month   period    immediately    pre·cetli·ng
re·cirerrient.      Pension   payments·  m·aae·  undE;·r   tli.e·  prO.visiotfs'.  of   this
Oi:dinahce shall  not  be  a  charge  on  any  other  fund· in  tlie · 1freas\1ry of th.e·• M r<i:dipali ty cir under its control, save the non-m\j,.foi"ined pens.:Lono r\ind •
 





SECTION 3 - EARLY RETIREMENT

3.	00 A participant may retire early ·after he  or  she  has attained  the  age  of  fifty-five  (55)  years   and   has·   completed twenty   (20)  years  of   service,  whichever  comes  later.

SECTION 4 - CONTRIBUTIONS

4.	00  No  participant   shall  be   required   to  contribute  into the pension fund established hereunder.

SECTION 5 - VESTING

5.	O 0  The   Municipality  shall  be   the  owner   of   all  monies or property paid into the fund or annuities  or  policies  pur­ chased from insurance companies hereunder and the owner of any insurance and retirement  income  contracts  acquired  hereunder, and  no   participant   prior   to   retirement   shall  have   any   right or interest in any portion of said monies or property, provided, however,   that   each   participant   shall  be   entitled   to  designate a beneficiary.  In  the event of  the termination or discontinuance of his employment with the Municipality for reasons other than retirement  or  death,  each  participant  whose   employment   equals or exceeds twelve (12)  years  shall  be  entitled  to  retain  a  non­ forfei table right to  a  percentage  (equal  to the number  of.  years of employement  over  the  number  of  years  the  participant  would have had to work to reach normal retirement age) of the retirement income attributable to employer contributions and accrued before termination.

SECTION 6 - PRE-RETIREMENT DEATH BENEFIT

6.	0 0  In  the   event   any   participant   dies   prior   to   his   or her  retirement  or  termination  of  employment,  his   or  her   desig­ nated  beneficiary   shall   receive   a   pre-retirement   death   benefit in the  amount  of   $10,000.00.

SECTION 7 - ADMINISTRATION

7.00 The  employee  pension  fund  shall be  under  the direction of  the  governing  body   of   the  Municipality  or  such  committee or persons as the governing body of  the  Municipality  may  from time to time  designate  by  Ordinance,  who  shall  act  as  Trustees of the pension fund. The governing  body  or  its Trustees  shall have full responsibility for administration of the program estab­ lished hereunder and shall hold,  invest,  reinvest,  and  distribute all funds or other  property  received  pursuant  hereto  in  trust for  the  purposes  of  this  Ordinance.   The  Board  of   Supervisors or their designated Trustees may receive at  any  time  and  from time to time, gifts, grants, devices or  bequests  to  the  pension fund of any money or property,  real,  personal  or  mixed,  to  be held by them in trust for the benefit of this fund and in accor­ dance witht the provisions hereof.
 





SECTION 8 - TRANSFER OR ASSIGNMENT

8.00  The   pension   payments,   herein   provided   for,   shall not be subject to  attachment,  excution,  levy,  garnishment  or other legal process, and . shall be  payable  only  to  the  partic­ ipant or his designated beneficiary. No participant  or  his beneficiary  shall  have  the  right  to  alienate,   encumber,   or  as­ sign any assets of the fund held by  the  Municipality  on  his behalf,   or  any   of   the  benefits  or  payments   or  proceeds  of   any
contract	or	agreement	purchased	or	acquired	by	the   Municipality hereunder.

·a. 01 Any contract or agreement purchased or acquired  pur­ suant to this Ordinance upon the life of  such  participant  shall contain a provision,  in  substance,  that  to  the  extent  permitted by law, none of the benefits or payments or  proceeds  of  such contract  or   agreement   shall  be   subject   to   any   legal   process by any creditor of such participant or beneficiary of such par­ ticipant.

SECTION 9 - PRIOR PENSION ASSETS AND BENEFITS

9.00 All contracts, agreements or funds held by the Munic­ ipality for the purpose of providing pensions, annuities  or retirement income or any of them,  on  any  non-uniformed  employees who shall  be  a  participant  in  the  program  herein  establihsed shall be  and  hereby  are  transferred  and  assigned  to  the  fund herein created. After such transfer, the  employee  pension  fund shall  assume  the   liability,   if   any,   of   continuing  the  payment of pensions to employee's retired prior to  such  transfer  in accordance with the laws and regulations  under  which  such mem­ bers  were   retired"

SECTION 10 - EXPENSE OF ADMINISTRA.TION

10.00  The  expense  of  administering  this   pension   fund program,   including   compensation   of   any   actuary,   any   custodian of   the   fund   and   any   other   charges   or   expenses  related  thereto,
:exclusive	of	the	payment	of	pensions,	shall	be	paid	by	the
Municipality	by	appropriations	made	by	the	governing	body	of the   Municipality.

SECTION ll - VALIDITY

11.00 Should any section or any provision of this Ordinance be declared by a Court of  competent  jurisdiction  to  be  invalid, such  invalidity  shall  not  affect  the  Ordinance  as  a  whole  or any part  thereof.

SECTION 12 - EFFECTIVE DATE

i'S"  12. 00	This  Ordinance	shall  become  effective  as  of	JM•·•L'"'"'f I,
198'&.
 





SECTION 13 - REPEALER

13.00 Any Ordinance and/or Resolution or part of any Or­ dinance  and/or  Resolution  conflicting  with   the   provisions   of this Ordinance shall  be  and  the  same  is  hereby  repealed,  insofar as the same affects this Ordinance.


BE	IT	SO	ORDAINED	THIS	I ..i -1-f-	day    of	f"VJ,9,eC-/,	1986.


ldflNlSS:
/. Ji.l,td-e,;pi_.
Joy= R.. Hun.ofl=geA.
se.C/ldwzy




 






















 
 
--.






ORDINANCE_NO  •      .S;L


Al'!  ORDINANCE  OF  THE  HA'Iq  K  'l'OWNS:>IIP  BOARD  OF f3UPERVISORS	AMEND'J:NG		ARTICLE	lV,.	SECTiON 4 0 5 ( A4)	WHICH	SETS.·	ORTH	THE		REGULATIONS FOR  ANIMAL   HUSBAND Y.

PR Ell.MB LE

The. Haycock	Township	Board	of	Supervisors,	upon	recommend-· ation	of	the	Haycock	Planning	Commission	and	Bucks	County	Plan­
'	ning	C0r.-inission	hereby	enacts	an	Ordinance	amending	the	Haycock
Township	'Zon·ing	Ordinance	Artie.le	IV,	Section	405 ( A4)   · :n>.g;'.lrding
'.>.·i,:,.qui·£-etilents	for   Animal     Husbandry.		·

SECTIOl/i ...!_

·-seetion	405 ( A4)	of	the	Haycock	Township	Zoning	O:tdl1Hl11.::e
.l	s he ·eby  amended  to read  as follows:

"{Al) -- nimal  Husbandry.

•(a)	"Tl:ie		keeping		and	raising	of	livestock	and	pu.ultry · wilf_h  ·the  'intent	of	producing	capital	gain		or	profit; o : Lth	the	ntent	f	selling  any  livestock		or  poultry
·	1;:r..idu.cts .

1.	!:>arc!elr; .qf' ten	( 10) acres or ..-more

( i)    A y   barn,    animal     shelter,    feed-yard, en:·	qt-J(P,r building used . for the purpo e de;:>GJ!.:.i.b d    in    (a)     shall    be     situated not		'.kess ·  than   two   hundred    ( 200) ·  feet
f:r,om	any  "str0et	line,	dwelling. or well,
:Hid·· act'	less -    than		one	hundred	(lOQ) feet	from		ai1y ·. w.ell	serving	the  ·owner' f;l
aw L inr:r ( s)  or  fTom  any property  line.
·fhi  ·  r;i,_i:Hj;\19 ·  oii,.'  garbaqe-fed  · pigs	and
fecrets is not permitted.
 
(,iil)
 
\{id.ing    academies,    livery    or   boarding
sti'l,b.ies,   comnercial    doq    kennels,.    arid th9 -ra,:i,.i;.t_ng of animals c.for ·fur.:..o:c· s c{.n a.i;e  not  included  in  ti1is ·'llsc>:•:. •
 

 
- ,	£>.arc ;ds . ofiess . than  r.ef! . (1G}  ac:c G.

( i·.)	Use	shall	be	l.i.m:i. ted	to   ,L'.r,;
 



k.	< f'Ji ng
 
and   raising	of·· t\>i::l	().)	l1 an .of	1iv<::.ii:'ock
or	c:iri ·	hundreci	(J.Oll) '    f ( Yi· 1	pe.c   '1:0il{   :: 0 )
::\ere.
 

(ii) Any  barn,  animal  shelter,  feed-yard or	other building used for the purpose described	in (a) shall be  situated not		less than one hundred (100) feet from any• street line, dwelling or well, not		less than fifty  (50) feet  from any well serving the owner's dwelling(s) or	fifty (50) feet from any property line.
 
(iii)
(iv)
 
Same as 1.(ii ). Same as 1. (iiiJ •
 

(b)	The keeping and raising of livestock and poultry as farm pet or for domestic purposes. A Zoning Permit shall not be required for this use.

1.	Parcels of any size.

(i)	Any barn,  animal  shelter,  feed  yard or	other building used for the purpose described	in (b)  shall  be  situated not		less than one hundred  (100) feet from		any street line, dwelling,  or well		other than  t'he  owner's  dwelling or well, not less than fifty (SO) feet from any well serving the owner's dwel­ ling (s) or fifty (50) feet from any property line.

 
SECTION 2

This	Ordinance
CJ utJ .
 



shall
,1986.
 



be	effective	the	day	of
 
ENACTED AND ORDAINED this	day of	                1986.

liJI7N&SS:
f;'r-- ti A},_,,,.,,_/, ;y-u
·Joyce R. Hun/>£.2./tgtVt
Se<Yud.w1.!J
 

 
 







ORDINANCE NO. 53


 
AN ORDHll\NCE or Tift !-'.AYCOCK SUPERVISORS	l'R; VIDING	FOR A POR'I'ION 01"    HIChORY LANE.
 

TOWNSHIP BOARD OF THE	VACATION	OF
 

PREAMBLE

It is hereby enacted and ordained by the Board of Supervisors nf Haycock Townsjip, Bucks County, Pennsylvania pursuant to ti1e S0cona-c1ass Townshi? Code (53  P.S. 1672)  that a.   porti.on af   Hickory Lane in Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania
:_,, hereby vacate>d.

SF.C'l'I ON I

The Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township have, in their discretion deemed it necessary to, and do, close and vdcate pursuant to the Pennsylvania Second-Class Township Code, that portion of Hickory Lane in Haycock Township, Bucks County, Penn­ sylvania, as more particulctrly  described  in Exhibit  "A"  which is attached hereto a.nd made a part hereof.

SECOFiD II

This ordinance	shall be effective five (5) days after enact·
 
ment.


1986.
 


It	is	hereby	Ordained	this	jl _,c
 


day	of
 

WJ7NlSS:
 
.'J.,1c, 	
 

/.  J.1,..J"':ru
 
Joyw i?. llunoB.eA!J"-"
Sevwi..rlAy
 
PICKERING,  CORTS & SUMMERSON,	INC.
CONSULTING  ENGINEERS  &  LAND  SURVEYORS


126 SOUTH STATE STREET· P. 0. BOX 270. NEWTOWN, PA. 18940	215  • 968·9300
116 WASHINGTON CROSSING-PENNINGTON ROAD. PENNINGTON, N. J, 08534	609 • 737-2033







 

Centerline Description of a portion of Hickory Lane, T-398 to be vacated Haycock Township, Bucks Co., PA
 
Job No. 860054
Dwg. No. 10-2535
 



All that certain tract, piece or parcel of land situate in the Township of Haycock, County of Bucks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, according to a plan by Pickering, Carts & Summerson, Inc., Consulting Engineers & Land Surveyors, Newtown, PA being dated June 13, 1986 as follows to wit;

Beginning at the centerline intersection of Pullen Station Road, L.R. 09127, 33' wide and Hickory Lane, T-398, 33' wide;

Thence, along the centerline of the aforesaid Hickory Lane, the following three courses and distances;

1.	S. 4" 44' 00" E.' a distance of 1063.85' to an angle point;
2.	S. 7"   02' 00" W. a distance of 366.00' to an angle point;
3.	S. 10· 37' 50" w.  a distance of 336.56' to the point of termination.

Being the centerline of all that portion of Hickory Lane, T-398, 33' wide, to be vacated, (16.5' perpendicular to the left and right of aforesaid centerline) as shown on the above mentioned plan.




 
 


ORDINANCE  NO • .S-Lj


AN ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR THE LEVYING, ASSESSMENT  AND  COLLECTION  OF  A  TAX   FOR GENERAL    REVENUE    PURPOSES    UPON    A    TRANSFER OF   AN   INTEREST   IN   REAL   PROPERTY   TO   THE EXTENT     THAT      TRANSFERS      ARE      SUBJECT      TO TAX IMPOSED BY THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYL­ VANIA   PURSUANT    TO    72    P.S.    §8101-C    et seq.,   AUTHORIZED   BY   ARTICLE   XI-D,    ".LOCAL REAL   ESTATE   TRANSFER    TAX",    72    P.S.   §8101-D et     seq. ,     AND     ADMINISTERED,      COLLECTED AND ENFORCED UNDER THE "LOCAL  TAX  ENABLING ACT",     53    P.S.    §6901    et       ; PROVIDING A        SEVERABILITY        CLAUSE;        AND        PROVIDING AN    EFFECTIVE     DATE.
··-	PREAMBLE
The		Board	of	Supervisors	of	Haycock	Township,	pursuant to	the	authority	contained	in	the	Local	Tax	Enabling	Act,
53	P.S.	§6901	et	and	the	Local	Real	Estate	Transfer Tax, 72 P.S. §8101-D and the Second Class Township Code hereby enacts the following Ordinance levying, assessing,  and  provid­ ing  for  the  collection  of  a  tax  on  the  transfer  of  an  interest in  real  estate.

Section One - Definitions.

"Ai;;sociation".  A    partnership,     limited    p:;i,rt:nership, or any other form . of ·'unincorporated enterprise •z::nn:;;d or  con':" ducted by two or more person other than a  priva.tc ·trust  or decedent's   estate.      ·

"Township".    'rhe  Township  of  Haycock.

"Corporation". A .Corporation,  j•).i.n1: ..sL,1<' k  associa- tion, businesio trust, or banking institution  which is organized under  :t1ie  L;.t,,-i;·  of  .this  Cornmonwe.3lth,   ·i:he  United  States,  or
any other ·state, territory; forei 1n connt:ry. or dependency.

	"Document".	Any	.deed,	into·b:1«<tent	or	writing	which
conveys,	tranRre>rs,	demises,	vests,	confirms	or	evidences
any   transfe:;: ··or   demis.e   of   title  to  real   estate,   but   does
not include wills, mortgages, deeds or trusts or other  instru­ ments of  li  e  character  given   as  security  for  a  debt  and deeds  of  release  thereof  to the debtor,  land  contracts whereby
 


the legal title does not pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable over a period of time exceeding thirty years, or instruments which solely grant, vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include a declaration· of acquisition required to be presented for recording under §108 of this ordinance;

"Family Farm Corporation". A corporation of which at least seventy-five percent (75%) of its assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least seventy-five (75%) of each class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the same family. The business of agricul­ ture shall not be deemed to include:

(1)	Recreational activities such  as,  but not limited to, hunting, fishing, camping, skiing, show compe­ tition or racing;

 
( 2) The raising, game animals or game birds, fish, intended  for use in sporting

(3)	Fur farming;
 
breeding or training of cats, dogs or pets or .animals or recreational activities;
 

 


or


of any kind.
 
(4) Stockyard	and	slaughterhouse	operations;


(5)	Manufacturing	or	processing	operations
 


"Members of the Same Family".  Any  individual, such individual's brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendents of any of the foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing, and the estate of any of the foregoing. Individuals  related by the half blood or legal adoption shall be treated· as if they were related by the whole-blood.

"Persons".· Every  natural  person,  association, or corporation. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and impo.sing a fine or imprisonment, or both, the term "person" as applied to associations, shall include the responsible members or general . partners thereof, and as applied to cor­ porations, the officers thereof.




- 2 -
 
"Real  Estate".
(1)	All lands,  tenements  or  hereditaments within the Township including without limitation buildings, structures,  fixtures,  mines,  minerals,  oil,  gas,  quarries, spaces  with  or  without  upper   or   lower   boundaries,   trees, and other improvements, immovable or interests which by custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance of land, but excluding permanent_ly attached machinery and equipment in an .industrial plant.

 
(2)	A   Condominium   Unit.

(3)	A tenant-Stockholder's cooperative  housing   corporation,   trust   or a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
 



interest association
 



in	a
under
 

"Real Estate Company". A corporation or  association which is  primarily  engaged  in  the  business  of  holding,  selling or  leasing  real  estate,  ninety  percent   ( 90%)   or  more  of   the
.o	wnership	interest	in	which	is	held	by	thirty-five	or	fewer persons and which:

 
(1)	derives its	annual .gross	receipts of real estate; or
 
sixty	percent	(60%)	or	more	of from	the	ownership	or		disposition
 

	(2)	holds	real	estate,	the	value	of	which
comprises	ninety	percent	(90%)	or	more	of	the	value	of	its
entire	tangible	asset	holdings	exclusive	of	tangible	assets
which  are  freely  transferable	and  actively  traded  as an  estab­
lished market.

"Title to Real Estate".
( 1) Any interest in  real  estate  which  endures for  a  period  of  time,  the  termination  of  which  is not  fixed or ascertained by a specific number  of  years,  including  with­ out limitation an estate in fee simple,  or  perpetual  lease­ hold; or

( 2)  Any    interest   in   real   estate   enduring for  ·a  fixed   period   of   years   but   which,   either  by    reasons of the length of the  term  or  the  agent  of  a  right  to  extend the term by  renewal  or  otherwise,  consists  of  a  group  of rights approximating those of an estate in  fee  simple,  life estate  or   perpetual   leasehold,  · including   without   limitation a  leasehold  interest  or   pos.sessory   interest  under   a   lease or  occupancy  agreement .  for  a  term  of   thirty  ( 3 0)  years  or
more	or	a	leasehold	interest	or	possessory	interest	in	real
estate in which the lessee has	equity.	



- 3 -
 

"Tran:saction" .	The	making,	executing,	delivering, accepting, or presenting for recording of a document.

11 Value 11 •
(1)	In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for actual monetary worth, the
amount of the actual consideration therefor, paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not the underlying indebtedness  is assumed, and  ground  rents, or a commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances and ground rents also encumbered or are charged against other real estate: Provided, that where such documents shall set forth a nominal consideration, the "value" thereof shall be determined from the price set forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;

( 2) In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold or possessory interest, any exchange of properties, or the real estate· of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty transfer tax base calculations as established by the State Tax Equalization Board;


(3)	In the case of an easement or other inter­ est in real estate the value of which is not determined under clause (l) or (2), the actual monetary worth of such interest; or


(4)	The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory agreement for the construction of buildings,  structures  or  other  permanent  improvements to real estate between the granter and other persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or between the granter, the agent or principle of the grantor of a related corporation, association or partnership and the grantee exis­ ting before or effective with the transfer.





- 4 -
 



Section Two  - Imposition of  Tax; Interest.

(a)	Every person who  makes,  executes,  delivers, accepts or presents  for  recording  any  document  or  in  whose behalf   any   document   is   made,    executed,   delivered,   accepted or  presented  for  recording,   shall_   be   subject  to  pay   for   an in  respect   to   the   transaction   or   any   part   thereof,   a   tax at  the  rate  of  one  percent  ( 1%)  of  the  value  of  the  real estate  represented  by  such  document,  which   tax  shall  be  payable at the earlier of the  time  the  document  is presented  for recording or within thirty ( 30) days  of  acceptance  of  such document or within thirty ( 3 0) days of  becoming  an  acquired company.

 
(b)	The	payment		of		the be	evidenced	by	the	affixing	of		an by		the	Recorder		of		Deeds		whereon of	the	tax,	the		amount	of	the		tax collecting  agent  shall  be  set  forth.
 
tax	imposed herein shall official stamp or writing the		date of the payment and	the  signature  of   the
 


( c)  It  is the  intent  of  this  Ordinance  that  the entire burden of the tax imposed herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations  prescribed  in  The  Local Enabling  Act,  Act  of   December   31,  1965,  P.L.  1257,  53  P.S.
§6901		et		seq.,		so		that		if	any		other		political		subdivision shall	impose	or	hereafter		shall	impose		such		tax		on		the	same person	or		transfer		then		the		tax		levied	by		Haycock		Township under		the		authority	of		that		Act		shall		during	the	time	such duplication  of	the  tax  exists,  except  as hereinafter		otherwise provided,		be	one-half		( \)		of		the	rate	and		such  one-half		( 12) rate	shall		become		effective		without	any	action	on		the	part of	the	Township		provided,		however,	that	the		Township		and any	other		political	subdivision		which			impose		such	tax		on
the same person or transfer may agree that,  instead  of  limiting their respective rates  to  one-half  (!z)  of  the  rate  herein provided,   they   will   impose  respectively    different    rates, the total of which shall not exceed  the  maximum  rate  permitted under  "The  Local Tax  Enabling Act".

 


due, due,
 
(d)	If for any reason the tax  is  not  paid  when interest at the rate in effect  at  the  time  the  tax  is shall be  added  arid  collected.
 

Section Three - Exempt Parties.

 
The United States, the their instrumentalities, agencies shall be exempt from payment of article.
 
Commonwealth, or  any  of or   political   subdivision the   tax   imposed   by   this
 


- 5 -
 



The. exemption of such governmental bodies shall not, however, relieve  any  other  party  to  a  transaction   from   liability  for the  tax.

Section Four - Excluded Transactions.

 


upon:
 
' The  tax  imposed	by  Section  Two  shall not  be  imposed


(1)	A	transfer	to	the	Commonwealth,	or	to
 
any  of   its  instrumentalities,   agencies   or  political   subdivi­
sion,  by  gift,   dedication   or   deed   in   lieu   of   condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with the condemnation proceedings·, · or  a  reconveyance  by  the  condemnation  body  of
the  property  condemned  to  the  owner   of   record   at  the   time of condemnation which reconveyance may include property fine adjustments   provided    said   reconveyance   is  made   within   one
(1)	year  from  the  date  of    condemnation.

(2)	A document which  the Township is  prohibited from taxing under  the  Constitution  or  statues  of  the  United States.

( 3) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school district or county of a tax delinquent  property  at sheriff  sale or tax claim bureau  sale.

(4)	A transfer for no or nominal actual consid­ eration which corrects or confirms a tr nsfer previously recorded, but which does not extend or limit  existing  record legal title or interest.

(5)	A  transfer  of   division   in   kind   for   no or nominal  actual  consideration  of  property  passed  by  testate or intestate  succession  and  held  by  cotenants;  however,  if any of the parties take shares greater in value than their undivided  interest, tax  is due on  the excess.

( 6) A transfer between  husband  and  wife, between  persons  who  were  previously  husband  and   wife   who have since been divorced,  provided  the  property  or  interest therein  subject  to  such  transfer  was  acquired  by  the  husband and  wife  or  husband  or  wife  prior  to  the  granting   of   the final  decree  in  divorce,   between  parent  and  child  or  the spouse  of  such   child,  between   brother   or   sister  or   spouse of   a   brother  or  sister,  an<:I   between  a   grandparent  and  grand-


6
 

child ·or the spouse of such grandchild, except that a subse­ quent transfer by the grantee within one ( l) year shall  be subject to tax as if  the granter were making such transfer.

 


sideration sion from decedent !s
 
( 7) A  transf·er  for  no  or of property  passing  by  testate a personal representative of devisee  or  heir.
 
nominal	actual	con­ or  intestate  succes­ a	decedent	to	the
 

( 8) A transfer for no or nominal actual con­ sideration to a trustee of an ordinary trust where the transfer was made directly from the granter to all of the possible beneficiaries, whether or not  such  beneficiaries are contingent or specifically named. No  such  exemption  shall  be  granted unless  the  Recorder  of   Deeds   is  presented  with   a   copy   of the  trust  instrument  that   clearly   identifies   the   granter and  all  possible  beneficiaries.

 


sideration trust.
 
( 9)
from	a
 
A	transfer	for		no	or	nominal trustee	to	a	beneficiary	of
 
actual	con­ an	ordinary
 

(10)	A transfer no or nominal actual consider­ ation from  a trustee to successor trustee.

(11)	A transfer (i) for. no or nominal actual consideration  between  principal   and   agent   or   straw   party; or (ii) from or to an  agent  or  straw  party  where,  if  the agent or straw party were his principal, no  tax  would  be imposed  under  this article.

	Where	the.	document	by	which	title	is
acquired	by	a	grantee	or	statement	of	value	fails	to	set
forth	that	the	property		was		acquired	by	the	grantee	from, or	for		the	benefit.  of,	his	principal,	there	is  a	rebi.tttable
presumption	that	the	property	is  the  property	of	the	grantee
in  his	individual	capacity  if	the grantee claims an exemption from the  taxation  under  this  clause.

( 12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or  consolidation  of  a  corporation  or  statutory division of a nonprofit corpora tion, exception where the department reasonably determines that the primary intent for such merger, consolidation  or  division  is  avoidance   of   the   tax   imposed by  this  article.

(·13)  A  transfer  from  a· corporation  or  associa­ tion  of   real  estate  held  of   re.cord  in  the  name  of  the  corpora-
 


tion	or	association		where		the	grantee	owns		stock	of ·the corporation	or	an	interest		in the	association		in	the	same proportion as his interest in or ownership of the real estate being	conveyed	and		where	the. stock	of	the	corporation	or the interest in the association has been held by the grantee for more than two (2) years.

(14)	A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that agency or authority as security for a debt or the grantee or a transfer to a nonprofit indus­ trial development agency or authority.

(15)	A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if: (i) the grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing,  publishing  research and development, transportation, energy conversion, energy production, pollution control, warehousing  or  agriculture; and (ii) the agency or authority has the full ownership inter­ est in the real estate transferred.

·	(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to · the holder of a bona fide mortgage in default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial sale in which the success­ ful bidder is the bona fide holder of a mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid.to another person.

(17)	Any transfer between religious organiza­ tions or other bodies or persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial purposes.

(18)	A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt status pursuant to Section 50l(c)(3) of the Internal  Revenue  Code  of  1954,  (68A Stat.  3, 26  U.S.C.
§501(c)(3) and which has as its primary purpose preservation of land  for  historic,  recreational,  scenic,  agricultural or open space opportunities.

(19)	A transfer of  real  estate  devoted  to the business of agriculture. to a family farm corporation by a member of the same family which directly owns at least seventy-five percent (75%) of each class of the stock thereof.

 


family	of	an or family farm
 

(20)	A	transfer	between ownership	interest	in	a corporation.
 
member		of	the	same real	estate	company
 



(21)	A	transaction	wherein	the	tax	due	is one dollar ($1.00) or less.

(22)	Leases	for	the	production	or	extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or minerals and assignments thereof.

In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this Section, the true, full and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of value. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of Value
may	be submitted for this purposes. For leases of coal, oil,		natural gas or minerals, the statement of value may be. limited to an explanation of the reason such document is not subject to tax under this Ordinance.

Section Five - Documents Relating to Associations or Corpora- tions	and	Members,	Partners,	Stockholders or Stockholders Thereof.

Except as otherwise provided in Section Four, docu­ ments which make, confirm or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article, corpora­ tions and associations are entities separate from their members, partners, stockholders or shareholders.

Section Six - Acquired Company.

(a)	A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the  ownership  interest in the company,
.h	owever, effected, if the change does not affect the continuity of· the company; and of itself or together with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly, ninety percent	(90%) or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a period of three (3) years.

(b)	With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family farm corporation is an acquired company when, because.of voluntary or involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation under this Ordinance.







- 9 -
 

(c)  Within  thirty  (30)  days  after   becoming   an acquired   company,   the   company   shall   present   a    declaration of   acquisition   with   the   recorder   of   each   county    in   which it holds real  estate  for  the  affixatiori  of  documentary  stamps and   recording.     Such   declaration   shall   set   forth   the   value of  real  estate holdings  of   the  acquired  company  in  such  count. A  copy  of   the  Pennsylvania  Realty  Transfer  Tax   Declaration of  Acquisition  may  be  submitted.for  this purpose.

Section Seven - Credits Against Tax.

(a)	where there is a transfer  of  a  residential property by licensed real estate broker which property was transferred to him within the preceding  year  as consideration for  the  purchase   of   other   residential   property,   a   credit for  the  amount  of  the  tax  paid  at  the  time  of  the  transfer to him shall be  given  to  him  toward  the  amount  of  the  tax due upon  the  transfer.

(b)	Where . there is a transfer by the builder of residential property  which  was  transferred  to  the  builder within the  preceding  year  as  consideration  for  the  purchase of  new,  previously  unoccupied  residential  property,   a  credit for  the  amount   of   the  tax  paid  at  the  time  of   the  transfer to  the  builder  shall  be  given  to  the  builder  toward  the  amount of   the  tax  due  upon  the  transfer.

(c)	Where there is  a  transfer  of  real  estate which is leased by the  granter,  a  credit  for  the  amount  ,of  tax paid at the time of the lease shall  be  given  the ·granter toward  the tax due upon  the transfer.

 

( d)
 
Where	there	is	a	conveyance	by	deed	of	real
 
estate  which  was  previously  sold  under  a  land  contract  by the granter, a  credit  for  the  amount  of  tax  paid  at  the  time of the sale shall be  given  the  granter  toward  the  tax  due upon the deed.

( e) If the tax  due   upon  the  transfer  is  greater than  the  credit  .given  under  this  Section,  the  difference shall be paid. If the  credit  allowed  is  greater  than  the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be allowed.

Section Eight  - Determination  by Department  of  Revenue.

Whenever the amount  of  tax  due  to the  Commonweal th of	Pennsylvania	pursuant	to	72	P.S.	§8101-C	et	upon


- 10 -
 


final determination, redetermination or review by the  Depart­ ment of  Revenue,  is more  than  the  amount  actually  paid  to the Commonwealth on account  thereof,  such  amount,  including all  interest  or  penalties   thereon,   shall   be   deemed   to   be the amount due and payable to the Township pursuant to this Ordinance and shall be collectable by  the  Recorder  of  Deeds upon   rerecording   as   hereinafter   provided.   If    the   amount of such tax as finally determined is less than the amount actually paid, then upon application to  the  Township  together with proof of payment and final determination by the Department of Revenue, the Township shall refund such portion of the overpayment that the Township actually  received.  All  applica­ tions  for  refunds  must  be  received  by  the  Township  within two ( 2) years of the date of payment for which a refund is requested.

Section Nine - Extension of	Lease.

In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or option to renew  or  extend  a  lease will be exercised if the rental charge to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the  rental  charge  is established.

Se·ction Ten - Proceeds of  Judicial Sale.

The		tax	herein		imposed		shall	be		fully	paid,	and have	priority	out	of		the	proceeds		of		any	judicial	sale	of real	estate	before		other	obligation,		claim,		lien	juc;'!gment, estate	or		costs	of		the	sale		and	of		the	writ	upon	which	the sale	is made	except		the		state		realty	transfer	tax,	and	the sheriff,		or	other	officer,		conducting		said	sale,	shall	pay the	tax	herein	imposed		out	of		the		first moneys		paid		to	him in	connection	therewith.			If		the		proceeds	of		the	sale	are insufficient· to	pay	the		entire	tax herein	imposed,	the	pur­ chaser  shall be  liable for the remaining  tax.

Section Eleven - Duties of  Recorder of  Deeds.

(a)	As  provided  in  16  P.S.  §11011-6,   as   amended by  Act  of  July  7,  1983  (P.L.  40,  No.  21),  the  Recorder   of Deeds  shall·  be  the  collection  agent   for   the   local   realty transfer  tax,  including  any  amount  payable  to  the  Township based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due· by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of  the  Pennsylvania  realty  trans­ fer tax,. without  compensation  from t.he  Township.

(b)	In  order  to  ascertain   the   amount   of   taxes due when  the  property  is  located  in  more  than  one  political


- 11 -
 

 
subdivision, such a deed showing what
 
the  recorder  shall  not  accept   for   recording unless it is accompanied by a statement of value taxes  are  due  each  municipality.
 

(c)	On or before  the  tenth  (10th)  of  each  month, the recorder shall pay over to the Township all local  realty transfer  taxes  collected,   less  two   percent   ( 2 % )   for  use   of the county, .together  with  a  report  containing  the  information as is required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting collections   of    the   Pennsylvania    realty   transfer   tax.    The two percent  (2%)  commission shall be paid to the county.

( d) Upon a redetermination of the amount  of realty transfer tax due by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the recorder shall  rerecord  the  deed   or  record  the  additional realty transfer tax form only when both the  state  and  local amounts  and a rerecording or recording fee has been tendered.

Section Twelve - Statement of Value.

Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder  of  Deeds  for  recording,  shall   set   forth   therein and  as  a  part  of  such  document  the  true,  full  and  complete
.v	alue		thereof,		or		shall	be·  accompanied	by	a	statement		of value		executed		by	a	responsible		person	connected		with		the transaction		showing	such	connection		and		setting	forth		the true,	full  and	complete		value		thereof		or  the  reason,	if	any,  why		such	document   is  not. subject	to		tax	under		this	article. A	copy	of		the		Pennsylvania		Realty		Transfer		Tax		Statement of	Value	may		be		submitted	for	this	purpose.		The  provisions of		this		subsection		shall	not	apply		to. any	excludable	real estate  transfer  which   are  exempt   from  taxation  based   on  family relationship.			Other		documents		presented	for		the	affixation of		stamps	shall		be	accompanied	by	a		certified		copy	of		the document		and		statement		of		value		executed		by	a	responsible person		connected		with	the   transaction	showing   such   connection and		setting	forth	the	true,		full		and		complete		value	thereof or	the		reason,		if	any,		why	such	document		is  not	subject		to tax under  this ordinance.

Section Thirteen - Civil Penalties.

 


by this the tax payment.
 
(a)	If		any  part	of	any underpayment	of	tax imposed article	is	due	to		fraud,	there	shall		be	added	to an  amount  equal  to  fifty percent	(50%)	of		the  under-







- 12 -
 

.'
the  validity	of	the  Ordinance	in  its  entirety or · of	any  part
thereof	other  than  that  declared  to be  invalid.

Section Eighteen - Repealer.

This Ordinance shall repeal any and all prior Ordinances regarding real estate transfer  tax.  -Said  repealer shall be  effective on the  effective· date of  this -Ordinance.

Section Nineteen - Effective Date.

This ordinance shall become effective  thirty  (30) days from the date of enactment.
 

ORDAINED	AND  ENACTED	thls	/ ,J' :l/f
1986.
 

day of JJEce/??.6E£	,
 


HAYCOCK  TOWNSHIP
BOARD   OF  SUPE 7..:;...:s.::;op.r/









 
 
JBR4/2











ORDINANCE NO • ...J


AN  ORDINANCE  PROHIBITING   PARKING   IN   CERTAIN   POR­ TIONS  OF  WEST  THATCHER  ROAD,  AND  COVERED    BRIDGE DRIVE.


PREAMBLE


The Haycock Township Board of Supervisors hereby  enacts and   ordains   the    following    Ordinance    prohibiting    parking on portions  of  West  Thatcher  Road,  and Covered  Bridge  Drive.


Section  One.

Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the fol­ lowing  locations:

A.	West   Thatcher   Road   (L.R.   09082)   on   the    South side  of  the  road   from   the   intersection   of   West   Thatcher Road and Richlandtown Road  (L.R.  09085)  to  a  point  75  feet West  of  the  intersection  of  West  Thatcher   Road   and Richlandtown  Road.

B.	Covered Bridge  Drive  (T,.R.  09129)  on  both  sides of   the   road   from   the   intersection   of   West   Thatcher   Road ( L. R. 09 0 82} and Covered Bridge Drive ( L. R.  09129)  to  a point 150 feet South of  the  intersection  of  West  Thatcher Road and Covered Bridge Drive.


Section	'l'wo.

Penalties

Any  person,  firm,  corporation,   partnership   or   entity who violates any provision of this Ordinance, shull, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than Twenty-Five  ($25.00)    Dollars   plus   costs.   Provided:   it shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer or  other  designated person to report ull violations of uny provision  in  this Ordinance,  indicating   the   section   violated,   license   number of     the   vehicle   involved    in   the   violation,    the    location
 
•










where the violation  took  place,  and  any  other  facts  that might be  necessary  in  order  to  secure  clear  understanding of  the  circumstances  attending  the  violation.


Section Three.

Effective  Date	      /7	/f7f7

This	Ordinance	shall	be	effective	five	(5)	days	after adoption.


HAYCOCK  TOWNSHIP BOARD    OF    SUPERVISORS

 
 

_,I  - ..., f    .., •
 
 







No.   56
 



AN ORDINANCE OF THE HAYCOCK 'rOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS  AMENDING  THE  HAYCOCK   TOWNSHIP   PORTION OF . THE  QUAKERTOWN  AREA  ZONING  ORDINANCE  OF   197 5, AS. AMENDED, TO  SET  FORTH  FURTHER  REGULATIONS PURSUANT  TO  THE  NATIONAL  PLOOD  INSURANCE  PROGRAM AND  THE  PENNSYLVANIA  FLOOD  PLAIN  MANAGEMENT  ACT


PREAMBLE

THE      HAYCOCK       TOWNSHIP       BOARD      OF      SUPERVISORS,       upon
recommendation of the  Haycock  •rownship  Planning  Commission, the  Federal  Emergency  Management  Agency  and  the  Pennsylvania
Department of Community Affairs hereby adopts the following Ordinance  amending  the  7.oning  Ordinance,   as   amended,   to set  forth  regulations  pursuant  to  the  National  Flood Insurance Program and the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.

Section One.

ARTICLE II, Section 220B of the Haycock  Township Portion of the Quakertown Area ioning Ordinance  of 1975 is hereby amended  to  read  as  follows:

Section	220B	Floodway  - That	portion	of the flood plain as identified in Section  220 including the water course channel and adjacent land   areas  which   must   be   reserved   to  carry  the
100 year recurrence interval flood  without cumulative   increasing   that   flood   elevation   more
than one ( l) foot. The term shall also  include floodway  areas  which  havi;   been   identified   in other available studies or  sources  of  information for those flood  plain  areas  where  no  flood  way has been identified in the flood insurance study prepared by the Federal  Emergency  Management Agency  ( FEMA) .

Section  Two.

ARTICLE II, Section  230  of' the  Haycock  Township  Portion of the Quakertown Area Zoning Ordinance of 1975 i.s hereby amended  to  read  as  follows:
 





Section	230  - Mobile   Home.	A	transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent: occupancy, office, or place of  assembly,  contained in o"ne unit, or  in two  units  designed  to  be  joined into one integral unit capable of again being separated    for    repeated    towing,     which     arrives at a site complete and ready  for  occupancy  except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations,  and  constructed   so   that   it  way   be used without  a  permanent  four. atj on.  For  the purposes of t'lis Ordinance, any inhabi ':ed trailer shall · be   considered   a    single-family    dwelling and as such shall be  sub:ect to all applicable regulations in  tnis  or  other  municipal  ordinances. As a  structure,  a  mobile  home  shall be  used  only in	conformance	with	Section	404,	Table	of	Use Regt'lal:.ions. '!'he term .includes parked trailer:>, travel trailers, recreational, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for more than one t-.un-Jred eighty  (180)  consecutive  days.

 
Sect.ion Three.

ARTICLE		V,	Se tion	517(2)	of	the		Haycock portion	of	the	Quakertown		Area	Zoning	Ordinance is hereby  revised  to  read  as  follows:
 



•rownsi-,ip of	l '.l: S
 

Secti,n 517 - Establishment  of  the Floo ain.

 

















1987.
 
{ 2·)   Where   an  area   has   been   designated as   "approximated   100-year   flood    bounda y·    in the Flood Insurance Study  (FIS)  prepare'.!  by  the eder3l   Emergency   Management   Agency   {FBMA),   eleva­ tion  and  the  f loodway  informc.tion  from  Feder.c0.l, State,  or  other  acce9tanl   source,   s.l1a.l'   be   used wnen available. Wi1en such other acceptable inf ::>r­ mation is not availaole, the  applicani:  for  the proposed use,. dcvelcpment,  oc  activity  shall determine   t:he   l00-1ear   .:.levation   in   acco1dance with hydrologic  and  hydraulic  engineerin1  tech­ niques  <'.cceptable  to  the  munic pal  r,ngineer.

ENACTED	and	ORDAINED	this	/& M	day	of _,.ht'Efrl!Jt::/(_
 

HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD   OF   SUPERVISORS

 
 
..L..L/  ..LV/  V   I	-·-"	· .







ORDINANCE NO.--""5-7'----


AN	ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY,	PENNSYLVANIA, ESTABLISHING STANDARDS  FOR THE		CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATION OF ON-SITE SEWAGE TREATMENT PROCESS FOLLOWED BY SPRAY IRRIGATION.


 
The	Board		of	Supervisors	of		the	Township		of Bucks	County,	Pennsylvania	does	hereby		adopt	by the following standards and procedures:

SECTION 100	INTENT

The intent of this Ordinance is to:
 
Haycock, Ordinance
 

a)	Promote the general health, welfare and safety of the	community and the environment within which it resides.

b)	Encourage the utilization of appropriate constructidn practices	to treat domestic sewage and .return'. the treated	wastewater to the ground for recharge of the ground water system.

c)	Minimize danger to public health by encouraging appropriate		operation of sewage treatment systems involving	a biological treatment process followed by spray irrigation.

d)	Specify minimum system sizes, flow rates, wastewater storage	capacity and operational design  features that	shall be used in the design and construction of	sewage treatment systems involving a biological treatment process followed by spray irrigation.

SECTION 101	SUPPLEMENTAL STA.""IDARDS

This Ordinance, by reference, hereby incorporates the most recently published standards pertaining to design, con­ struction, maintenance and operation of on-site sewage treat­ ment systems involving biological treatment processes followed by spray irrigation of the:

a)	Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources

b)	Bucks County Department of Health

c)	National Sanitation Foundation
 


SECTION 102		INTERPRETATION	OF  ORDINANCE  AND	STANDARDS BY TOWNSHIP ENGINEER

If a reference standard allows for more than one option, the option listed in this Ordinance shall govern the design and construction of an on-site sewage treatment system in­ volving a biological treatment process followed by spray irrigation.

All	standards	referenced	are to be	the latest revision
·thereof.

Interpretation of this Ordinance and standards as well as the choice of available option in the referenced standards shall be done by the Township Engineer.

SECTION 103	APPEAL OF TOWNSHIP ENGINEER'S INTERPRETATION

Should a  dispute  arise  concerning  the  interpretation of the above standards as they relate to each other or to the minimum standards specified in this Ordinance, an initial determination shall be made by the Township Engineer.'· Any party aggrieved by this decision may appeal to the Haycock Township Board  of  Supervisors.  The burden  of proof  shall be on the appellant.

SECTION 200	DEFINITIONS

Soil descriptions	are	those	commonly	used	by	the	USDA Soil Conservation Service.

Water conservation fixtures shall include spray tops, faucet aerators, flow control devices, flow-reducing shower­ heads, dual-type flush devices, low water use pressure toilets and other similar state of the art devices for reducing the use of water for domestic purposes.

·SECTION 300		SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM 300.l	TYPE OF SYSTEM
The type of on-site sewage treatment system to be de­ signed, constructed and operated in accordance with this Ordinance consists of a biological treatment process followed by spray irrigation.






;
 
''
'






300.2	SITE REQUIREMENTS

 
A	site	being domestic		wastewater capable of:
 
considered followed
 
for	biological	treatment	of by	spray	irrigation	shall	be
 

a)	providing	a	spray	area	meeting	the	requirements of this Ordinance.

b)	providing	a	fenced-in	buffer	area	around	the	spray area meeting. the requirements of this Ordinance.

c)	having the following minimum distances to the buffer area fence of:

1.	100	feet	from	public/private	rights-of-way.
In	the	case	of	public	streets,	the	minimum
distance	shall	be	measured	from	the	ultimate
right-of-way line.

2.	125 feet from property lines of adjacent properties and properties on the opposite· sides of public rights-of-way.

3.	100 feet from on-site occupied buildings.

4.	250	feet	from	established	off-site	occupied buildings.

5.	100	feet	from	all	streams,	water	courses	and ponds.

6.	100 feet from drilied wells.

7.	250 feet from hand dug wells.

8.	100 feet	from	on-site	high	use areas	such as swimming pools and patios.

 

9.	250 feet from established areas · such as playgrounds, patios.·
 
off-site		high swimming	pools
 
use and
 

300.3	SPRAY AREA REQUIREMENTS

An	area	to be	considered	as	a	spray area	and to meet the requirements of this Ordinance shall:
 

a)	not	contain	severely	or	moderately	eroded	phases of shallow/well-drained soils'.

b)	not	contain	severely	eroded	phases	of	moderately well-drained soils.

c)	not contain poorly drained soils_.

d)	not contain floodplain soils.

e)	not be located in wetlands.

f)	not	have	slopes	exceeding	eight	percent	(8%) in
	open	grassed areas.				

g)	not	have	slopes	exceeding	eight	percent	(8%)  in
wooded areas.

 
h)	not have
soil	is
soil".
 
slopes	exceeding	four percent	(4%) if the determined	to	be		"somewhat	poorly_ drained
 

i) not experience a seasonally high groundwater  table of l foot or less.

j) not - be located in areas where potential groundwater contamination may occur.

 300.4	SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT

A	biological	process	sewage	treatment	plant	in	order to meet the requirements of this Ordinance shall:

a) provide minimum secondary treatment  (30 mg/L BODS and		Suspended Solids) such as that provided by an	NSF Standards No. 40 Class I (less than 1500 gpd) approved treatment unit and NSF Criteria C-9 approved treatment unit greater than 1500 gpd.

 
b)	provide	disinfection		of by	chlorination	or	other esses.
 
a	treated equivalent
 
sewage,	either approved	proc-
 

c)	be	constructed	so that	entry	of	surface water	into the treatment unit is avoided.
 


SECTION 400		SEWAGE  TREATMENT	SYSTEM  DESIGN  PARAMETERS 400.1	SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT
The sewage treatment plant shall be designed for an average wastewater influent flow of 100 gallons per residence capita per day or 400 gallons per day, whichever is the greater gallonage per day. In addition, the applicant must demonstrate that the proposed unit has been designed to accommodate addi­ tional loading.

400.2	TREATED WASTEWATER STORAGE FACILITY

A treated wastewater storage facility consisting of tanks, shall be included in the design of the sewage treatment system to store treated wastewater when spraying of the treated wastewater for a period of time is not permitted. Open tanks or ponds for wastewater storage are prohibited. The storage facility shall be sized to contain the larger quantity of treated wastewater as determined on the following basis.:

a)	100 gallons per day for 30 days.	

b)	
Projected wastewater generated per day times	
30
days.


400.3	SPRAY IRRIGATION AREA

The spray irrigation area shall be designed:

a)	for spray application rates of:

1.	0.2 inches/week on deep, somewhat poorly drained soils.

2.	0.4	inches/week	on	shallow	{depth	of	15	to
20 inches} well drained soils.

3.	0.4 inches/week on deep, moderately well drained soils.

4.	0.4 inches/week on moderately deep, well drained soils.

5.	0.4 inches/week	on moderately	deep, moderately well drained soils.

6.	0.5 inches/week on deep, well drained soils.
 

b)	for spray application rates of 2 times the design influent rate of the sewage treatment plant.

c)	to be completely covered by spray pattern of the irrigation system nozzles.

d)	to use low trajectory nozzles and "coarse" spray to minimize misting/aerosol drift.

e)	such that a different segment of the area can be sprayed	each day of the week and that each segment will	be "rested" at least 6 days between spray applications to that segment.

(f) to have a mowable vegetative cover.

 400.4	BUFFER AREA

The	buffer	area	surrounding	the	spray	irrigation	area shall:

a)	be a minimum of 25 feet in width.

b)	·be planted with Evergreens for a minimum of  2 staggered	rows, at 6 foot intervals, to act as a visual		break  and  a wind  break.   Plantings  shall have	a minimum height of 4 feet at time of installation.

c)	be planted with a mowable vegetative cover.

d)	contain the treated wastewater storage facility.

e)	include an uphill berm which will direct upland drainage	away from the spray irrigation area. The height of the berm shall be determined by the Township Engineer.

 
f)	include	a		downhill	berm the	spray	irrigation		area to the storage facility.
 
to	retain	drainage	from and		to	redirect	drainage
 

g)	be enclosed with a 4-foot high chain link fence and	a lockable access gate to protect the health and safety of the neighboring property owners, unless waived		in the discretion of the Township. Fencing, when		required, shall be of the type and height recommended by the Township Engineer.







-6-
 

 

h)	be posted with signs on each straight stating	that the enclosed  area is a tion wastewater disposal area.
 
run of fencing spray	irriga-
 

i)	be provided with a driveway for Township access to the spray irrigation system.

400. 5	ADDITIONAL DESIGN FEATURES

Each sewage treatment system consisting of a biological treatment process followed  by  spray  irrigation  shall have the following items incorporated into the design:

a)	a· wind velocity interlock that will prevent a spray application to take place at wind velocities greater than 8 miles per hour.

b)	a shut-off accessible to the Township to be operated by the Township only if the system is not operating properly or being maintained properly.
 

c)	water	conservation	fixtures	throughout water system of the residence.
 

the
 

domesti'c
 


d)	a chlorine residual monitoring system or a chlorine residual test kit for monitoring the chlorine residual of the treated secondary effluent.

 

el		an audible siren or buzzer that will alert of	the	sewage	treatment	system	that	the minimum requirements are not being met.
 
the owner chlorine
 

fl	a	monitoring	well	located	downhill	of	the	buffer area.

SECTION 500	OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE

A sewage treatment system consisting of a biological treatment process followed by spray irrigation shall be oper­ ated and maintained in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance and the requirements of both the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources and the Bucks County Department of Health.

This Ordinance requires that:

a)	all	spray	applications	be	made	between	the hours of 9 p. m. and 6 a. m.





-7-
 


b)	spray	applications	be	made	on	soils when the	soil temperature is above 32° Fahrenheit.

c)	all	spray	applications	be	made	during	periods	of low wind velocity.

 
d)	all operation and maintenance listed in and	maintenance	manual	be	performed scheduled intervals.
 
the operation at	regularly
 

 
e)	the secondary effluent be monitored and chlorine	residual  on  a  periodic  basis safe maintenance and operation.
 
tested	for to	insure
 

f)	the monitoring well shall be monitored for ground­ water	pollution at intervals of not more than six
(6) months.	Monitoring	costs	shall	be	borne	by the owner of the system.

g)	the vegetative cover on the spray irrigation  area and the buffer area be mowed and harvested to mainta1n a height of not greater than four (4) inches.

h)	monthly operation and maintenance  reports  shall be	kept by the owner and shall be available for inspection by the Township at reasonable times.

i)	Tank Removal and Disposal All removal and/or disposal of the system shall be in compliance with the	written agreement and shall require notice to Haycock	Township Administrative Office no less than fifteen		(15) days prior to the start of removal and/or disposal.

SECTION 600	APPLICATIONS AND SUBMISSIONS

Applications to construct and operate an on-site sewage treatment system consisting of a biological treatment process followed by spray irrigation in Haycock Township shall be submitted to Haycock Township as well as to other governmental agencies having jurisdiction over the construction and opera­ tion of this type of sewage treatment system.

Written applications to Haycock Township to construct and operate the sewage treatment system shall be accompanied by:

a)	Planning	Modules	to	revise	Haycock	Township's	Act
537 Sewage Facilities Plan.






-8-
 



bl	Logs and analysis of soil(sl  within  the proposed spray area.

cl	a site review and analysis report.

dl		a large scale detailed site plan,  extending 500 feet beyond the proposed spray irrigation area showing existing and proposed 2 foot contours, wooded areas, buildings,	wells, streams,  on-lot sewage systems, plantings,	grading,  fences  and other topographic features necessary to evaluate the proposed system.

el		easement to Haycock Township for purpose of inspec­ tion.

 

f)		system	design	calculations	and	reports, details		of	monitoring	well		and		spray equipment.
 
including irrigation
 

gl	an operation	and maintenance	manual	for the system.

h)	application fee.

Written applications to Haycock Township for an annual operating permit shall be accompanied by:

a)	a	copy	of	the	previous	year's	operational	data, logs, monitoring and test results.

bl		application	fee	as	provided	by	resolution	of	the Board of Supervisors.

If the owner of the sewage treatment system has contracted a service person, or company, to operate and maintain the system, a copy of the service contract shall accompany the application for an operating permit.

SECTION 700		PERMITS,	FEES	AND	REQUIREMENTS	OF	SYSTEM MAINTENANCE  AGREEMENT

700.1	PERMITS

A permit to operate a sewage treatment system complying with the requirements of this Ordinance will be issued to the owner of the system system at such time as the owner of the sewage treatment system has satisfied Haycock Township that:






-9-
 

a)	the system complies with requirements of the Pennsyl­ vania Department of Environmental Resources.

b)	the	system	complies	with	requirements	of	the	Bucks County Department of Health.

c)	the system complies with this Ordinance.

d)	the system operation will comply with this Ordinance, and	that the owner ·has executed an Agreement with the Township providing for an Escrow fund to insure the proper operation and maintenance of the system.

e)	all	required	fees, applications,	contracts,	reports and manuals have been submitted to Haycock Township.

The initial permit will be valid until June of the cal­ endar year following the date of issuance.

Applications for subsequent annual operating permits shall be made by the owner to Haycock Township in ·April of each year.

The Haycock Township Board of Supervisors may revoke an operation permit if the system is not being operated and maintained in accordance with this Ordinance.

700.2	FEES

Fees for application and operating permit shall be estab­ lished by Resolution.

700.3	SYSTEM MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT

The owner of the sewage treatment system shall enter into an agreement with the Township, in . form acceptable to the Township, as to the maintenance and inspection schedule of said system, and further delineating certain guarantee of the performance of the required obligations of owner by the deposit of funds in escrow in an amount determined by Township. Said Agreement shall be recorded with the Bucks County Recorder of Deeds, and shall be binding upon any suc­ cessor or assign of owner.

700.4	INSURANCE

 
Owner	shall in full force and system is used or
 
maintain	policies	of	liability	insurance effect during the time the sewage treatment intended for use expressly naming as insured


;
-10-
 

the Owner, the Township, the Township Board of Supervisors individually while acting on Township business, the Township Engineer and all Township personnel from liability for personal injury and property  damage  claims,  and  owner  further  agrees to  have  the  aforesaid  named  as  an  additional  named  insured in each of the policies and shall provide general liability coverage, in an amount and in a manner satisfactory to the Township.

SECTION 800		FINES	AND	PENALTIES,	SEVERABILITY,	REPEALER AND EFFECTIVE DATE

800.l	FINES AND PENALTIES

a)	For  any  and  every  violation  of  the  provisions of	this  Ordinance:

1.	The owner, general agent, contractor  of  the system where such a violation has been committed or   shall  exist;

2.	The  owner,  general   agent,   contractor,   lessee, or tenant of any property containing an on-.,-site spray	irrigation system in which part such violations	have been committed or shall exist; and

3.	The general  agent,  architect,  builder,  con­ tractor,		or any other person who knowingly commits,	takes part, or assists in any such violation		or who maintains or has agreed to maintain		the  on-site  spray  irrigation   system for		which   such   violation    shall    exist    shall be	liable   upon   conviction   thereof   to   a   fine or	penalty of three hundred  dollars  ($300.00) which		shall  be  paid  to   the   general   fund   of the		Township. In  default  of  payment,  such person		shall be committed to the Bucks County prison		and confined for a period not to  exceed sixty		(60) days. Each day the violation con­ tinues shall constitute a separate and distinct violation		and a separate  and  distinct  penalty shall  be  accessed  therefore.

b)	Such fines and penalties may be collected by summary proceedings	brought in the name of the municipality before   a   District   Justice.





.;

-11-
 


800.2	SEVERABILITY

If any  provision,  sentence,  clause,  section  or  part of this Ordinance, or the application of any provision hereof, is for any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or  invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses,  sections  or  parts  of  this  Ordinance. It is hereby declared as the intent of the Township that this Ordinance would have been enacted had such unconsti­ tutional, illegal or invalid provision, sentence, clause, section or part hereof not been included.

800.3	REPEALER

 
All	Ordinances	or inconsistent	herewith, absolutely.
 
parts be	and
 
of	Ordinances the		same	are
 
in	conflict	or hereby	repealed
 

 
800.4	EFFECTIVE DATE

This Ordinance	is hereby	declared preservation	of the peace, health and of the Township and		shall take	effect (5 ) days	after	it	is	enacted		by	the of the Township.
 



to be urgent	for the comfort of the people and	be		enforced	five Board	of	Supervisors
 

SO ORDAINED AND ENACTED into Ordinance this	 
,  A.	D.  1987.

















ATTEST:


Tq}Vnship Secretary




;
-12-
 
--  J...,flR7 /2	5/2/88	-









ORDINANCE  NO.	58


AN	-ORDINANCE OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP REGULATING ·THE NU!'!1EERtNG	OF .HOUSES AND BUILDINGS  IN  THE  MUNICI-' PALITY,     A W    PRESCRIBING    PENALTIES    FOR    VIOLATION.


ppon	recommendation		of	the	Haycock	Township	Engineer and	pursuant	to _53	P.S.	65737	of	the	Second	Class	Township
<;:od.e,	t_he _l;loar:d ·of	Supervisors	of	Haycock	Township_   f\er.eby
.'o:cGl iris:

···.Section	one	Building	Numbering	System	Adopted.	The
survey·,	plan	and	system  ·for · the	numbering	of	houses	and
buildings   prepared	by  the  Pennoni  Associates,	Inc., Township F;ngir. er-s,	entitled	"House/Building	·Numbering	Systel)l	.for'
.H	ayc '_ck· ·Township,		Bucks	County,	Pennsylvania",		dated ·Hay 2,	1988,	a	copy	of	.which	is	attached	hereto	and	made	a
·.part o;h&r of,	is hereby approved and adopted.
._',  .
·	Seci'Oion	Two	-  Res-Ponsibili ty	for	Numbering	Buildings.
·	Within.·thirty	(30)	days  after  the  passage   of	this Ord;lnance;
it	sJ::i.afF'':be	the: ·_duty	of	each	and	every	owner,	trustee" l.ess-Eie',	agent  and  occupant  of	each  and  every house,	buildin\J
.or ;other  · structure	in	the	Township	of	Haycock	to	cause
th& ·sam_e,	to  be	numbered	in	accordance	with   this	Ordinance, and  the.system  and  plan  hereby  adopted  and  approved.

Section Three  - Requirements  for Numbers.    The  numbe:r·
$hall .be	placed	on		the	mailbox,		house,		structure		or. other­ conspicuous	place'	the	same	number	to	be.- of	p<;iint'	metal 1'.ir	enamel,  -and	at	least	three	(3)	inches	in	height,	the. cilor	9f ·'the· numbers	to ·be		in	contrast.  to·  th	immedi<iti
backgrou d,	ai'1d	shall	be	placed	so	as	to  ·be. in	full. view  .
. ·£roil': · the	oppo•sJ. te	side	of	the	street,	in	accordance·  with
.the_ followin·g design:

A' For those buildings  or .structures visible from the road,  and  with  identifiable  tnaiiboxes, the· nmribers   shall  be . placed  on  the  mailbox,  as
described above.

.	B.	For  those  buildings  or  structures  v:i.s'ible froni ..the	road	but	with out . mai'lboxes;	the nu..l!lbers,
. .is	described,	shall	be	placed	in  ,	conspiCl;l.OU5
.PJ.ice	on	or	over	each	front	door,	on	the	frcrit
·transom	bar,	front ..· transom	glass  . or	front  ,show•
window.
 





C.	For those buildings or · structures with mailboxes but not visible from the road, the number shall be placed on the mailbox, as described above,. and additionally, at the entrance of the road or driveway serving each individual building or structure.

D.	For those buildings or structures without mailboxes and not visible from the road, the number, as described above, shall be placed at the end of each road or driveway serving such buildings or  structures,  and  at  the  entrance to any private lane or driveway off a main road or driveway serving any building or structure.

The Zoning Officer is hereby authorized to require the numbering and renumbering of any house, building or other structure in accordance with this Ordinance.

Section	Four	Certain  Acts  Prohibited.	It	shall be unlawful to cover any house number with any sign, drapery, or other obstruction tending to conceal such number and all old numbers shall be removed from any house, building or other structure when a new number has been assigned, and when so directed by the Township Engineer or Zoning Officer.

Section	Five	Penalties.	Any	person,	firm	or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Ordinance shall, upon convic;tion thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than  Six Hundred  Dollars  ($600.00), and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed ninety .(90) days.

 
Section Six ordinances which repealed.
 
Repealer.	All	ordinances are	inconsistent	herewith·
 
or	parts	of are	hereby
 

Section Seven - Severability. If any sentence, clause, section, or part of this Ordinance is for any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconsti­ tutionality, illegality  or  invalidity  shall  not  affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this Ordinance. It is hereby declared  as the intent of the Township of Haycock that









-2-
 












 
this Ordinance would have been adopted tional, illegal or invalid sentence, part thereof not been included herein.
 

had such unconsti tu­ clause,	section	or
 

 
Section Eight - become effective on A.D., 1988.
 
Effective Date. the	qi; & day
 
This of.
 

Ordinance
ft(,<Jl
 

shall
 


HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
 







































-3-
 
JBR3/J.U   4/!:S/l:Hl












PERSONAL PROPERTY NUISANCE ORDINANCE ORDINANCE NO. 59
AN  ORDINANCE	OF  THE  TOWNSHIP	OF HAYCOCK	regulating
th.e	storage	of	machinery,	equipment,	materials

and/or   solid.  waste   on   private   grounds,   so  .as to  create  a  nuisance  ·ar health  hazard;   requiring
the removal, repair or alteration of the conditions constituting a nuisance or danger to the .citizens; and  prescribing  penalties  for violation.

The Haycock Township Board  of  Supervisors  . hereby  ·or­ dains:

Se<;:tion 1. Definitions. As used in this Ordinance, the following  terms  shall  have. the  meanings   indicated,  unless a  different meaning  clearly appears  from  the  context:          · ·

LESSEE - Owner for the purpose of this  Ordinan6e when the   lessor   holds   the   Lessee   responsible   for  maintenance
·and· repairs.

NUISANCE	any		condition,	structure,	or	improvement which	.shall	constitute·	a	threat		or	potential	threat·  to 'the   health,	safety;	or  welfare  of	the  citizens  of	the Town­
ship' of  Haycock.

OWNER the actual owner, agent or  custodian  of  i:J:ie property  on  which  machinery,  equipment  or  materials  .ar stored,    whether     individual     or    partnership,     as9ociation; or  corpor.ation.

PERSON	.,.    a  natural· person,	firm,	partnersh.ip, · af :spot .,­
·. tion,  corporation,·  cir   other  legal  entity.

SOLID WASTE . sha.l+ mean · garbage, refuse .and othe<: discctrded ma:teria·ls . Jncluding, but not limited to· .so.l.id', semi-solid, liquid- and. contained gaseous waste materials resulting frOI!l municipal, industrial, mining, institutionai.', 'commer·cial,  .a.gricultural  or  residential  activities.             ·       '

 
·	VECTOR -  -·		a .· r.cident,	. arthropod	or transmitting	a		·disease	or	infection,
·limited to rats, mosquitoes; .cocj{roaches,
 
insect capable: of including · but ci,ot. flies  arid   ticks •. ·
 






In	this	Ordinance,	the	singular	shall	include	the
plural;	the	plural	shall	include	the	singular;	and	the
masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.

Section 2. Health Hazards and Nuisances Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to create or maintain any condition upon their property which  could directly or indirectly cause a nuisance or health hazard to residents of the Township of Haycock. Specifically, the unsheltered storage or maintenance of unused, stripped, damaged and generally unusable machinery or equipment, materials, or solid waste shall be considered a nuisance and/or health hazard if any of the following conditions exist:

1.	Broken glass or metal parts with sharp or protruding edges.

2.	Openings or areas which are conductive to the harboring and growth of vermin.

3.	Storage of solid wastes or any refuse in containers other than covered recepticles, which shall be kept clean by rinsing and draining as often as necessary so as not to provide food or breeding areas for vectors.

4. Storage in any manner which would allow the equip­ ment, machinery, material or any parts thereof to easily shift, tilt, or fall from its original storage position.

5. Storage of items containing any liquid or material of a hazardous or potentially hazardous nature,. including, but not limited to, gasoline,· oil, battery acids, refrigera­ tion agents, and poisons.

 
6.   Storage of two  (2 ) or tubes which could permit for vectors.
 
or	more harborage
 

flat or
 
or	open breeding
 
tires areas
 

7.	Storage of any type of mechanical device propelled by a motor, but which is unable to move under its own power. and has one	(l) or more of the following physical defects:
(a)	missing	tires	resulting	in .unsafe	suspension	of	the.
motor	vehicle;	(b) broken	vehicle	frame	suspended	from
the	ground		in		an	unstable	manner;	(c) inoperable	locking mechanism	for	doors	or	trunk;	(d) suspension	on unstable
supports.






-2-
 





 

8•	Any	other	condition which, inspecting official shall be deemed potential health hazard or nuisance.
 
in the opinion	of the to be a health hazard,
 

Sectiorr 3. Inspection; Notice to Comply.

1.	The Enforcement Officer is hereby empowered to inspect grounds on which machinery, equipment, materials and/or solid waste are stored to determine if there is compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. If noncompliance with the provisions of this Ordinance constitutes a nuisance, or if any condition, structure, or improvement poses a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the public, he shall issue a written notice to be served by registered or certified mail upon the owner of said premises, or, if the owner's whereabouts or identity be unknown, by posting the notice conspicuously upon the offending premises.

2.	Said notice shall specify the condition considered to be a hazard		and/or nuisance and shall require the owner to	commence		to	remove	or		otherwise	rectify	the	nuisance as	set	forth		therein within	ten	(lO) days .of mailing		or posting	of		said	notice,	and		thereafter,	to	fully	comply with	the		requirements	of		the	notice	within		thirty	(30) days of mailing or posting of said notice.

Section  4.	Authority  to Remedy  Noncompliance.	If	the owner of grounds on which machinery, equipment, materials and/or solid wastes are stored does not comply with the notice to abate the conditions, within the time limit prescribed, the Township of Haycock shall have the authority to take measures to correct the conditions· and collect the cost of such corrections plus ten percent (l0%) of all costs. The Township of Haycock, in such event and pursuant to its statutory or otherwise authorized police powers, shall have the right and power to enter upon the offending premises to accomplish the foregoing.

Section 5 ..  Penalties.	Any	person	who	shall violate	any provision of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000), and/or to undergo imprisonment for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days. Each day that a violation of this Ordinance continues shall constitute a separate offense.








-3-
 






Section 6. Remedies not Mutually Exclusive. The remedies provided herein  for the  enforcement  of  this  Ordinance, or any remedy provided by law, shall.not be deemed mutually exclus ve; rather they may be employed simultaneously or consecutively, at the option of the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township.

Se_,c,..t_,i,..· _o_n_7_.......,_R_e p e a°"l,_e--,-r.	All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. The following Ordinances or  parts  thereof  are  specifically repealed:   Ordinance Nos. 5, 8 and 9.

·Section 8. Severability.  If any sentence, clause, section or	part of this Ordinance is for any reason found to be unconstitutional,	illegal or invalid, such unconstitution­ ality, illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this Ordinance. It is hereby declared as the intent	of the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township that this Ordinance would have been adopted had such uncon­ stitutional,	illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.

 

Section 9.	Effective Date. effective on
 
This	Ordinance
, A.D., 1988.
 
shall	become
 


 




















-4-
 

G>rahofuslti,   herle,  ire, & jcafibi
;.ttom•q• •I
Jmui•, J•l11Ullillanill
 
·4 ,it,l .  ..
 









ORDINANCE NO. '()


AN ORDINANCE SETTING THE SPEED LIMIT FOR MOTOR VEHICLES ON HAYCOCK RUN ROAD, FROM
TOP ROCK TRAIL ROAD TO THE TOWNSHIP BOUNDARY LINE WITH NOCKAMIXON TOWNSHIP


Preamble

The Haycock Township Board of Supervisors, upon the recommendation of the Township Engineer and the 'l'ownship Roadmaster, and pursuant to appropriate engineering and traffic studies, hereby enacts and ordains as follows:

AR'l'ICI,E I

Words and phrases when used in this Ordinance shall have the meaning described to them in the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, 1976, June 17, P.L. 162, Act No. 81, as amended.

ARTICLE II

It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle in excess of thirty-five (35) miles per hour on Haycock Run Road (T.R. 424), from its intersection with Top Rock Trail Road {T.R. 422) to the Haycock 'l'ownship boundary line at Haycock Run Creek.

ARTICLE III

The proper authorities of the '!'ownship are directed to erect official signs establishing the speed on Haycock Run Road at thirty-five {35) miles per hour, and to do so in conformity with the provisions of the Vehicle Code.

ARTICLE IV

Any person who violates any provision of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of Thirty­ Five Dollars ($35.00). Any person exceeding  the maximum speed limit by more than five (5) miles per hour sha11 pay an additional fine of 'rwo Dollars ($2.00) per mile for each mile in excess of five (5) miles per hour over the maximum speed limit.
 








 
ARTICLE V

All ord ances, thereof are :if>pealed this Ordinance.
 



parts	of insofar		as
 



ordinances,	and	amendments they	are	inconsistent	with
 

ARTICLE VI

This	Ordinance	shall	become	effective	five	(5) days after final enactment.
ORDAINED	and	ENACTED	this	/t{;,	day	of .::::fU...1.. y
A.D., 1990.


HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPER ISORS
 
lfirahofuslii, lfilierle,  ice, & jrnfim
,l\Jtam•Q• nl 1Jm.
Jutaaiz• Jrnmvlum

I



ORDINANCE NO. t:. I


AN ORDINANCE SETTING THE SPEED LIMIT FOR MOTOR VEHICLES ON OAK LANE, FROM
OLD BETHLEHEM ROAD TO THE TOWNSHIP BOUNDARY LINE WITH SPRINGFIELD TOWNSHIP


Preamble

The Haycock Township Board of Supervisors, upon the recommendation of the Township Engineer and the Township Roadmaster, and pursuant to appropriate engineering and traffic studies, hereby enacts and ordains as follows:

ARTICLE I

Words and phrases when used in this Ordinance shall have the meaning ascribed to them in the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, 1976, June 17, P.L. 162, Act No. 81, as amended.

ARTICLE II

It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle in excess of thirty-five (35) miles per hour on Oak Lane (T.R. 418), from its  intersection  with  Old  Bethlehem Road to the Haycock Township boundary line with Springfield Township.

ARTICLE III

The proper  authorities  of  the  Township· are  directed to erect official signs establishing the speed on Oak r.ane at thirty-five (35) miles per hour, and to do so in conformity with the provisions of the Vehicle Code.

ARTICLE IV

Any person who violates any provision of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of Thirty­ Five Dollars ($35.00). Any person exceeding  the maximum speed limit by more than five (5) miles per hour shall pay an additional fine of Two Dollars ($2.00) per mile for each mile in excess of five (5) miles per hour over the maximum speed limit.
 






 
ARTICLE V

All ordinances, thereof are repealed this Ordinance.
 



parts	of insofar	as
 



ordinances,	and	amendments they	are	inconsistent	with
 

ARTICLE VI

This	Ordinance	shall	become	effective	five	(5) days after final enactment.
ORDAINED	and	ENACTED	this	        
A.O.	I	1990.


HAYCOCK 'l'OWNSllIP
F SUPERVISORS









\   x' .l,






























-2-
 
&ir11&nfunlii, lJi&erle, ;!Ric£, & 'cllfibi
,i\lhtnll! · al fn
Jerlmsie,  Jemu1,Ptmnia









ORDINANCE  NO.  62


AN ORDINANCE AUTHORIZING HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP (HEREIN REFERRED   TO   AS   THIS    "GOVERNMENTAL    UNIT")    TO    JOIN WITH   OTHER   LOCAL   GOVERNMENT    UNITS    AS    A    SETTLOR FOR  THE  PENNSYLVANIA  LOCAL  GOVERNMENT,  INVESTMENT TRUST    FOR    THE    PURPOSE    OF     PURCHASING     SHARES     OF THE   TRUST


WHEREAS, the Pennsylvania Local Government Investment Trust was formed 'in accordance  with  the  authorization  con­ tained  in  the  Intergovernmental  Cooperation   Act   (1972   P.L. 762 No. 180, as amended), initially by the Boroughs of Chambersburg and Emmaus, to provide a vehicle  for  Pennsyl­ vania municipal entities to pool their funds for investment purposes;   and,

WHEREAS,		the	Municipal		Authorities		Act			of		1945	(P.L. 382,	No.	164,	as	amended),		as	amended		by	Act		70	of		1981 ( P. L.		221),	authorizes	municipal		authorities		to			join	with other		political	subdivisions	and		municipal		authorities (collectively,	"local	governmental	units")		in		accordance with	the	Intergovernmental	Cooperation	Act	for	the		purpose of  purchasing  investments;  and,																	,

WHEREAS, the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act provides that any  joint  cooperation  agreement  shall  be  deemed  in force to any local government ,unit, when the same has been adopted by  all cooperating  local governmental  units;

NOW,	THEREFORE,	IT  SHALL  BE  ORDAINED  AS  FOLLOWS:

Section 1.			This		Governmental	Unit		shall		join		with other  local  governmental  units	in  accordance  with  the  Inter-c governmental	Cooperation,, Act, by	becoming	a		settlor	of	the Pennsylvania Local Governmental	Investment	Trust		(the   Trust) and  entering  into  the  Declaration  of	Trust, which is adopted by	reference	with		the	same	effect	as	if		it	had		been		set out	verbatim	in	this	section	and	a		copy		of		which		shall be	filed	with	the		,minutes	of		the	meeting	at		which		this Ordinance was adopted.

Section 2.	This	Governmental	Unit	is	authorized
 
to	purchase	shares	in
available	funds,	and	to
 
the	Trust	from	time	to	time	with
redeem	some	or  all  of	those	shares
 







 
from time to time as These	actions		are to for	·this	purpose, instructions		by	the Unit.
 
funds are be	taken pursuant governing
 

needed for other purposes. by the officers designated to general or specific body of this Governmental
 

Section  3.	The Trustees of the Trust are designated as having official custody of this Governmental Units funds which are invested by the purchase of shares in the Trust.

 
Section    4.		As Cooperation	Act	the found and determined.
 
required following
 
by	the matters
 
Intergovernmental are	specifically
 

(a} The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the Declaration of Trust referred to in Section l;

(b} This Governmental Unit's  participation  in the Trust shall be terminable at any time by Ordinance;

(c} The Declaration of Trust and the purchase of its shares are for the purpose of investing this Govern- mental Unit's funds in obligations which are otherwise legal investments, as part of a pooled arrangement with other local governmental units, thereby achieving economic and other advantages of pooled investments; and the powers and scope of authority delegated are set forth in the Decla­ ration of Trust referred to in Section l;

(d} It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from funds of this. Governmental Unit except through the purchase of shares in the Trust;

(e} The. Trust shall be managed by a Board of Trustees as set forth in the Declaration of Trust and the By-Laws provided for therein;

 
(f} time	to	time be	necessary requirements;
 

Shares may be repurchased and redeemed from as this Governmental Unit may determine to or appropriate to meet its cash investment and,
 

 


contracts benefits,
 
(g}	The	Trust		shall	be	empowered	to	enter	into for	policies	of	group	insurance	and	employee
including social security, for its employees.






-2-
 






 
Section 5.
shall be	/"t /f/'c""  k
 
Th,,,e,,
'
 
effective	date	of
I	1991.
 
this	Ordinance
 
H/16 JBR:bjf	5/6/91
 















ORDINANCE NO.
 


AN ORDINANCE OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP PROVIDING FOR SIDE AND REAR YARD SET BACK REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES


Preamble


 
Upon review by the Haycock •rownship and the Bucks County Planning Commission, visors hereby ordains:
 
Planning	Commission the Board of Super-
 

ARTICLE I

Section 405(H3) Residential Accessory	Building	is hereby revised as follows:

(H3) Residential Accessory Building

Residential	accessory	building,	structure	or	use, including but not limited to:

(a)	Parking space for the parking of passenger automobiles;	parking of commercial vehicles which shall not exceed three-quarters-ton loading capacity.

( b) Structures such as fences, walls, private swimming pools.

(c)	Building such as storage sheds, bath houses and private greenhouses.

(d)	Facilities for domestic servants  or  caretakers employed on the premises.

 
( e I Facilities for the parents, of	any one of the owners of the premises.
 
grandparents or children who	are	also	occupiers
 

 

( f)	No	portion	of	a built	within		the in Section 502A.
 

building	or minimum	front
 

structure yards	as
 
shall	be specified
 
.·





(g)	Except	for	dwelling	facilities	as	described	in
(d) and (e), new and existing buildings or structures
may		extend into the minimum  side or rear yards to	a distance of ten (10) feet from a lot line or		street line, provided  that no such building
or structure shall exceed two hundred eighty-eight
(288) square feet of gross floor area.

(h)	Only one  such additional  dwelling  as  described in	(d) and (e) is permitted except by Special Exception	granted by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the provision for Special Exceptions herein provided.

ARTICLE II

	Should	any	section	or	any	provision	of	this	Ordinance
be	declared	by	any	Court	of	competent	jurisdiction	to	be
invalid, illegal or unconstitutional, such decision shall have no effect on the validity of this Ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof.

ARTICLE III

Any ordinance or resolution or part of any ordinance or resolution inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.

 
SO	ORDAINED
1991.
 
this	day	of	A.  D.,
 


 
 
H/36 JBR:bjf	6/20/91

 









ORDINANCE NO.	I/


 

AN	ORDINANCE	ESTABLISHING	A	STOP INTERSECTION A'r   COBBLER ROAD AND MISSION
ROAD WITHIN HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP

Preamble

The	Haycock	Township	Board	of	Supervisors, enacts and ordains as follows:
 








hereby
 

ARTICLE ONE

Words and phrases when used in this Ordinance shall have the meaning ascribed to them in the Pennsylvania Motor. Vehicle Code, 1976, June 17, P.L. 162, Act No. 81, as amended.

ARTICLE TWO

The following intersections are established as stop intersections, anO--official stop signs shall be erected in such a position as to face traffic approaching the second-named street (the intersecting or through street) on the first-named street (the stop street) in the direc­ tion indicated  for that intersection.   Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection on the first-named or stop street, in the direction indicated in each case, shall stop the vehicle as required by Section 3323 (b) of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, and shall not proceed into or across the second-named  or  intersecting  street
until	he	or	she	has	followed	all	applicable	requirements
of that section of the	law.		
 


Stop Street
 

Intersection
or Through Street
 

Direction of Travel
 

Cobbler Road (T-463)	Mission Road (T-404)	West

ARTICLE THREE

The proper authorities of the Township are directed to erect official signs in accordance with the appropriate provisions of the Vehicle Code and regulations of PennDOT.
 
,









 
ARTICLE FOUR

Any person who violates any provision shall,.	upon	conviction,	be	sentenced	to Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) and costs.
 



of this Ordinance pay	a	fine	of
 

 
ARTICLE FIVE

All	ordinances, ordinances		which	are repealed.
 



parts	of	ordinances	or		parts	of inconsistent	herewith		are	hereby
 

ARTICLE SIX

This	Ordinance	shall	become	effective	five	(5) days after final enactment.

ORDAINED  and ENACTED  this	/.')/f' 1 day of - _7-;._'-/
A.D	.,	1991.


 



























-2-
 
Hay2/16	JBR:bjf	11/7/91










_,.	.-
ORDINANCE NO.	fo5

FLOW CONTROL ORDINANCE OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, ESTABLISHING  A  PROGRAM FOR THE MUNICIPAL LICENSING OF ALL PERSONS WHO COLLECT AND TRANSPORT MUNICIPAL WASTE AND SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS GENERATED WITHIN THE TOWNSHIP; PROVIDING WASTE FLOW CONTROL TO DIRECT MUNICIPAL WASTE AND SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS TO DESIGNATED PROCESSING AND/OR DISPOSAL SITES; AND PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF THIS ORDINANCE


Preamble

The Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, pursuant to Section 304 of the Pennsylvania Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and waste Reduction Act of 1988 (Act 101) and Section 65708 of the Second Clas·s Township Code hereby ordains as follows:

SECTION l - SHORT TITLE

This Ordinance shall be known and referred to as the "Waste Flow Control and Licensing Ordinance of Haycock Township."

SECTION 2 - DEFINITIONS

The following words and phrases as used in this Ordinance shall have the meaning ascribed to them herein, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Act 97 - The Pennsylvania	Solid	Waste	Management	Act of 1980 (P.L. 380, No. 97, July 7, 1980).

Act 101	- The	Pennsylvania	Municipal	Waste	Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction· Act of 1988 (Act 1988-101, July 28, 1988).

Collector or Waste Hauler shall mean any person, firm, partnership, corporation or public agency who is engaged in the collection and/or transportation of municipal waste and/or source-separated recyclable materials.
 





Commercial  Establishment	means	any	establishment engaged in nonmanufacturing ·or nonprocessing business, including, but not limited to, stores, markets, offices, restaurants, shopping centers and theaters.
County - means the County of Bucks, Pennsylvania. Disposal	means	the	deposition,	injection,	dumping,
spilling, leaking or placing of solid waste into or on
the land or water in a manner that the solid waste or a
constituent  of  the  solid waste  enters  the environment,
is emitted into the air or is discharged to the waters
of this Commonwealth. Disposal facilities included, but are not limited to, municipal waste landfills and construction/demolition waste landfills as defined by Act 101, Act 97, and/or DER rules and regulations (e.g. 25 Pa. Code Chapters 75 and 271).

Department	or  DER	shall	mean	the	Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.

Industrial Est.ablishment means any establishment engaged in manufacturing or production activities, including, but not limited to, factories, foundries, mills, processing plants, refineries, mines and slaughterhouses.

Institutional Establishment shall mean  any establishment or facility engaged in services, including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes, schools and universities. ·

 
Leaf  Waste	·shall	mean shrubbery	and	tree		trimmings, not including grass clippings.
 
leaves,	garden	residues, and	similar	material,	but
 

 
Licensed	Collector	or	Licensed		Waste	Hauler mean	any	collector	or	hauler	of	municipal	waste source-separated	recyclables		possessing	a	current issued by the Township pursuant to this Ordinance.
 
shall and/or license
 

Municipality	shall	mean	the	Township	of	Haycock, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.

Municipal Waste - means any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office waste and other material including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material, resulting from operation  of  residential, municipal,  commercial  or
 






institutional establishments and from community activities and any sludge· not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste under Act 97 from a municipal, commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant, or air pollution control facility. The term does · not include any source-separated recyclable materials.

Person - means any individual, partnership, corporation, association, institution, cooperative enterprise, munici­ pality, municipal authority, Federal government or agency, State institution or agency, or any other legal entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. In any provisions of this Ordinance prescribing a fine, imprisonment, or penalty, or any combination of the foregoing, the term "person" shall include the officers and directors of any corporation or other legal entity having officers and directors.

Processing - means any technology used for the purpose of reducing the volume or bulk of municipal or residual waste or any technology used to convert part or all of such materials for off-site reuse, Processing facilities include, but are not limited to, transfer facilities, recycling facilities, composting facilities, and resource recovery facilities.

Recycling	- means the collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and .other materials which would otherwise be disposed or processed as municipal waste or the mechanized separation and treatment of municipal waste (other than through combustion) and creation; and recovery of reusable materials other than a fuel for the operation of energy.

Scavenging shall mean the unauthorized  and uncontrolled removal of any material stored or placed at a point for subsequent  collection or from a processing or disposal facility.

Source-separated Recyclable Materials - means materials, including leaf waste, that are separated from municipal waste at the point of origin or generation for the purpose of recycling.

Transportation	means	the	off-site	removal	of	any
municip.al waste at any	time after generation.			
 





 
For include feminine
 
the the and
 
purposes of plural and neuter.
 
this Ordinance, the	masculine
 
the .singular shall shall	include	the
 

SECTION 3 - DESIGNATION OF PROCESSING AND/OR DISPOSAL FACILITIES

A.	The Township of Haycock shall designate by separate resolution one or more specific processing ·and/or.disposal facilities where all licensed collectors must, as a condition of licensing, transport and dispose all municipal waste and/or source-separated recyclable materials collected within the Township of Haycock.

B.	The Township of Haycock  shall have the right by separate resolution to require any licensed collector to obtain a contract or disposal site affidavit with any or all processing and/or disposal facilities accepting municipal waste or source-separated recyclable material generated within the Township. Haycock Township may, by separate reso.lution, establish a minimum term of the con­ tract or disposal site affidavit and may also require that said contract or disposal site affidavit be accompanied by a notarized statement of the projected annual weight and/or volume of waste or recyclable material to be disposed at the facility.

SECTION 4 - PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES

A.	It shall be unlawful for any person to collect municipal waste or source-separated recyclable materials from any residential, public, commercial, industrial or institutional establishment within the Township of Haycock without first securing a license to do so from the Township in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.

B.	It shall be unlawful for any person to collect and/or transport municipal waste or source-separated recyclable materials from any sources within the Township of Haycock in a manner not in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance,  any  applicable  municipal  ordinance, the Bucks County Municipal Waste Management Plan, Act 101, the minimum standards and requirements established in Chapter
285	of	the	DER's	Municipal	Waste	Management	Regulations
(25 Pa. Code Chapter 285), and/or any other federal, state,
or local regulations.
 





c.	It shall be unlawful for any person to transport any municipal waste or source-separated recyclable materials collected from within the Township of Haycock to any processing and/or disposal facility other .than those facilities designated in the Bucks County Municipal Waste Management Plan.

D.	It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge any material from any municipal waste or source-separated recyclable materials that are stored or placed for subsequent collection within the Township of Haycock without prior approval from the Township.

E.	It shall be unlawful for any person to permit, assist, cause or pay an unlicensed collector or waste hauler to collect or transport any municipal waste and/or source-separated recyclable materials from any residential, commercial, industrial or institutional establishment.

SECTION 5 - STANDARDS FOR COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTATION

A.	All collectors or waste haulers operating within the Township of Haycock must comply with the following minimum standards and regulations:

(1)	All trucks or other vehicles used for collection and transportation of municipal waste and/or source-separated recyclable materials  must  comply  with the requirements of Act 97 and Act 101 and . Department regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and Act 101, including the Title 25 Pa. Code Chapter 285, Subchapter B, regulations for the collection and transportation of municipal waste.

(2)	All collection vehicles conveying municipal waste and/or source-separated recyclable materials  shall be operated and maintained in a manner that will prevent creation of a nuisance or a hazard to public health, safety and welfare.

(3)	All collection vehicles conveying putrescible municipal waste shall be watertight and suitably enclosed to prevent leakage, roadside littering, attraction of vectors and the creation of odors and other nuisances.

(4)	All collection vehicles conveying nonputrescible municipal waste and/or source-separated recyclable materials shall be capable of being enclosed or covered to prevent litter and other nuisances.
 






(5)	All	collection		vehicles		conveying	municipal waste		and/or	s.ource-separated		recyclable		materials	·shall bear	signs	identifying	the		name	and	business	address	of the person	or municipality	which	owns the vehicle		and the specific	type		of	material		transported		by	the	vehicle. All such signs shall have lettering which		is at least six
(6)	inches in height as required by Act 101.

 

B.	All	collection		vehicles		and licensed		collectors		or	licensed	waste subject	to	inspection	by		the	Township authorized		agents	at	any		reasonable notification.
 
equipment		used	by haulers	shall	be of	Haycock		or	its
hour	without	prior
 

SECTION 6 - LICENSING REQUIREMENTS

A.	No person shall collect or remove and then subsequently haul or transport any municipal waste or source-separated recyclable material through or upon the streets of the Township of Haycock without first obtaining a Waste Flow Control License in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.  This  section  shall not apply to private individuals  (e.g. homeowners}  who wish to transport their own. household waste or recyclables to County-designated facilities, nor to farmers, landscapers, or nurserymen who collect, remove, haul, or otherwise transport agricultural or other organic waste associated with their respective business activities.

B.	All collectors and waste haulers shall be licensed by the Township of Haycock and designated as a "Licensed Waste Hauler" or a "Licensed Collector."

C.	As a condition of acquiring and maintaining a license to operate within the Township, each licensed waste hauler or collector shall dispose of all municipal waste and source-separated recyclables at a facility or facilities designated by the Township. Noncompliance with this subsection shall be grounds for revocation of a waste hauling company's license to collect waste in the Township.

D.	Any person who desires to collect and subsequently haul or transport municipal waste within the Township of Haycock shall submit a Waste Flow Control License application and any application fee to the Township or its designated licensing representative. Any collector or waste hauler operating within the Township as of the effective  date
 






of	this		Ordinance		must	apply		for		and	be ·issued a Waste Flow Control License in order to continue to operate within the Township.		Subsequent to initial licensing, any licensed collector	or		waste		hauler	possessing	an	existing	license shall submit a	license renewal· application		and fee to the Township	of	Haycock	at	least		forty-five		(45) days	prior to the expiration date of the existing	license, if renewal of	the		license		is	desired.		New		license		applicants	must submit	a	license	application	and	fee at	least	forty-five
(45) days  before  beginning  collecting  and  transporting
municipal	waste and/or source-separate recyclables in the Township.	The Township shall have forty-five (45) calendar
days to review any application and take approval or denial
action. If the Township fails to take action within forty-five (45) days, the application will be deemed to be approved.

E.	The license fee per waste hauling company, shall be set by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township on an annual basis. All licenses are nontransferable and shall be issued for a period of one (1) calendar year. There shall be no reduction or prorated fee for any license issued during a calendar year.

F.	The Waste Flow Control License application form, which will be supplied by the Township, shall set forth minimum information required to establish the applicant's qua·lifications for a license to collect and transport municipal waste and/or source-separated recyclables, including, but. not limited to:

(1)	Name and mailing address of the applicant.

(2)	Name and telephone number of contract person.

(3)	List of all collection vehicles to be covered under the license including, as a minimum the following information for each vehicle: identification information for each vehicle (such as vehicle license number, vehicle registration number, and company identification  number); date and location of most recent vehicle inspection; and hauling capacity of the vehicle.

(4)	Type of municipal waste or source-separated recyclable material to be collected and transported.
 






(5)	Certificate(s) of insurance must accompany the application form as evidenced that the applicant has valid liability, automobile and workmen's compensation insurance in the minimum amounts established and required by separate resolution of the governing body of the municipality.

G.	No new license or license renewal shall be approved and issued to any person who fails to satisfy the minimum standards and  requirements of this Ordinance or is in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance.

H.	All licensed collectors or licensed waste haulers are also subject to, as a condition of licensing, the provisions of Sections 3 and 7 of this Ordinance.

I.	All licensed collectors or waste haulers shall meet the requirements of Act 97, Act 101, the Bucks County Municipal Waste Management Plan, all DER rules and regulations (25 Pa. Code Chapter 285) and any applicable Bucks County Department of Health regulations regarding storage, collection and transportation of municipal waste and source-separated recyclable materials including provisions for proper labeling of collection and transfer vehicles.

SECTION 7 - REPORTING REQUIREMENTS

A.	All licensed collectors and licensed waste haulers shall promptly report any significant changes in the collection vehicles or equipment covered under the license and any changes in insurance coverage to the Township.

B.	All licensed collectors and licensed waste haulers shall maintain current, up-to-date records of the collected municipal waste and/or source separated recyclable material within the Township of Haycock. Such records and collected volume reports shall be subject to review by and made available to the Township or its authorized agents upon written request.

C.	All licensed collectors and licensed waste haulers operating within the Township of Haycock shall participate in the Bucks County Municipal Waste Documentation Program. Said program shall be developed and put into operation by
 





the County for the purpose of documenting  the  origin  of municipal waste and source-separated  recyclable  material  and the  ultimate  disposal  point  of   said  waste  and  ri:lcyclables. As part of the program, each licensed collector and  licensed waste  hauler  shall  prepare  and  submit  a  semiannual   report to  the  Township   of   Haycock.    The  report  for  the  first  half of  the   year  (January  through   June).  shall  be   submitted  on or  before  July  31  and  the   report  for  the   second   half   of each year (July through December)  shall  be  submitted  by January 31  of  the  following  year.  At  a  minimum,  the following  information  shall be  included  in  each  report:

( 1) Total weight of municipal waste and source­ separated  recyclable  materials  collected  from  all  sources within the Township during each  month  of  reporting  period; and

( 2)  Name  of  each  processing   and/or   disposal facility  used  during  the   reporting  period   and  total  weight of  municipal  waste  and/or   source-separated   recyclable materials   delivered   to    each    facility   during    each   month of   the  reporting  period.

	( 3)	Any	other	information	determined	to	be
necessary	during	the	development	and	implementation	of
the Bucks  County Municipal  Waste  Documentation  Program.

D. All . semiannual  reports  submitted  to  the  Township from  licensed  collectors   and   licensed   waste   haulers   shall be   submitted  ·by  the  Township  to  the  County  by  August   31
(covering	January	through	June)	and	by	February	2 8	of	the
following year	(covering July  through	December).	

SECTION 8 - PENALTIES

A.	Any		person		who		violates	any		provision		of	this. Ordinance		shall,		upon	conviction		at		a	summary	proceeding, be	sentenced	to		pay		a		fine	to	the	use	of	the		Township	of not	less	than		five  hundred		dollars	($500.00)	nor	more	than one		thousand		dollars		($1,000.00)		together	with	the	costs of	prosecution,	or		be	imprisoned	for		a	period		of		not	more than	thirty	(30)	days,	or		both.			Each	day		of		violation shall  be  considered  as  a  separate  offense.
 





 
B.
at	any
suspend or wast;e
 

The Township of Haycock shall have the right time, and without refund of any license fee, to or revoke the license of any licensed collector hauler for any of the following causes:

(1)	Falsification	or	misrepresentation	of	any
 
statements in any license application;

 
(2)	Lapse insurance coverages;
 
or	cancellation	of	any	required
 


(3)	Collection and/or transportation of any municipal waste  or  source-separated  recyclable material in a careless or negligent manner or any other manner that is not in compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance, Bucks County Department of Health regulations, and/or any applicable federal, state or local regulations.

( 4) Transportation and disposal of any municipal waste or source-separated recyclable material collected within the Township to any site that is not a designated facility in the Bucks County Municipal Waste Management Plan or that is not properly permitted by the Pennsylvania DER;

 
(5)	Failure	to	dispose	of source-separated	recyclables	at	the in the license application; and
 
municipal	waste	or facility(ies)	stated
 

 

(6)	.Violation	of	any	part	of any	other	applicable	County		or	municipal Bucks	County	Municipal		Waste	Management applicable Pennsylvania laws or regulations.

SECTION 9 - INJUNCTIVE POWERS
 
this	Ordinance, ordinances,		the Plan,		or	any
 

The Township of Haycock may petition the Bucks County Court of Common Pleas for an injunction, either mandatory or prohibitive, in order to enforce any of the provisions of this Ordinance.

SECTION 10 - SEVERABILITY

In the event that any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance, or any part thereof, shall be declared  illegal,  invalid  or  unconstitutional for any reason,. the remaining provisions of this Ordinance shall not be affected, impaired or invalidated by such action.
 





SECTION 11 - CONFLICT

Any ordinances or any parts of any ordinances which confli9t with this Ordinance are hereby repealed insofar as the same is specifically inconsistent with this Ordinance.

SECTION 12 - EFFECTIVE DATE

 
This Ordinance	shall take effect	on the 1st January	, A.D., 19 92.
 
day of
 

ORDAINED AND ENACTED thics	/tf t!f  day of f)eccm 1 iJGlL
A.D., 1991.











Attest:


Secretary
 
NOTICE	is hereby	given that the Board	of Superviscr13 of Haycock Township will consider for adoption the following
!!rdinance at their regular	meeting 9n  May 18, 1992 at 8:00
P.M.	at the Township Building, 640_ Harrisbur.g School Road,
Quakertown,	PA.	All	interested	parties	are	invited	to attend.


ORDINANCE NO.	 	


AN ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF WATER CONSERVATION REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL NEW STRUCTURES WITHIN HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP.

BE IT ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, and it is hereby enacted and ordained by the authority of same:


Section 1.	Definitions_

The	following	words,	terms,	and	phrases	used	in	this ordinance shall be defined and construed as follows:

A.	"Business" shall include commercial, industrial, and professional activity.

B.	"Consumer" shall ·include a person, partnership, association	or corporation,  and  shall  mean  anyone to whom water is supplied by the Authority, whether as owner or tenant.

c.	"Property" shall ·mean the following:

1.	a	building	or	enclosure	occupied	as	a	single dwelling unit or business;
2.	a	combination	of	buildings	in	common		enclosure occupied as a single dwelling or business;	.
3.	one side of a double house with a solid vertical partition wall occupied as a single dwelling unit;
4.	each	dwelling	unit,	business,	or	profession	in
addition	to	the	first	dwelling	unit,	business,	or
profession	occupying	the	same ·. building	or	enclosure,
regardless	of	whether	or not	any	additional	plumbing
facilities	are existing with respect to such dwelling
units, businesses, or professions	in addition to those
installed	or	existing	in	the	first	year	there	of;
provided, however, that during the first year following
the date upon which newly constructed or reconstructed
commonly	owned	multiple	dwelling,	business,	or
professional	unit	in addition	to the first	such unit
shall be	considered	as property	for purposes	of	this
Ordinance	only	upon	its	having	been	rented	for
occupancy.	Upon	the	expiration	of	such	first	year,
such	additional	dwelling,	business	or	professional
unit	shall	be	considered	a	proper±y	hereunder,
regardless of whether or not it has been so rented.
 





D. ;"New Construction" shall mean construction pursuant to a valid building permit issued subsequent to date of enactment hereof.

Section 2'"	Water  Conservation  Requirements

 
Water saving fixtures and devices all new constructio'n regardless of public pursuant to the following specifications:
 

shall	be	required	in or private water supply
 

A.	Water closets operated by flush tanks.


Water closets and .associated flushing mechanisms shall not exceed an average maximum volume of one and sixth tenth gallons per flushing cycle when tested in accordance with  a  hydraulic  performance  requirements of ANSI All2.91.2m and ANSI All2.19.6m.

B.	Urinals and Associates Flushing Mechanisims

Urinal water consumption shall not exceed an average of	1.5 gallons per flush cycle over a range of· test pressures from 20 to 80 psi. The fixtures shall perform in accordance with the test requirements of the ANSI Al22.19.2M and ANSI All2.19.6M.

C.	Special Performance Equipment

The performance standards of Section two shall not apply to fixtures and fittings such as emergency showers, aspirator faucets,a nd blowout fixtures that, in order to perform a specialized function, cannot meet the specified standards.



D.	Showerheads

Showerhead discharge rates shall not exceed 3 gallons of water per minute when tested in accordance with ANSI All2.18.lm.

E.	Sink Faucets

1.	Kitchen sink faucet discharge rates shall not exceed 3 gallons of water per minute over a range of test pressure from twenty (20 l to ·eighty (80) psig. The fixture shall perform in accordance with the test requirements cited in the ANSI 112.18.lm Finished Rough Brass Plumbing Fixture Fittings standard.


-2-
 



2.	Residential	lavatory		sink	faucet discharge	rates sJ;.rall not exceed		3	gallons		of water per minute		over a range of test pressures			from twenty	(20 l		to eighty ( B 0 l	psig.	The		fixture	shall perform	in	accordance with the test requirements cited in the ANSI 112 .18. lrn Finished Rough Brass Plumbing Fixture Fittings standard.


Section 3.	Penalty

The provisions of this Ordinance are declared to be for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Township and persons violating  any provisions,  upon conviction before any District Justice of Bucks County., shall be fined the sum of Three Hundred ($300.00) Dollars and costs. Each day during which such violation of any pr.ovisions shall continue, shall be deemed to be a  separate offense.

Section 4.	Severability

If	any	provision,		sentence,			clause,		section	or	part		of this	Ordinance,		or	the		application		of		any	provision		hereof, is	for	any	reason	found	to	be		unconstitutional,		illegal. or invalid,		such	unconstitutionality,			illegality	or			invalidity shall		not		affect		or	impair		any		of		the		remaining		provisions, sentences,		clauses,	sections		or	parts	of	this	Ordinance.		It is	hereby		declared	as		the			intend		of	the	Township		that	this· Ordinance		would		have		been		enacted		had		such	unconstitutional, illegal or invalid provision,		sentence, clause, section or part hereof not been included.

Section 5.	Repealer
 

All	Ordinances	or inconsistent	herewith, absolutely.
 

parts be	and
 

of the
 

ordinances same	are
 

in	conflict	or hereby	repealed
 

Section 6.	Effective Date

This Ordinance is hereby declared to be urgent for the preservation of the peace, health and comfort of the people of the Township and shall take effect and be enforced five (5 l days after it is enacted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township.


•





-3-
 
•






 
SO	ORDAINED
of	11-'l
 
AND	ENACTED	into
I  A.D. I	1992.
 
ordinance	this
 
day
 

 










'/(.fif  ,,r{,.(..A.-j  }J/'/, ti:<-.: 	
Townshii:0"secre
 
HA¥COCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS

GRABOWSKI, EBERLE, RICE & SCAFIDI
Gae Sea fi _Fi	e hr--tSHe	e e e,,_	­
P. O. Box 192
Perkasie, PA	18944
 










































-4-
•
 
Hayl/37	JBR:bjf	9/16/92
--4::













ORDINANCE NO. (, (


AN  ORDINANCE  OF  HAYCOCK   TOWNSHIP   A.\IENDING ITS   EMPLOYEE   PENSION   PLAN    ORDINANCE; PROVIDING     FOR     THE     PAYMENT     OF      PENSION FUND    EXPENSES


The Haycock	'rownship Board of Supervisors hereby ordains as follows:

ARTICLE I

Section	10	of	Ordinance	No.	51	is	hereby	revised	as follows:


10.00 The expense of administering  this pension fund program,  including  compensation  of any actuary, any custodian of the fund and any other charges or expenses related thereto, exclusive of the payment of pensions, shall be paid out of the nonuniformed employees pension fund. In addition to current administration expenses, all prior admini­ stration expenses of the pension fund from January 1, 1986 to the present shall be paid out of the nonuniformed employees pension fund.

ARTICLE II

Should any section or any provision of this Ordinance be declared by any Court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, illegal or unconstitutional, such decision shall have no effect on the validity of this Ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof.

ARTICLE III

Any ordinance or resolution or part of any ordinance or resolution inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
 
. .
.•







 
ARTICLE IV

The	effective
.;:·:.- / ; <"-"L	I 9
 



date
, 1992.
 



of	this	Ordinance
 



shall	be
 

 

SO	ORDAINED	this
1992.
 

day
 
,
of	·<...:... :.-Z:/)0
 

A.	D.,
 


HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
-i.	\  .	. ..
 
Hay2/10	JBR:bjf	10/7/92









ORDINANCE NO. 6.5'.


AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK REQUIRING LANDLORDS TO FILE REPORTS LISTING ALL RENTAL OR RENTABLE UNITS, TENANTS OR OCCUPIERS THEREOF, AND ANY SUBSEQUENT CHANGE THEREIN; ESTABLISHING THE DUTIES OF THE TOWNSHIP SECRETARY; PROVIDING FOR DEFINITIONS, INTERPRETA­ TIONS AND THE PURPOSES HEREOF; AND PRESCRIBING PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION


The Township of Haycock hereby ordains:

SECTION 1 - Purposes

This Ordinance is enacted to provide for the uniform and equitable distribution of the tax levies in the Township of ·Haycock and upon the inhabitants thereof and to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Township of Haycock.-

SECTION 2 - Definitions and Interpretation

As used in this Ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:

 
Business Unit - A parcel of real estate, with improvements	located	thereon	utilized	by	any persons for any commercial activity or purpose.
 
or without person	or
 

Dwelling	Unit		One		or	more	rooms	used		for	living and		sleeping	purposes		arranged	for	occupancy	by	one	(1) family or by one . (1) or more persons, or a parcel of real estate, with or without improvements located thereon. utilized by	any	person		or	persons	for ·any residential	activity		or purpose.

	Landlord	- A	lessor, or person	who	acts as agent for
the	lessor,	of	any	parcel	of	real	estate	located	in	the
Township	of	Haycock, ·or a	lessor,	or	person	who	acts	as
agent	for	the	lessor,	of	any	improvements	on real estate or any building located in the Township of Haycock.

 
Person	Any	individual,	partnership, firm or corporation.
 
association,
 




Tenant - A person who has the use, either by himself or with others, of a dwelling unit or a business unit owned by a person other than himself, for a period exceeding thirty (30) days.  The foregoing thirty  (30) day period of use 'need not be actual or continuous use provided that the person has the legal right to use the dwelling unit or business unit for the stated time period.

SECTION 3 - Reports by Landlords

Within thirty (30) days from the effective date of this Ordinance, each landlord shall submit to the Township Secretary, a report form supplied by the Township Secretary, which includes the following information:

 
A.	List	of	the	dwelling	units owned by the landlord, located within the limits, whether occupied or not occupied;
 
and	business	units Township of Haycock
 

 




unit;
 
B.	Address of each dwelling unit and business unit;

c.	Brief description of each dwelling unit or business


D.	Whether	or	not	said	dwelling	unit	or	business
 
unit is inhabited or utilized by tenants;

E.	Names	of	the	tenant	or	tenants	utilizing	the aforementioned dwelling unit or business unit, if any;

 
F.	Permanent address of the tenant utilizing the aforementioned dwelling unit unit if different from subsection B. above.
 
or		tenants or	business
 

SECTION 4 - Reports by Persons Upon Becoming Landlords

After the effective date of this Ordinance, any person who becomes a landlord of any parcel of real estate or any improvements on real estate or building located in the Township of Haycock by agreement of sale, by deed, or by any other means, shall, within thirty (30) days thereafter,· report to the Township Secretary the information and data set forth in Section 3 above, and on forms to be provided by the Township Secretary.
 




SECTION 5 - Reports of Changes in Use or Occupancy

After the effective date of this  Ordinance,  each  and every landlord of property within the Township  of  Haycock shall  r.eport  to  the   Township   Secretary  on   a   report   form to  be  supplied  by  the  Township· Secretary,  any  change  in the use or occupancy of any dwelling unit  or  business  unit owned by  such  landlord.  The  reported  change  shall  include the  name  or   names   of   new   tenants   of   such  dwelling  unit or business  unit,  the  date  when  such  change  was  effected, and  the   forwarding   address   of   the   old   tenant   or   tenants if  known.  A  landlord  of  a  hotel,  inn  or  boarding   house shall  not  be  required  to  report  a   person   as   a   "tenant" until  that  person  has  resided  in  such   landlord's establishment   for   a   period    exceeding   thirty    (30)    days. In  the  event  that  a  dwelling  unit   or   business   unit   was used or utilized by a tenant and then becomes vacant, this change  shall  also · be  reported  to  the  Township   Secretary. All  reports  required  by  this  Section   shall  be  made   within ten  (10)   days   after   a   landlord   has   knowledge   that   such a unit has had a change in occupancy or has become vacant.

SECTION 6 - Duties of the Township Secretary

The Township Secretary, under the authority of this Ordinance,   shall:

A.	Maintain on file at  the  Township  office,  the names of the landlords owning dwelling units  and  business units  in  the  Township  of   Haycock,   said   list  to   include the  names  of  the  current  tenants   of   said   dwelling   units and  business  units;

B.	Maintain  a  supply   of   forms   for   landlords   to   use in  making   reports   to   the   Township   Secretary   as   required by  Sections  3,  4  and  5  of  this  Ordinance;

 
C.	Notify the of the address and business  unit  that  is
 
Fire	Chief of the Township of Haycock description	of any dwelling unit or vacant,	unoccupied  and  not  in use.
 

SECTION 7 - Penalties; Remedies

 
A. Any person who shall violate any Ordinance  shall,  upon  conviction  before   a be   sentenced   to  pay   a   fine  of   not  more
 
provision of this District Justice, than  six hundred
 
dollars	($600.00)	together	with	the	costs
 
of	prosecution,
 




or be imprisoned for a period of not more than thirty (3 O) days	or both. Each day of violation shall be considered as a separate offense.

B.' Haycock Township may petition  the  Bucks  County Court of Common Pleas for an injunction, either mandatory o·r prohibitive, in order to enforce any of the provisions of this Ordinance.

SECTION 8 - Repealer

All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. The following ordinances or parts thereof are specifically repealed:

Ordinance No. 49

SECTION 9 - Severability

If any sentence, clause, section, or part of this Ordinance is for any reason found to be unconstitutional,· illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this Ordinance. It is hereby declared as the intent of the Township of Haycock that this Ordinance would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.

SECTION 10 - Effective Date

This Ordinance shall become effective five (5) days after adoption.

ENACTED and ORDAINED this	•
A.D., 1992.


HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS




,.
 





 





















NOTICE
NOTICE IS HEREBY GI­
VEN that the Board ol Supervis_ors of· Haycock Township. will cons_ider the·
- adoptiQn>  9f    an    cuµinance,
_th-0-suinitlar;i of which is set
fPrth below; at their regular
'*1.eeting   on  October   19,
}992 at 8:00 P.M. at the
Haycock Township Build­ ong, 640 Harrisburg School Road, · Quakertown, Hay­ cock   Township,   Bucks
--- _ .County, PA 18951. Copies
·of the full text of the Ord
·,nance are .available for in­
spection  at- the  Township
B.uildin·g during normal bus­
iness hours,- the. Bucks County !,aw Library, Doy­ lestown,  PA, the office of
- he _.-solicitor   and  the
-n p per - _
' . OR.DJNANCE NO.
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP  .OF  HAY­ COCK REQUIRING lAND­ lORD5  TO  FILE   RE­ POflTS .LISTING ALI. RE- . NTAL  OR. RENTABLE
. UNITS; l'ENJ\NTS OR dC­
C.UPl'Ef,!S THEREOF, AND AN1f' SUBSEQUENT
.CHANGE THEREIN;  ES­
TABLISHING THE DU­ TIES OF THE TOWNSHIP SECRETARY; PROVID­ ING FOR DEFINITIONS,
·1NTERPRETATIONS  AND
THE PURPOSES HE­ REOF; AND PRESCRIB­ ING PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION
 
Legals

The  Township   of  Hay­
. cock  hereby  ordains:
SECTION 1 • Purposes This Ordinance Is enacted to provide- for the uniform and equitable distribution of
.t	he tax levies in the Town-
. $hip of Haycock and upon
the Inhabitants thereof and
to promote the health, safety, and general welfare 'of· the inhabitants of the Township .o!· Haycock.
SECTION 2 • DeHnl!lons and lnlarpret&tlon This section sets forth ·defini­ tions· of Business Unit, Dwelling   Unit,  Landlord,
Person and Tenant as used throughout the Ordinance.
SECTION 3 • Reports by Landlords ThiS section r&­ quires each landlord to sub­ mit specific information to the Township upon request pertaining to dwelling units, buSiness units arld tenants.
SECTION 4 • Reports by Persons Upon Becoming Ulndlords This section re­ quires all new landlords to 90mply Witll the Ordinance within thirty (30) days of becoming a landlord.
SECTION 5 • Reports of C anges ·in Use or Occu­ pancy. This  section  re- quires all landlords lo report changes in use or occu- :
. Pancy of any dwelling unit ·
or  business· unit  and  ex­
empts landlords. of hotels, inns or boarding houses in certain situalions from re­ porting re((uir ments.
SECTION 6 • Dulles of the Townshlp Secret•!Y This section sets f rth. the dl,lties of the Township Secretary
under  the  Ordinance.
SECTION 7 • Penalilfes; Remedies This ·section
. provides for a six hundred
dollar ($600.00) fine for.via-,
·	lation·of the OrdinanCe and
authorizes the TownShip to enforce the Ordinance through a petition to the Bucks County Court ol Common Pleas.
SECTION a - Repeater SECTION 9 - Severability SECTION 10 • Effective Date  !
 
Legals

HAYCOCK  TOWNSHIP BOARD  OF  SUPERVISORS
John B. Rice," Esquire .
GRAWBOWSKI,  EBERLI RICE  &  SCAFIDI
One South· Fifth Slreet
P.O.	Box  192
Perkasie,  PA  18944
October  9,  1992
 
- l O	.JO.t\/ U J L	l.U/l./':JL.
 


NOTICE
 
NOTICE	IS	HEREBY	GIVEN	that	the	Board	of	Supervisors
of Haycock Township will consider for adoption the following ordinance at their regular meeting on November 16 1992 at 8:00 P.M. at the Haycock Township Building, 640 Harrisburg school  Road,  Quakertown,  Haycock  Township,  Bucks  County,
PA 18951.
ORDINANCE NO. G 1


AN ORDINANCE SETTING THE SPEED LIMIT FOR MOTOR VEHICLES ON ROODENBOSH ROAD, FROM OLD BETHLEHEM ROAD TO MISSION ROAD
IN HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP


Preamble

The Haycock Township Board of Supervisors, upon the recommendation of the Township Engineer and the Township Roadmaster, and pursuant to appropriate engineering and traffic studies, hereby enacts and ordains as follows:

ARTICLE I

Words and phrases when used in this Ordinance shall have the meaning ascribed to them in the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, 1976, June 17, P.L. 162, Act No. 81, as amended.

ARTICLE  I.I

It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle in excess of thirty (30) miles per hour on Raudenbush Road (T-467), from its intersection with Old Bethlehem Road to Mission Road (T-404) in Haycock Township.

ARTICLE III

 

The		proper	authorities	of	the		Township to erect	official		siqns establishing	the speed Road at thirty	(30) miles per hour, and to do so with the provisions of the Vehicle Code.
 

are directed on Raudenbush in conformity
 

ARTICLE IV

Any person who violates any provision of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of Thirty­ Five Dollars ($35.00). Any person exceeding the maximum speed limit by more than five (5) miles per hour shall pay an additional fine of •rwo Dollars ($2.00) per mile for each mile in excess of five (5) miles per hour over the maximum speed limit.
 




 
ARTICLE V

All ordinances, thereof are repealed this Ordinance.
 



parts	of insofar		as
 



ordinances,	and	amendments they	are	inconsistent	with
 

ARTICLE VI

This	Ordinance	shall	become	effective	five	(5) days after final enactment.
ORDAINED	and	ENACTED	this	 
A.O	., 1992.


HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS

GRABOWSKI, EBERLE, RICE & SCAFIDI
one South Fifth Street
Perkasie, PA	18944

 
 
..----··----. ·--:-·---.
0






,	ORDINANCE NO.  	



AN ORDINANCE OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP, BUCKS COtJNTY 1  PENNSYLVANIA, MAINTAINING A STOP SIGN AT THE MAGNOLIA DRIVE APPROACH TO THE INTERSECTION OF MAGNOLIA DRIVE AND DOGWOOD LANE 1  AND ESTABLISHING A STOP SIGN AT THE SOUTHWESTBOUNO APPROACH TO THE THREE•WAY INTERSECTION ON CAMP TRAIL ROAD IMMEDIATELY NORTHWEST OF ROUTE 563.

BACKGROUND

1.	The Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code authorizes Townships of the Second Class to erect and maintain traffic signs wherever deemed necessary for the protection of the traveling public.
2.	c. Robert Wynn Associates, Inc., Township Engineers, have

performed an engineering study of:

a.	Intersection of Magnolia Drive and Dogwood Lane, a recently constructed cul-de-sac in the Stevens subdivision. The Township Engineer has recommended that a stop sign should be maintained on the Magnolia Drive approach to the intersection. A copy of the engineering study of c. Robert Wynn Associates, !nc., is attached to this Ordinance as Exhibit "A" 1 and
b.	Camp Trail Road intersection. The Township Engineer has recommended that a stop sign should be installed at the southwestbound approach to the three-way intersection located immediately northwest of Route 563. A copy of the engineering
study of c. Robert Wynn Associates, Inc., is attached to this

Ordinance as Exhibit A."

3.	The Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township has determined that it is in the interest of public safety to maintain a stop sign at the Magnolia Drive approach to the intersection of Magnolia Drive and Dogwood Lane and to install a
 
-.:ruN-::2 1. -93	MON	13:2:::;	0	------- ------
t
'';



stop siqn at the southwestbound approach to the three-way intersection on Camp Trail Road located immediately northwest of Route 563.
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED }!.ND ENACTED as an Ordinance of

the  ownship of Haycock, County of sucks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as follows:
Section l. A stop sign shall be maintained at the Magnolia Drive approach to the intersection of Magnolia Drive and Dogwood Lane.
Section 2. A stop sign shall be installed at the southwestbound approach to the three-way intersection on Camp Trail Road located immediatly northwest of Route 563.
Section 3. The Township Roadmaster is directed to acquire and post the appropriate stop siqns in accordance with the regulations of 'the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation as soon as possible.
Section 4. Any person violating either Section l or Section

2  of  this Ordinance shall be subject to the penalties prescri.bed in Section 6502 of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code as same may from time to time be amended.
Section s. Any person violating either Section 1 or Section

2   of this Ordinance shall be subject to a fine of not less than

$50.00 and not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment not exceeding 90

days.

Section 6. This Ordinance shall take effect five (5) days after the date of its enactment.
 
- - - - - - - - -- - - - - - .,,,	----------
 
13:2!4	0
 
F" .. e-;._- ------
 






RESOLVED AND ENACTED as an Ordinance this	/9	day  of
·}nt£;/f	,  1993  by  the  soa:rd  of   Supervisors of   Haycock

Township.
 



ATTEST:
 

HAYCOC TOWNSHIP BOARD
 

 


Nancy Y  · is ,	(
Township secreta:i:y
 

\ a.-c4-f<-< r' <J\ t'.S 9 u­ athleen M. Babb ChairpeJ:"son
 




 
 
II	.
l•/'}5 13:29 pm ZONORD!N.AMD  HT-JSL-95-5


ORDINANCE NO.	7


AN ORDINANCE BY THE BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP AMENDING .THE
HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE


BACKGROUND

A.	On or about September 26, 1994, the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township adopted a new Zoning Ordinance amending Haycock Township Zoning Ordinance of 1975.
B.	In furtherance of the purposes and community development

goals and objectives recited at Section 102 and 105 of the Amended Zoning Ordinance and specifically the objectives set forth at Section
105.c.	the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township has determined that the following amendments to the Zoning Ordinance will promote,_the purposes and community development objectives stated therein.
IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township upon recommendation by the Haycock Township Planning Commission and the Bucks County Planning Commission that various sections of the Haycock Township Zoning Ordinance are hereby amended as follows:
1.	Section 204.a. Lot Area is amended to delete the sentence,

"In addition, the minimum lot area does not include any area designated as open space under requirements of Section 501, Site Capacity Calculations and Section 502 Table of Performance Standards."
2.	Section 219 Density is amended to replace the words "net buildable site area" with the words "base site area."
3.	Section 239 Impervious Surface Ratio is amended to replace

the words "net buildable site area" with the words "base site area."
 




4.	Section 270 Net Buildable Site Area is amended to read:

"The net buildable site area is the area of the site which may be altered, disturbed or regraded for development purposes.	The net buildable site area may contain buildings, roads, parking areas, sewage systems and stormwater management facilities.	The net buildable site area shall not contain required open space, recreation areas and natural resource protection areas."
5.	Section 403 Table of Use Regulations is amended as applied to Use A4 Forestry, as follows:
 

RP	RA	RD
p	p	p
 

FC	VC-1 SRC SRL SRM
p	N	p	p	p
 

SRH
p
 

VC-2 URL
N	p
 

PC	cc
p	p
 

SC	PI
p	p
 

EXT
p
 


6.	Section 501 Site Capacity Calculations is amended so that the introductory paragraph is preceded by the words, "Except for Use Bl. Single-Family Detached."
7.	Section 501.g. is amended to replace this subsection with, "g.	Reserved" .
8.	Section 501.h. is amended to replace the words "Unusable Land" with the words "Required Open Space."
9.	Section 501.i. Number of Dwelling Units is amended to replace the words "Net Buil·dable Site Area" with the words 11 Ba;;2  Site Area."
10.	Section 501.j. Impervious Surfaces is amended to replace the words "New Buildable Site Area" with the words "Base Site Area."








2
 




11.	Section 502 Table of Performance Standards is amended to delete the Maximum Density DU/AC performance standards for the B1- Single Family Detached uses for th following districts:



12.	Section 1108 Governing Body:  Powers and Duties - Conditional Uses is amended to delete subsection d. (4)(c) Use A4 Forestry and replace it with d. (4)(ci Reserved.
 
This Ordinance shall

ENACTED AND ORDAINED

1995. ATTEST:
 
be effective  five  (5) days after enactment. this  $hi	day of ,J";_,oro=-fot<JM.?<..	,



HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
 



 
 		BY:
 


EARL D. WINTERS, Chairman
 


























3
 

 

10/18/95 2:49 pm C.\BLETV.ORD JSL#9S-S
.i
'

,-,,..,
ORDINANCE  NO.	/ .:5



AN  ORDINANCE  OF TI1E TOWNSHIP  OF HAYCOCK.,
BUCKS COUNTY, PE..1\INSYLVANIA RENEWING TI'!E FRAN01ISE TO SERVTCE ELECTRIC  CABLE 1V, INC., ITS SUCCESSORS A.l\'D ASSIGNS, TO OWN, OPERATE At."l";J M.'\..'NTAlN A CABLE TELEVISION IN
THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, SETTING FORTH CGNGffiONS.
ACCOMPANYING  THE GRANT OF SAID RENE'NAL  OF FRANCHI.S:E
.A.? D PROVIDING FOR IBE REGL'I.ATION AND USE OF SA.TD SYS!;.c.M
A1'11D FOR THE PAYMENT OF CEH.TAIN FEES AND PROVIDING PENALTIES  FOR VIOLATION  THEREOF




WHEHF..AS,  Ordinance  No. 38-3,  duly enacred on November  5,  1980 ("Francms Ordinance"!. the Board of Supervisors of Haycock To1<1m.ship ("Township") granred a lr.:r:chise  to  Se1vice  Elecrric Cable TV,  Inc.1   its successors  and assigns  ("Company2')  to own, operare and m3intain a cable television system in the Town.ship  (the "Franchise"); and
WHEREAS. pursuant to the Franchise Ordinance, the term of the Franr.hise is fifteen (15) ::ears and, therefore, iris due ro expire on November 4, 1995; and
VvE!'.. . S crion 3 of the I'ranchise Ordinance provides that the Franchise may . be renewed for reas>lnable terms on such additional terms and conditions as may be specified by the Tovmship; and
\A.'HEREAS, Tmvnship, by this enacrme.'lr. has determined to renew the te= of the Franchise  for an additional period oi five (S)  years subject to  the condiricns ser forrl: herei.'l;
NOY'/ THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACDill  by the Board of

Supervisors of Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania,  as follows:
 





























ii
!,,/ '! '
 
I



1.	Renewal of Franchise.  The Franchise awarded to Service Electric Cable TV, Inc. is hereby renewed and extended for a period of five (5) years from the dare of this enactment  ("Renewal Term") after which time it shall terminate unless renewed for an additional period or periods.
2.	Continuation of Previous Franchise Ordinance.  Except as modified hereby, or Qy such rules, regulations,  ordinances er laws as may hereafter be lawfully enacted, the Franchise shall continue to be and remain subject to all of the terms and provisions of the Franchise Ordinance duly adopted on November  5, 1980.
3.	Franchise Fee.  During the Renewal Term, Company shall pay ro the Township during each year of operation a franchise fee equal to three percem  (3%) of the gross subscriber revenue received  by the Company for basic and/or standard cable television services rendered to customers located within the Township.   (Basic and/o:
 
1	standard   cable   television   services   shall  be  those   services   described   by   Company  in

11
i'	offering  circulars,  cable TV sign-up  cards,  and similar  materials  published,  from rime  to
I
!
time, by the Company.

The Franchise Fee may, from time to time, be revised in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Cornpetitirm Act of 1992 ("Acr'') as same may from time to time be amended and the Rules and Regulations of the t'ederal Communications Commission, provided, however, that in no event shall the Franchise Fee be less tlian three percent (3%) of the revenues derived from basic and/or standard television service.

2
 
ii	I
I I



4.	Standards  of  Service.

a.	The Company shall render efficient service, make repairs prompt!;',

and inter:;:i1pr service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible.  Such

imern.iprio:i.s, insofar as possible, shall be preceded  by notice  and shall occur during	I
periods of minimum use of the system.  Upon receipt of a complaint regarding the

quaiiry of service,  equipment  malfum:rions,  and similar matters,  rhe  Company shall
promptly i:;vestigate such complaint as  et fonh bebw.	I
b.	The Company ohall provide a publicly listed teleph:me number	I
:I	which sball be operated so thar complaints and requests  for repairs may be received  r''.1	I
!I	a twenty-four  (24)  hour  a day basis.   The Company shall respond  to service complaints
vdthin twenty-four (24} hours of its receipt.	I
c.	A cable subscriber shall not be responsible  for payment  for cable	I

television service for any period in excess of twenty-four (24) hours during which

service was not provided; provided that the complaint has been documented prior to ·he
onset of the twenty-four  (24) hour period.	I
5.	Cable Television  Servic .   Company  shall provide  the  basic,  stand;:;rd  and	I

premium c ;ble TV .<ervices listed on Etliibit "A" attached hereto or comparable cable service.  Aidirionally, Company shall provide as part of the basic caLle service, Philadelphia public television station Channel 12/WHYY.
6.	Legal Costs.  All expenses for legal services reasonably incurred by Township in connection with the grant of this Franchise, the adoption of this


3
 











Ordinance,  and proceedings  held in connection  therewith,  shall be reimbursed  to Tuv.'7!shi? by Comp::my.
7.	Sever-ability.

a.	If any section, subsection,  sentence, clause,  phrase  or portion  of this Crdinam:e is for any reasor.. held invali<l or unconstitutional by any Cou.."'T of competenr _iurisdiction,  such porrion s .all be deemed a separate, ciisr:inct and inde?ende t provision  and such holding shall nor  affect rhe validity of the rem2ining porti.cns  hereof.
b.	Should any provision  of this Franchise  be inconsistent  or at ViJriar:..ce with any rule, regulari:m O!' policy, in whole in the parr, oft.lie Fecierai Cornmu:nicaricns  Corrunission or any orher agency having jurisdiction,  such provision sl:a!i be invalid, bur :.he remaining ;irovisions hereof shall not be affected thereby.
Except as amended by this Ordinance,  all other terms and provision  or Ordimmce

38 ·B duly adopted November 5, 1980 shall remain in full force and effect.

ORD, INED AND ENACfED inro an Ordinance rhis. b (!,day of  /r)o1.1e1116t57e..

1995.

ATTEST:	TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK

 



/&.....--¥_,,_. m .
NANCY  id. YODIS,  ;,
Township Secretary
 
f:cvJ....	iJ--ZJ t-,,J/,cV=.
.E	Afu. D. WINTERS,  Chairman







4
 
 


:i
"


KATHLEEN M. BA.BB






Ni\T,-IANIEL S. OSTRO!'F














































5
 
ORDINANCE # 7 Y
 


£	.
'7!·;:;'.l!G-
 
AN ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR PENALTIES FOR FALSE J!!'lM:  ALARMS CAUSED BY FAULTY FIRE DETECTION, ALARM EQUIPMENT OR
NEGLIGENCE

TITLE

This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the "HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP FALSE ALARM ORDINANCE"
ARTICLE l:	DEFINITIONS

The following definition shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this Ordinance:

False Alarm - Any signal activated by an automatic protection device, any audible alarm or any other kind of direct or indirect signal given to which police, fire department or emergency response agencies respond which is not the result of an attempted illegal entry, burglary, intrusion, fire, medical or other similar emergency, excluding weather extremes and utility interruptions, which activates a protection device.

ARTICLE 2:	FALSE ALARMS PROHIBITED

It shall be unlawful for the property owner, lessee or any person occupying or otherwise on any premises within Haycock Township, to make or cause to be made, a false fire or security alarm, directly or indirectly to any fire department or emergency response agency responding to alarms within the Township, when the false alarm is caused by faulty detection or alarm equipment or by the negligence of said property owner, lessee or person.

ARTICLE 3:	FALSE ALARM SERVICE FEES

(a)	The status of an alarm is ta be determined by the police department, fire company, or other affected
agency, and the decision shall be final.

(b)	Upon notification of a false alarm, a written report shall be made within fourteen (14) days by the owner
or lessee to the affected emergency response agency and shall contain what steps have been taken to eliminate future false alarms.

(c)	Service fees for false alarms shall be assessed by the Township as follows:
 

1.	Third false alarm in any one calendar year shall be subject to a service fee not to exceed Fifty Dollars ($50.00)

2.	Fourth false alarm in any one calendar year shall be subject to a service fee not to exceed One Hundred Dollars ($100.00)

-	3.	Fifth and subsequent false alarms in any one calendar· year shall be subject to a service fee not to exceed Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00)

ARTICLE 4:	PENALTIES AND REMEDIES FOR VIOLATIONS

(a)	In the event a violation of this Ordinance occurs, in addition to such other remedies as may be available under existing law, the Township may institute an action in equity to prevent,
restrain, correct, abate or enjoin such violation.

(b)	Any person, whether as principal or agent, who violates this Ordinance or assists or abets its violation, shall upon conviction thereof, before any Magistrate, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than Fifty ($50.00) Dollars, nor more than Five Hundred ($500.00) Dollars, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of the payment of said fine and costs, shall be committed to the Bucks County Prison for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense, for which a summary conviction may be sought.

ARTICLE 5:	SEVERABILITY

The provisions of this Ordinance shall be severable, and if any provision hereof shall be declared
unconstitutional, illegai or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of
this Ordinance. It is hereby declared as a legislative intent of the Township that this ordinance would have been amended
as if such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid provision or provisions had not been included herein.

ARTICLE 6:	REPEALER

All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances conflicting or inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance hereby adopted are hereby repealed.

ARTICLE 7: EFFECTIVE DATE

This Ordinance shall become effective five (5) days after final enactment.	'
(2 )
 






ORDAINED AND ENACTED into an Ordinance at a regular meeting of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Haycock, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, this	..dJI.	day of
S--' 199&>.


Attest:







Nathaniel Ostroff







































( 3)
 
.'	 	

.,.i.








ORDINANCE NO.

AN ORDL."TANCE REGULATING THE OPENING OF DRIVEWAYS INTO ROADS OF TEE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCX AND THE RECONSTRUCTION AND IMPROVEMENTS OF TEE SAME, PROVIDING FOR THE OBT.ADi!NG OF PERMITS AND FEES, AND PROVIDING pENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.

THE EO .RD OF SUPERVISORS of the TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK,
hereby ENACTS AND ORDAINS as follows:

SECTION l...,_	The following words, when used in this ordinance, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this se-ctian.

(a)	The word "road" shall mean any public street, road, highway, or other public place located in the Township of Haycock and maintained by the	oard of Super-;isors of Haycock Township and established for the use of vehicles.
(bl The word "person" shall mean and include any natural person, partnership, firm, association or
corporation.
(c) The words "drainage structure" shall mean and
include collection boxes, culverts, pipes, pipe
inlets, pipe outlets, swales, trenches, ditches,
drainage beds, grates and prefabricated or
constructed trench drains, or any   other structure
used to facilitate drainage of water.

SECTION £.. It shall be unlawful for any person to open a driveway of any kind or to reconstruct or make any
improvement to an existing opening into any of the roads of the Township of Haycock without first securing·a permit therefore as hereinafter provided. Normal maintenance and repair of an existing driveway shall be exempt from the reauirements of this Ordinance provided the maintenance
or-repair does not alter drainage along the roadway.

SECTION ]_,_	Any person who shall desire to open a driveway or to reconstruct or make any  improvement to an existing opening into any road of the Township of Haycock shall make application ta the Haycock Township Zoning Officer in writing for a permit for that purpose. Such application shall set forth the name of the applicant and exact location of the proposed driveway to be opened, reconstructed, or improved.

SECTION	In the event that the Township Roadmaster or Township Engineer shall determine that a drainage structure(s) is (are) required to facilitate the flow of
water across any proposed driveway or to improve or allow the
 


2.

SECTION 4. (cont.) flow of water across any e.xisting driveway it shall be so noted upon the driveway permit. The permit	· shall state the type and size of drainage structure(s), if
any, reconunended by the Township Roedmaster or Township Engineer to be used in the construction, reconstruction, or improvement of the driveway and ·shall contain any other pertinent recommendations relating to materials, line, grade, length, width, depth, or configuration of drainage structure(s) to be used in the construction, reconstruction, or improvement of said driveway. Also to be noted on the permit shall be· recommendations regarding driveway end location, and removal of trees or other sight distance obstructions.

SECTION 2.,.  The size and type of the drainage structure, location of driveway end, and removal of sight distance obstructions shall be subject to approval of the Township Engineer.

SECTION .§_,_	Bituminous paving having a minimum thickness of
2 (two) inches shall be applied over a stone base having a
minimum thick.. ess of 6 inches in an area the full width of the driveway extending from the existing street line (cartway) and extending back to the edge of the ultimate right of way limit.

SECTION L	A p'erson opening a driveway or reconstructing or improving any existing driveway in Haycock Township shall do so in accordance with the recommendations set forth in the permit.

SECTION .a.,.	The fees in regard to this orainance shall be as follows:	New construction $25.00. Reconstruction or improvements to an existing driveway $10.00. Unless changed by resolution of the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors.

SECTION.!.,..	Violations  and penalties.

(a.) Any landowner or operator who violates any provision of this Ordinance is guilty of a sununary offense and upon conviction such land owner or operator shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 00
nor more than $500.00 for each separate offense and, in the default of the payment of such fine, a person shall be imprisoned for a period of thirty (30) days.

(b.) Each day of continued violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall constitute a separate offense.
 
.,·




3.


SECTrON 10. Repealer.

All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.


SECTION 11.	This Ordinance shall become effective five (5) days after adoption.


ENACTED	
AND	
ORDAINED	this	/ T	day	of /?cY<' 1<-.	,    1996.

Attest						
HAYCOCK  TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
                   irfmL4ft· N' A !1A£2  	

_h'V---JJIAI J
 
3/4/96 10:03 am  (mobhmamd.ord   jsl#96-5)



ORDINANCE NO.    7{,,



AN ORDINANCE AMENDING  TIIE·HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP ZONING  ORDINANCE TO PROVIDE A NEW ACCESSORY  USE: MOBILE HOME FOR QUAIJFYING FAMILY MEMBER AS A USE  PERMITfED  BY  RIGHT




BACKGROUND

A.	On or about September 26, 1994, the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township adopted a new Zoning Ordinance amending the Haycock Township Zoning Ordinance of 1975.
B.	In furtherance of the purposes and community development goals and objectives recited at Sections 102 and 105 of the Amended Zoning Ordinance and, specifically, the objectives of Section lOS(c), the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township has determined that the following amendment to the Zoning Ordinance will promote the purposes and community development objectives stated therein and will afford an opportunity for residents of the Township to provide suitable housing for family members as defined in Section La., hereof.
IT. IS HEREBY ORDAINED AND ENACfED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, upon recommendation  of the Haycock Township Planning Commission and the Bucks County Planning Commission that the Haycock Township Zoning Ordinance is hereby amended as follows:
 




1.	Add a new section, 404.H.(17) designated "Mobile Home for Qualifying Family Member" providing as follows:
"A free standing mobile home is permitted in addition to a primary residence on a property which otherwise meets the minimum lot requirements for a single family detached residence in the district in which it is located subject to the following conditions:

a.	The mobile home shall be occupied only by the parents, grandparents, or children of an owner of a property and the owner shall reside in the primary residence on the property.

b.	Only one (1) mobile home for qualifying family member shall be permitted on any one (1) property.

c.	The mobile home shall be no less than Four Hundred Eighty (480) square feet and no more than Eight Hundred (800) square feet in floor area.

d.	The mobile home shall be installed and located only to the side or rear of the principal residence and shall conform to the minimum side and rear yard requirements for principal structures in the zoning district.

e.	The provisions of all current municipal ordinances regulating mobile homes and regulations of the Bucks County Health Department shall be met.

f.	The area between ground level and the perimeter of the mobile home shall be enclosed by means of wood or aluminum skirting or other similar material.






2
 




g.	Each mobile home shall be placed on a permanent foundation of at least eight (8) poured concrete or masonry pillars set on a concrete base at least eight inches (8") thick. The pillars shall be spaced no more than ten feet (1O') apart with the end piers being no farther than five feet (5') from the ends of the unit.  The pillars shall be at least one foot by two feet (1'x2') in size and at least thirty-six inches (36") below grade. Each pillar shall have installed a tie-down ring to which the mobile home shall be secured.

h.	No permanent  fences, walls or other structures shall be installed that,may interfere with removal of the mobile home.

i.		Prior to the issuance of a use and occupancy permit, a certificate, in the form of an affidavit shall be presented to the Zoning Officer verifying that the occupant of the principal dwelling intends and will reside in the
principal dwelling and that a qualifying family
member as described above will occupy the mobile home for as long as both dwelling units are located on the property.  The mobile home shall be removed from the property within ninety (90) days after it is no longer occupied by a person who is a qualified family member as described herein.



2.	Section 403, Table of Use Regulations, is hereby amended to insert a new use, H-17, Mobile Home for Qualified Family Member, and the Table shall show this use designated as permitted in each of the. zoning districts designated in the Table of Use Regulations.·





3
 




3.	All other terms and provisions of the Amended Haycock Township Zoning Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.
ORDAINED and ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township on

this   3"-" ay of	,,._,k:.p,c;:, _,,.,,_,l.h!.-; 1996.
'
ATTEST:	BOARD  OF SUPERVISORS
HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP







Township Secretary




EARL WINTERS, Vice Chairman

 






















4
 
I  l/21/\l6   9:34  am    CABLETV.ORD     eb  Haycock   #100








ORDINANCE NO.	17



AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK,
BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA   NEWING THE FRANCHISE TO SERVICE ELECTRIC CABLE TV, INC., ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, TO OWN, OPERATE AND MAINTAIN A CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM IN THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, SETTING FORTH CONDITIONS ACCOMPANYING THE GRANT OF SAID RENEWAL OF FRANCHISE AND PROVIDING FOR THE REGULATION AND USE OF SAID SYSTEM AND FOR THE PAYMENT OF CERTAIN FEES AND PROVIDING
PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION THEREOF




WHEREAS, Ordinance No. 38-B, duly enacted on November 5, 1980 ("Franchise Ordinance"), the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township ("Township") granted a franchise to Service Electric Cable TV, Inc., its successors and assigns  ("Company") to own, operate and maintain a cable television  system in the Township (the "Franchise"); and
WHEREAS, pursuant to the Franchise Ordinance, the term of the Franchise is fifteen


(15)	years and, therefore,  it is due to expire on November 4, 1995; and

WHEREAS, Section 3 of the Franchise Ordinance provides that the Franchise may be renewed fot: reasonable terms on such additional terms and conditions as may be specified by the Township; and
WHEREAS, Township, by this enactment, has dete1mined to renew the te1m of the Franchise for an additional period  of fifteen (15) years subject to the conditions set forth herein;
NOW THEREFORE; BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of

Supervisors of Haycock Township, Bucks  County, Pennsylvania,  as follows:
 



I.	Renewal of Franchise.   Service Electric Cable TV, Inc. is hereby  a non- exclusive  franchise. renewing  and extending the franchise previously  granted for a period  of fifteen (15)-years from the date of this enactment ("Renewal Te1m") after which  time it shall terminate unless  renewed  for an additional period  or peiiods.
2.	Continuation of Previous  Franchise  Ordinance.   Except as modified  hereby, or by such mies, regulations,  ordinances or laws as may hereafter be lawfully  enacted, the Franchise shall continue to be and remain  subject to all of the terms and provisions  of the Franchise  Ordinance duly adopted  on November  5, 1980.
3.	Franchise  Fee.   Dming the Renewal Term, Company shall pay to the Township  during each year of operation a franchise fee equal to three percent  (3%) of the gross subsciiber revenue  received  by the Company for basic  and/or standard cable television services rendered  to customers  located  within  the Township.   (Basic and/or standard  cable television  services shall be those services descdbed  by  Company  in offedng  circulars,  cable TV sign-up cards. and .similar mate1ials  published. from time  to time, by the Company.
The Franchise Fee is payable for the pe1iod from November  1, 1995, through the date this Ordinance  is adopted, and is payable  dudng the entire Renewal Term.   In the event the franchise  is not renewed  at the expiration of the Renewal Term (or any subsequent Renewal Te1m)  and Service Electric Cable TV. Inc. continues to provide  cable television services within  the Township,  Company  shall continue to pay  the Franchise  Fee  descdbed herein  until such time  as a Renewal Franchise  Ordinance is adopted  or Company  no longer provides  such services in  the  Township.
 



The Franchise  Fee may, from time to time, be revised in accordance with the tenns and provisions of the Cable Television  Consumer Protection  and Competition  Act of 1992 ("Act") as same may from time to time be amended  and the Rules and Regulations  of the Federal  Communications  Commission,  provided,  however,  that in no event shall the Franchise Fee be less than three percent (3%) of the revenues derived from basic  and/or standard  television  service.
4.	Standards of Service.

a.	The Company  shall render efficient service, make  repairs  promptly,  and inte1TUpt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible.   Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded  by notice  and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system.   Upon  receipt of  a com plaint regarding  the quality of service, equipment malfunctions,  and similar matters,  the Company  shall promptly  investigate  such complaint  as set forth below.
b.	The Company  shall provide  a publicly  listed  telephone number which shall be operated so that complaints and requests for repairs may be received  on a twenty-four
(24) hour  a day basis.   The Company shall respond  to service complaints within twenty-four

(24) hours of its receipt.

c.	A cable subscriber shall not be  responsible  for payment  for cable television  service for any period  in excess of twenty-four  (24) hours  during which  service was not provided; provided  that the complaint has been  documented  prior to the onset of the twenty-four  (24) hour period.
 



d.	The Company shall meet with  the Board of Supervisors or a duly appointed representative  of  the Board  of Supervisors, upon reasonable notice, to discuss and resolve  ma ters  regarding  the perf01mance  of Company's  obligations hereunder  and/or other matters of concern  to the Township.
5.	Cable Television Services.   Company  shall provide  the basic, standard and premium  cable TV services listed  on Exhibit  "A" attached  hereto  or comparable  cable service.
6.	Legal  Costs.   All expenses for legal services reasonably  incurred  by Township in connection with the grant of this Franchise,  the adoption  of this Ordinance, and  proceedings  held  in connection  therewith,  shall be reimbursed  to Township  by Company.
7.	Compliance with Laws.	Company shall, throughout the period of the Renewal Te1m or any extension thereof, comply with the terms and provisions of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992. or any successor to that Act, the Rules and Regulations of the Federal Communications Commission, and any other Statutes or Ordinance applicable to the activities of Company in the Township.  In the event of a conflict between this Ordinance or Township Ordinance 38-B and such other Act, Rule, Regulation, Statute or Ordinance. the provisions of this Ordinance and Township Ordinance 38-B shall govern unless such other Act, Statute, Rule or Regulation specifically preempts regulation by Municipal Ordinance.
8.	Severability.


a.	If any section. subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or p01tion of this Ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any Comt of competent
 
,






jmisdiction,  such portion  shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision  and such holding shall not affect the validity  of the remaining portions hereof.
b.	Should any provision  of this Franchise  be inconsistent or at variance with  any mle, regulation  or policy, in whole in the part, of the Federal Communications Commission  or any other agency having jurisdiction,  such provision  shall be invalid, but the remaining  provisions hereof  shall not be  affected thereby.
Except as amended by this Ordinance, all other terms and provision  of Ordinance 38-B

 
duly adopted November 5, 1980 shall remain in full force and effect.
A A.t'..
ORDAINED AND ENACTED  into an  Ordinance  this
De:ce:/L1. S 612....
 



day of
 
r	1	1996.

ATTEST:	TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK



 
k,..,_r.:,.-c..-£- F.n,  ,c,,_.;	,)
NANCY &i..YOD	,
Township   Secretary	,
 

BY:
 

 	
EARL D. WINTERS, Chairman
 



 



 
 
 

ORDINANCE NO.

Al ORDINANCE OF HAYCOCK TOvVNSIDP, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, DIRECTING THAT STOP SIGNS BE ERECTED TO
CONTROL TRAFF1C AT CERTAIN INTERSECTIONS IN HAYCOCK TOvVNSIDP.

BACKGROUND

A.	The Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code authorizes Townships of the Second Class to erect and maintain traffic signs wherever deemed necessary for the protection of the traveling public.
B.	Certain intersections in Haycock Township are currently regulated by stop signs for which no formal ordinance has been  adopted. The Township by the enactment of this Ordinance desires to approve the traffic control signs erected at the hereafter described intersections.
C.	The Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township has determined that it is in the interest of public safety to maintain stop signs at the intersections hereafter described.
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED AND ENACTED as an Ordinance of the Township of Haycock, County of Bucks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as follows:
Section 1. Stop signs shall be installed (where necessary) and maintained at the following intersections.  The street identified as the "stop street" will be controlled by a stop sign
where it intersects with the "intersection street":

STOP STREET :	AT INTERSECTION WITH:

 
TR-473 West Sawmill Road (Eastbound) TR-463 Cobbler Road (Westbound)
TR-420 Dogwood Lane (Eastbound)

TR-429 East Thatcher Road (Westbound) TR-465 Cider Press Lane (Eastbound)
TR-467 Raudenbush Road (Westbound)

TR-428 Strawntown Road (Eastbound) TR-418 Oak Lane (Westbound)
 
SR4 l0I Old Bethlehem Road SR410 l Old Bethlehem Road SR4101 Old Bethlehem Road SR4 I 0 I Old Bethlehem Road SR4101 Old Bethlehem Road SR4101 Old Bethlehem Road SR4101 Old Bethlehem Road SR4101 Old Bethlehem Road
 
STOP STREET

TR-419 Woodbine Lane(Southbound) TR-428 Strawntown Road(Westbound)
TR-398 Applebachsville Road (Northbound) TR-390 Creamery Road (Northbound)
TR-390 Creaniery Road (Southbound) TR-420 Dogwood Lane (Westbound)
TR-390 Creamery Road (Southbound) TR-426 Old School Road(Southbound) TR-425 Cedar Lane (Eastbound)
TR-421 Kirrzler Lane (Eastbound) TR-463 Cobbler Road (Eastbound) TR-404 Mission Road (Eastbound)
TR-406 Harrisburg School Road (Westbound)

TR-476 Lakewood Drive (Southbound) TR-427 Roundhouse Road (Eastbound) No TR#- Reed Lane (Eastbound)
TR-422 Top Rock Trail(Eastbound)

TR-473 Pheasant Run Road (Eastbound) TR-473 Fox Riln Road (Eastbound)
TR-406 Harrisburg School Road (Eastbound) TR-406 Harrisburg School Road (Westbound) TR-423 Boulder Lane (Northbound)
TR-423 Boulder Lane (Southbound)

TR-430 Old Bethlehem Road (Northbound) TR-459 Camp Trail Road (Eastbound)
 
AT INTERSECTION  "WITH

SR4077 Apple Road SR4077 Apple Road SR4077 Apple Road SR4077 Apple Road SR4077 Apple Road
SR4043 West Thatcher Road SR4043 West Thatcher Road SR4095 East Sawmill Road SR4095 East Sawmill Road SR4095 East Sawmill Road SR4075 Deerwood Lane SR4075 Deerwood Lane SR4075 Deerwood Lane SR4075 Stony Garden Road SR4075 Stony Garden Road SR4075 Stony Garden Road SR0563 Mountain View Drive SR0563 Mountain View Drive SR0563 Mountain View Drive SR0563 Mountain View Drive
SR0563 Mountain View Drive SR0563 Mountain View Drive SR0563 Mountain View Drive SR0563 Mountain View Drive SR0563 Mountain View Drive
 



2
 

STOP STREET	AT INTERSECTION WITH


 
TR-475  Church Road (Westbound) TR-418 Woodcock  Lane(Southbound)
TR-426 Old School Road(Northbound) TR-477 Edgehill Circle (Westbound) TR-390 Creamery Road (Southbound) TR-465 Cider Press Lane (Westbound) TR-421 Kinzler Lane (Westbound)
TR-425 Cedar Lane (Westbound)

TR-473 Church View Drive(Westbound) TR-473 Church View Drive (Eastbound) No TR#- Hickory Lane (Southbound)
 

TR-424 Haycock Run Road TR-427 Roundhouse Road TR-427 Roundhouse Road TR-476 Lakewood Drive
TR-398 Applebachsville Road TR-390 Creamery Road
TR-406 Harrisburg School Road TR-406 Harrisburg School Road TR-406 Harrisburg School Road TR-406 Harrisburg School Road TR- 473 West Sawmill Road
 

Section 2.   The Township Roadmaster is directed to acquire and post, where necessary, and to maintain the appropriate stop signs in accordance with the regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation as soon as possible.
Section 3.     Any person violating either Section 1 of Section 2 of this Ordinance shall be subject to the penalties prescri ed in Section 6502 of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code as same may from time to time be amended.
Section 4.     Any person violating either Section 1 or Section 2 of this Ordinance shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50.00 and not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days.




3
 

 
Section 5.	This  Ordinance  shall  take  effect  five  (5)  days  after  the  date  of  its

enactment.

RESOLVED AND ENACTED as stated.	/co-&  - 9 7




ATTEST:	HAYCOCK TO,VNSHIP BOARD




 






·	Earl D. Winters, Supervisor



.	.f.7	,·

d,Supervisor





































4
 
11/5/ 97 J:Haycock - Ordinance.I




ORDINANCE NO. .:L'L

ORDINANCE OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AMENDL'iG  ORDINANCE NO. _7_1_ THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP,
TO REVISE THE REGULATIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.



 




A.	The Haycock Township Board of Supervisors on or about September 26, 1994, duly adopted  Ordinance No. 1.1	revising and restating the Haycock Township Zoning Ordinance as adopted in 1975.
B.	The Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township deems it in the best interest of the citizens of the Township to amend the Zoning Ordinance to clarify certain provisions thereof as they relate to residential  accessory buildings and structures (use H2).
C.	The Board of Supervisors specifically finds and determines that  this Ordinance

is consistent with the Township Comprehensive Plan and the Community Development Objectives stated therein and in the Zoning Ordinance.
NOW,  THERE.FORE,  be  it ORDAINED  AND  l!.NACTED  as follows:

Section 1.

Section 404.H.2(d) is revised and restated as follows:

"Buildings such as storage shed , bath houses, and private greenhouses or unenclosed (without walls) decks, porches and patios.
New and existing buildings or structures may extend into the minimum side or rear yards to a distance of ten feet from a lot line provided that such building or
 
structure shaU not exceed two hundred eighty-eight (288) square feet of gross floor

area."

Section 2.

Section 404.H.2(j) is revised and restated as follows:

"Aci:cssory buildings and structures shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height.

Such buildings and structures may extend into a rear yard, but no greater than the required side yard for the zoning district in which the building or structure is located provided such building or structure shall not exceed seven hundred fifty Ci50) square feet ."  Accessory buildings exceeding seven hundred fifty (750) square feet shall comply with the set back provisions of
the 7.oning district in which they are located. Section 3.
Section 404.H.6 is revised and restated as follows:

Non-Residential  Accessory  Building, Structure o.r Use

Accessory buildings, structures, or uses customarily incidental to non-residential uses, not including outside storage or display, where a principal  use is permitted by special exception or conditional use, any accessory use shall also require a special exception or conditional use.
1.	Non-residential accessory buildings shall not <!xceed thirty-five (35) feet in height and shall comply with the front side and rear yard set back requirements of the zoning district in which the building or structure is located.
2.	Parking shall conform to the most closely related use in Section 404.

!'ction 4.

All other provisions of the Haycock Township Zoning Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.
2
 
Section 5.

This Ordinance shall be effective immediately upon enactment.

ORDAINED AND ENACTED this ·  ..1.  day of	1tlf.!..<!.:.r.a.:c.'?J	' 1998.



 


ATTEST:
 
HAYCOCK  TOWNSHIP BOARD  OF  SUPERVISORS
 



 
/}	-
/-	;.,.-,..-
Nancy M. "W)dis
 
 
&r(f:ttnJ

v/iZ	O
Michael Lennard (C',,. ,,e.,,,...,.)































3
 
J/9/9g J:Haycoek - Ordinance.,2




ORDINANCE NO.	ijQ

ORDINANCE OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 24 OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP INCREASING THE NUMBER OF MEMBERS ON THE PLANNING COMMISSION FROM
FIVE TO SEVEN AND ESTABLISHING THE NUMBER REQUIRED TO BE PRESENT FOR A QUORUM AND THE NUMBER OF VOTES REQUIRED TO APPROVE ANY ACTION


BACKGROUND



A.	Article 2 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning  Code

53 P.S. §10201 et. - "MPC" authorizes the Townships of the Second Class to create a Planning  Commission  and  to  enumerate  the  powers and duties of  same.
B.	Haycock Township, by the adoption of Ordinance 24 on February 20, 1973, created the Haycock Township Planning Commission and provided  that  it would be  comprised  of  five  (5)  members,.
C.	Certain administrative problems have developed,   primarily

related to the number of commitments citizen members of the Planning Commission have and  the inability,  on occasion,  to secure a  quorum in attendance  at  Planning  Commission  meetings.
D.	The Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, by the adoption of this Amendment to Ordinance No. 24, intends to facili- tate the better operation of the Haycock Township Planning Commis- sion.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED AND ORDAINED by  the  Board  of

Supervisors of Haycock Township that Ordinance No. 24 is hereby amended as follows:
SECTION 1.		Section  2   is  hereby  amended   to  state  as  follows: "SECTION 2.		COMMISSION.	The   Haycock   Township   Planning Commission	shall	consist		of	seven	(7)	members.	The
 
attendance at any duly scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission by three (3) members shall constitute a quorum. A majority vote of the Planning Commission members in attendance shall be required to approve any business before the Planning Commission. All members of the Planning Commission shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed by the Township for reasonable and necessary expenses. At least five (5) of the Planning Commission members so appointed shall be citizen members· and shall not be officers or employees of Haycock Town­ ship. Two (2) members of the Planning Commission may be officers or employees of Haycock Township. No appointed
officers or employees of the Township shall forfeit the

right to exercise the powers, perform the duties or receive the compensation of the Township offices held by them during membership on the Planning Commission.
As	to	the	two	(2) additional	vacancies	on	the

Planning Commission created by this Ordinance, one (1) member shall be appointed for four (4) years and one (1) member for three (3) years and, annually thereafter, the members so appointed shall be appointed for the term of four (4) years."
SECTION   2.	Section 4 shall be amended to state as follows:

"SECTION 4. MEMBERSHIP.  All of the members of the Planning Commission shall be residents of the Township.	Five (5) of the members shall be "citizen members", that is shall not be officers or employees of Haycock Township during

2
 
their term  of  office on  the  Planning  Commission.	Two (2) · members	of	the	Planning	Commission	may  be	officers   or employees of  Haycock Township during their term of  office on  the  Planning  Commission."
SECTION 3.	All  other  terms  and provisions  of  Ordinance  No.

24  are  hereby  ratified  and  reenacted  and  shall  continue	in   full force  and  effect.
SECTION 4.	This   Ordinance   shall   take   effect	immediately

 
upon  adoption.

ORDAINED and ENACTED this
 


L/fel
T
 



day of	' 1998.
 



 


ATTEST:
 
HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS




Michael  Lennard,	Chairman




 


















3
 
3/9198 J:Hayeock ·Oniinanr:e.,3



 

ORDINANCE NO.
 
   "DI 	
 

ORDINANCE OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AMENDING THE HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE TO PROVIDE THAT USE H.(17} MOBILE HOME FOR QUALIFYING FAMILY MEMBER SHALL BE PERMITTED ONLY BY CONDITIONAL USE
AND PROVIDING STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL OF SUCH USE


BACKGROUND


A.	On or about September 26, 1994, the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township adopted a new Zoning Ordinance amending the Haycock Township Zoning Ordinance of 1975.
B.	On or about September 3, 1996, the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township adopted Ordinance No. 76 creating a new accessory use: "H. (17) Mobile Home for Qualifying Family Member" as a use permitted by right.
C.	The Board of Supervisors has determined that it is in the interests of the Township to provide that use H. (17), Mobile Home for Qualifying Family Member be permitted by conditional use approval rather than as a use by right.
D.	In furtherance of the purposes and community development goals and objectives recited at Sections 102 and 105 of the Amended Zoning	Ordinance	and,	specifically,	the	objectives	of	Section 105 (c), the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township has determined that the following amendment to the Zoning Ordinance will promote the purposes and community development objectives stated therein nd will afford an opportunity for residents of the Township to provide suitable housing for family members as defined in Section
1.a	, hereof .
 



IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, upon recommendation of the Haycock Township Planning Commission and the Bucks County Planning Commission that the Ha·ycock Township Zoning Ordinance is hereby amended as follows:
1.	Section, 404.H. (17) "Mobile Home for Qualifying Family

Member" is hereby amended to provide as follows:

"A free standing mobile home is permitted in addition to a primary residence on a property which otherwise meets the minimum lot require­ ments for a single family detached residence in the district in which it is located subject to the following conditions:

a.	This use shall be permitted only by conditional use approval pursuant to the provisions of Section 1108 of the Zoning Ordinance.

b.	The mobile home shall be occupied only by the parents, grandparents, or children of an owner of a prop­ erty and the owner shall reside in the primary residence on the prop­ erty.

c.	Only one (1) mobile home for quali­ fying family member shall be permit­ ted on any one (1) property.

d.	The mobile home shall be no less than	Four Hundred Eighty (480) square feet and no more than Eight Hundred	(800) square feet in floor area.

e.	The mobile home shall be installed and located only to the side or rear of the principal residence and shall conform to the minimum side and rear yard	requirements for principal structures in the zoning district.




2
 




f.	The provisions of all current munic­ ipal	ordinances regulating mobile homes and regulations of the Bucks County Health Department shall be met.

g.	The area between ground level and the perimeter of the mobile home shall be enclosed by means of wood or aluminum skirting or other simi­ lar material.

h.	Each mobile home shall be placed on a permanent foundation of at least eight (8) poured concrete or masonry pillars set on a concrete base at least eight inches (8") thick. The pillars shall be spaced no more than ten feet (10') apart with the end piers	being no farther than five feet (5') from the ends of the unit. The pillars shall be at least one foot by two feet (l'x2') in size and at	least thirty- six inches (36") below grade. Each pillar shall have installed a tie·-down ring to which the mobile home shall be secured.

i.	No permanent fences, walls or other · structures shall be installed that may interfere with removal of the mobile home.

j.		Prior to the issuance of a use and occupancy permit, a certificate, in the form of an affidavit shall be presented	to  the Zoning Officer verifying that the occupant of the principal dwelling intends and will reside in the principal dwelling and that a qualifying family member as described	above will occupy the mobile	home for as long as both dwelling units are located on the property.	The mobile home shall be removed		from the property within ninety		(90) days after it is no longer occupied by a person who is a


3
 



qualified family member as described herein.


2.	Section 403, Table of Use Regulations, is hereby amended to show that use, H. (17), Mobile Home for Qualified Family Member, is designated as a use permitted as a conditional use in each of the zoning districts designated in the Table of Use Regulations.
3.	Section 1108 of the Zoning Ordinance is hereby amended to

insert	a	new	section	at	Section	1108	d. (4)(aa) providing	as follows:
Use H, (17) Mobile Home for Qualified Family Member

(1) The applicant shall identify who will occupy the mobile home and such person's relationship to the owner.

(2)	The applicant shall provide satisfactory evidence from the Bucks County Health Depart­ ment .that the sewage disposal needs of the mobile home will be met in a manner consistent with Bucks County Health Department Regula­ tions and the Regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.	

(3)	
The applicant shall submit a plan, drawn to	
	scale, showing the location of all existing structures on the property, identifying their	
	use and showing the proposed location of the	
	mobile	home.	The plan must demonstrate how	
	the applicant will comply with the requirement	
	of Sections 404 .H. (17)(c)(b)(e)(f)(g)and (h).	

(4)	
The	Board	of	Supervisors	shall	attach	such	
	conditions to the approval of the application	
	as it deems appropriate, including the condi­	
	tion that the applicant execute the certifica­	
	tion required by Section 404.H>(l7) (j) of this	
	Ordinance.	

4.	
All other terms and provisions of the Amended	
Haycock
Township Zoning Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.

4
 





S.	This	Ordinance	shall	take	effect	immediately	upon adoption.


ORDAINED and ENA TED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township on this /	day of	·JIA:./J-LJL	,  1998.


ATTEST:	BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP




 


Township Secretary
 
MiCaelLE:nnard, Chairman



 

 





























5
 
. ORDINANCE NO.	8 :J,.

AN	ORDINANCE  . OF	HAYCOCK	TOWNSHIP	AMENDING ARTICLE  II, DEFINITIONS, AND  ARTICLE  V,  SECTION  507, .. FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS, OF THE HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP ZONING  ORDINANCE  OF 1975 AS  AMENDED  SEPTEMBER 26, 1994, TO COMPLY WITH SUGGESTED  PROVISIONS OF THE  NATIONAL  FLOOD  INSURANCE  PROGRAM  AND  THE
.PENNSYLVANIA	FLOODPLAIN  MANAGEMENT   ACT   (1978-
.166) SECTION 60.3 (d).

ARTICLE I.

The following  definitions  included within  Article  11,  Definitions,  are  amended to read as follows:	·

Section 206    Basement

A story partly underground, but having one-half or more of its height (measured from floor to ceiling) above the average finished grade level of the adjoining ground. A basement shall be counted as a story for the purposes of height measurement or for the determination of square footage or floor area only if the vertical distance between the ceiling and the average level of the adjoining ground is more than four (4) feet, or if it si used for business or dwelling purposes. For the purposes of Section 507, Floodplain Regulations, the term "basement" shall mean any area of the building having its floor below ground level on all sides.                           ·                                         ·

Section 221    Development

Any man-made change to  improved or unimproved real estate, including  but ncit limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or the storage of materials or equipment.                                                   ·

ARTICLE II.

The following definitions are added to Article II, Definitions: Section 235.a.	Historic   Structure
An historic structure is any struCture that is:

a.	Listed individually in the National ·Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing oh the National Register;                 ·

b.	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined  by the Secretary  to qualify  as a registered  historic
. district;	·
 
c.	. Individually listed on a state inventory of bistoric places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or.

d.	Individually listed ori a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:

(1)	By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of Interior, or

(2)	Directly  by  the  Secretary ·of the  Interior  in. states  without  approved
.programs.

Section 278 a. - Substantial Damage

Damage from any cause sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) perceni or more of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

Section 278 b. Substantial Improvement

Any reconstruction,  rehabilitation,  addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty  (50)  percent of the  market value  of the structure  before the "start  of  construction"  of  the  improvement.	This  term  includes  structures  which  have incurred "substantial damage",  regardless  of the  actual repair work  performed.    The term  . does not, however, include either:		·	·	·	·

a.	Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations  of state or  local   health,   sanitary,   or   safety   code   specifications   which   have   been identified by the local code enforcement official  and which  are the  minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, ot;    · ·                                              ·

b.	Any alteration of a "historic  struciure",  provided  that  the  alteration  will  not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure".

ARTICLE Ill.

Section 507, Floodplain Regulations, is amended to read as follows: B.. FLOODPLAIN PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Section 507	Floodplain Regulations

No  development  as  defined  in  Section  221  other  than  those  permitted  herein  shall hereafter be permitted in an area designated as floodplain as defined in this Ordinance.

a.	Purpose

The purpose of these provisions is to prevent the loss of property and life, the creation  of  health  and  safety  hazards,  the  disruption  of  commerce  and
 
governmental  services,. the  extraordinary  and  unnecessary  expenditure  of public funds for flood protection and relief, and to protect the tax base by:

(1)	Regulating uses, activities, and development which, acting along or in. combination	with other existing or future . uses, activities, and development,		will cause -unacceptable increases in flood heights, velocities, and frequencies.                                                    ·

(2)	Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities and development from locating within areas subjectto flooding.

 
(3)




(4)
 
Requiring all those u es, activities, and development that do occur in flood prone areas· to be protected and/or floodproofed against flooding and flood damage.

Protecting individuals from buying lands and structures which are unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards.
 

b.	Warning andDisclaimer of Liability

(1)	The degree of flood protection· sought by the provisions of this Ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur. Flood heights rriay _be increased by man-made or natural causes. This Ordinance does not imply that areas outside the floodplain districts or that land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damages.

(2) This Ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the municipality or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.·

c.	Establishment of Floodplain

For the  purposes at this Ordiriani::e,  various floodplain  areas are identified·
·which are subject to the provisions of this section. These floodplain areas are:

(1)	Floodway: That portion of the floodplain including the watercourse channel and adjacent land areas which must be reserved to carry the 100-year recurrence-interval· flood. without cumulatively increasing that flood elevation more than one (1) foot.

(2)	Flood Fringe: That portion of the floodplain which is outside the Floodway.

(3)	Approximate 100 - Year Flood Boundary: That portion of the floodplain as identified in the Flood Insurance Study for which no detailed flood profiles or 100-year-flood elevations have been determined.
 
(4)	Floodplain Soils: Areas subject to periodic flooding and listed in the Soil Survey    of    Bucks    and    Philadelphia  · Counties    Pennsylvania.	U S. Department at Agriculture: Soil  Conservation  Service,  July,· 1975,  as being "on the floodplain" or "subject to flooding".

The following soil types are floodplain soils:

 
Alluvial land
Alton   gravelly  loam, flooded Bowmansville sJlt loam    ·
Hatboro silt loam
 
Marsh Pope loam
Rowland silt loam
 

d.	Boundaries of the Floodplain

(1)	The following studies shall be used to identify the floodplain. The study which indicates a floodplain of greater delineation shall be used;-unless a detailed study which identifies a floodway and flood·fringe has been prepared, in which case, such detailed study shall be used:

(a)	The  Flood  Insurance  Study  prepared  by  the  Federal  Insurance Administration and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps.

(b)	The Soil Survey of Bucks and Philadelphia Counties. Pennsylvania prepared by the U.S. Department at Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, July, 1975.                                                                       ·

(c)	A study prepared by a registered engineer expert in the preparation .· at hydrological studies.  Such hydrological studies shall be subject to  · the review and approval of the Governing  Body on recommendation of the municipal engineer.	.	.

(2)	The delineation of any of the floodplain areas  may be revised by the municipality where natural or man-made changes have occurred and/or more detailed studies conducted or undertaken by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, a River Basin Commission, a registered engineer or others of demonstrated qualifications document the need for such change. However, prior to any such change to the Flood Insurance Study, approval must be obtained from the Federal Insurance Administration and the Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic Development

e.	General Provisions

(1)	The floodplain areas described above shall be overlays to the existing underlying zoning districts and the floodplain provisions shall serve to supplement the underlying zoning provisions. Where there is a conflict between the provisions or requirements of any floodplain requirement and those of the underlying zoning, the more  restrictive  provisions  and/or those pertaining to the floodplain area shall apply. However,  in all cases the floodplain requirements shall be met.      ·
 
(2)	In the event  any  provision  concerning  a floodplain  regulation  is declared inapplicable  as  a  result  of  any  legislative  or  administrative  actions  or  · judicial  discretion;  the  basic  underlying  zoning  district  provisions  shall remain applicable.

(3)	Under no circumstances shall any use, activity, and/or· development adversely affect the capacity of the· channels or floodways of any watercourse, drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or system.

(4)	No encroachment,   alteration  or  improvement  of  any  kind  shall  be made to any  watercourse   channel   until  all  adjacent   municipalities  which   may  be  . affected  by  such  action  have  been  notified  by  the  municipality,   and  until all   required   permits   or   approvals    have·  been  ·first   obtained   from   the Department    of   Environmental   Protection,.  Bureau   of   Dams,  Waterways, and   Wetlands.

In  addition,  the  Federal  Insurance  Administration  and  Pennsylvania Department	of  Community,	and	Economic  Development,	Strategic . Planning and Operations Office, shall be notified by the municipality prior" to any alteration or relocation of any watercourse.

(5)	All proposed development  shall be in compliance with permits as required by Federal or Commonwealth laws. ·.	·	·

f.	Approximate 100-Year Flood Boundary arid Floodplain Soils Regulations

Any proposed. wse, .development or  activity in approximate 100-year flood boundary areas and floodplain soils areas shall be subject to all standards specified in this section for floodway .areas unless ·a hydrological study. is prepared thereby identifying the floodway and flood fringe areas. Such study shall be prepared by a registered engineer expert in the preparation of hydrological studies. The hydrological study shall be subject to the review and approval of the Governing Body on recommendation of the municipal engineer.

g.	Use Regulations

(1)	Uses Permitted by Right

The  following   uses  and  activities  are  permitted  in  the  floodplain   provided that  they  are  in  compliance  with  the  provisions   of  the  underlying  zoning  · district  and  are  not  prohibited  by  any  other  ordinance  and  provided  that  . they  do  not  require  structures,  fill  or storage  of  materials  or  equipment,  . and  provided  that  within  the  floodway  there  would   be  no  increase  in  the one  hundred  year  flood  elevation.	·

(a)	Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture grazing, outdoor plant  nurseries, horticulture,  truck  farming,  forestry,  sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.

(b)	Public and private recreational uses and activities such as parks, day  camps,  picnic  grounds,  golf  courses,  boat. launching  and
 
swimming  areas,  hiking,  bicycling  and . horseback  riding  trails, · wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, tennis courts, and hunting and fishing areas.

(c)	Yard areas for residential and non-residential uses.

(d}   Temporary uses such as circuses, carnivals, and similar activities.

(2)	Uses Permitted by Special Exception

The following uses and activities are permitted in the floodplain by special exception provided that they are in compliance with the provisions of the underlying district .and are not prohibited by any other ordinance and provided that all applicable floodplain requirements are met:

(a)	Utilities, public facilities and improvements such as streets, brldges, transmission lines and pipe lines.	·	-

 
(b)
 
Water related uses and activities.
 

. (c) .· Storage bf materials and equipment provided they are not buoyant, flammable or explosive, and are not subject to major damage by flooding, and provided such material : and equipment is firmly anchored to prevent flotation or movement. Storage of materials  and equipment fisted in subsection k. hereof shall be prohibited in the floodplain.

(d)	Pervious parking areas.

h.	Existing Structures in the Floodplain

A structure or use of a structure or premises which lawfully existed before the enactment of  these provisions, .but which is not in conformity with these provisions, rriay be continued subject to the following conditions:
.	.	.

(1)	Existing  structures  and/or  uses may  be  expanded  when  permitted  as  a  · special exception  by the Zoning Hearing Board.

(2)	Existing structures and/or uses located in any floodway shall not be expanded or enlarged unless the effect of the proposed expansion or enlargement on 100 year flood heights is fully offset by accompanying improvements.	·

(3)	Any. increase in area shall not exceed an aggregate of twenty-five (25) percent  of the area of the structure and/or use, during the  life of the
·structure and/or use.	·

(4)	The modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to an existing structure shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and any other applicable ordinances.
 
i.	Special Requirements for Mobile Homes

Mobile homes are defined in Section 245 of this Ordinance. For floodplain management purposes, the term mobile home shall also include park trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicles and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days.

(1)	No  mobile  home  shall  be  permitted  in  the  floodplain  except  as  a nonconforming use which predates the enactment of this Ordinance.

(2)	Within any floodway area, replacement of, or expansion of an existing mobile home shall be prohibited.

(3)	Within  any flood fringe  area,  replacement  of cir expansion  of an existing mobile home shall be:

(a)	Placed on a permanent foundation;

(b)	Elevated so that the lowest floor of the mobile home is one and one­ half (1.5) feet or more above. the elevation of the 100 year flood;

(c)	Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.

j.	Prohibited Activities in the Floodplain

The commencement of any of the following activities; or the construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or intended to be used, for any of the following activities shall be prohibited within the floodplain:

(1)	Hospitals

(2)	Nursing Homes

(3)	Jails or Prisons

k.	Development Which May Endanger Hurrian Life

Any new  or substantially improved structure which will  be  used  for  the production or storage of any of the following · dangerous  materials  or substances or which will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply (more than ten (10) gallons or other comparable  volume  or any  amount of radioactive substances) of any of the dangerous materials or substances, including but not limited to the following and other such materials or substances identified for exclusion from floodplain areas by the · agencies of the Commonwealth or the Federal Government,  on the premises,. shall not be permitted in any identified floodplain  area.

 
(1)
(2)
 
Acetone Ammonia
 
(3)	Benzene
(4)	Calcium carbide
 
(5)	Carbon disulfide
(6)	Celluloid
(7)	Chlorine
(8)	Hydrochloric acid
·(9)	Hydrocyanic add
(10)	Magnesium
(11)	Nitric acid and oxides  of nitrogen ·
(12)	Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel, oil, etc.)
(13)	Phosphorus
(14)	Potassium
(15)	Sodium
(16)	Sulfur and sulfur products
(17)	Pesticides (Including insecticides, fungicides and rodenticides)
(18)	Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise regulated.

I.	Special Exceptions and Variances

When development is allowed in the floodplain either by special exception or variance, the following standards shall be met. .

(1)	No development  shall be permitted in th floodway that would result in any increase in the 100 year flood elevation.	·

(2)	No new construction or development shail be located within the area measured fifty (50) feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.

(3)	Elevation Requirements

(a)	Residential Structures

Within any floodplain area, the lowest floor (including basement) of any building shall be at least one and one-half (1.5) feet above the one-hundred year flood elevation. Fully or partially enclosed spaces below the lowest floor shall be prohibited. A document certified.by a registered professional engineer or architect, which certifies that the proposed building is in compliance with the elevation requirements shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer.      ·
 
··.-
 
_._,
 






(b)	Non-residential Structures

(i.)	Within any identified floodplain area, the lowest floor (including basement) of any non-residential structure, or any substantial improvement to an existing non-residential structure, shall be. at least one and one-half  (1.5 feet) above the one hundred
(100) year flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so
that the space enclosed by such structure shall remain either completely or essentially dry during any flood up to that height. Fully or partially enclosed spaces below the lowest floor shall be prohibited.

(ii.)		Any non-residential structure, or part thereof; having a lowest floor which is not elevated to at least one and  one-half (1.5) feet above the one hundred (100} year flood elevation, shall be floodproofed  in  a  completely  or  essentially  dry  manner  in accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards contained		in	the	publication	entitled	"Flood-Proofing Regulations" published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers· (June 1972), or with some equivalent standard.  All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be accompanied by a statement certified  by a registered professional engineer or architect	which		states	that	the		proposed	design	and· construction  are in conformance  with the above  referenced standards.

(4)	Fill

(a)	The cross-sectional area of the floodplain shall not be reduced by more than three (3) percent. The three (3) percent shall be allocated· to one and one-half (1.5) percent on either side of the centerline of the watercourse.  Such fill shall not cumulatively increase the 100- year flood elevation more than one (1) foot.

(b)	Fill shall consist  of soil  or small rock materials  only; solid waste landfills shall not be permitted.

 
(c)
 
Fill shall be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance to erosion, scouring, or settling.
 

(d)	. Fill shall be no steeper than one (1) vertical to two (2) horizontal, unless substantiated data justifying steeper slopes is submitted to, and approved by, the Zoning Officer.

(e)	Fill shall be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent properties.
 
(5)	Drainage

Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of stormwaler runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system shall insure proper drainage along .streets, and provide positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties..

(6)	Water and Sanitary Sewer Facilities and Systems

(a)	All new or replacement  water aiid  sanitary  sewer  facilities  and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
.	.
 
(b)



(c)
 
Sanitary  sewer facilities  and systems shall be designed  prevent the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.	·

No part of  any  on-site  sewage  system  shall  be located within  any identified  floodplain   area.   No  expansion   of  any  on-site  sewage system  now located either wholly  or  partially  in the floodplain  shall · be permitted.	·
 

(7) ·	Other   Utilities

All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible)  and constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.

(8)	Streets   ·

The finished elevation of all new streets shall be at least one (1) foot . above the one hundred (100) year flood elevation.

(9)	Storage

No materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or, in times of flooc!ing, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life shall be stored within any identified floodplain area.                          ·

(10)	Placement of Buildings and Structures

All buildings·and structures shall be designed, located, and constructed. so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
 
(11)	Anchoring

(a)	All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordarice
. with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.The zoning officer shall require the applicant to submit the written opinion ·Of a registered professional engineer that the proposed structural design meets this criteria.            ·

(b)	All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and .other similar objects or components located below the one hundred  (100)  year  flood elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.

(12)	Floors, .Walls and Ceilings

(a)	Wood flooring used at or below the JOO-year flood elevation shall be· installed  to . accommodate  a  lateral  expansion  of  the- flooring, perpendicular  to  the   flooring	grain  without   causing  structural damage to the building.

(b)	Plywood used at or below the 100 year flood elevation shall be of a "marine" or water-resistant variety.	·

(c)	Walls and ceilings at or below the 100-year flood elevation shall be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant and · will withstand inundation.

 
(d)
 
Windows, doors, and other components at or below the 100-year flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant material.·
 

(13)	Paints and Adhesives

(a)	Paints  or  other  finishes  used  at  or  below  the  100-year  flood elevation shall be of a "marine" or water-resistant quality.

(b)	Adhesives used at or below the 100-year flood elevation shall be of a "marine" or water-resistant variety.

(c)	All woodem components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be finished with "marine" or water-resistant paint or other finishing materials.

(14)	Electrical Components

(a)	Electrical distribution  panels shall be at least three (3) feet above the 100cyear flood elevation.

(b)	Separate  electrical  circuits shall serve  lower  levels  and shall  be dropped from above.
 
(15)	Equipment

Water  heaters, furnaces,  air conditioning  and ventilating  units,  and other electrical,   mechanical   or  utility  equipment   or  apparatus   shall  not  be · loc.ated below t.he 1CO-year flood elevation.

(16)	Fuel Supply Systems

All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made for the drainage at these systems in the event that floodwater infiltration occurs.

m.	Variances

If compliance with any of the requirements of this Section would result in an exceptional hardship for a prospective builder, developer, or landowner, the Zoning Hearing Board may, upon request, grant relief from the strict application of the requirements. Requests for variances shall be considered by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the following:

(1)	No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use or activity within any floodway that would cause any increase in the one hundred (100) year flood elevation.             ·                            ·                ·

(2)	No variance shall be granted for any of the requirements pertaining to Development· Which May Endanger Human Life (subsection  k.)  or Prohibited Activities in the Floodplain (subsection j.).                                 ·      ·

(3)	If granted, a variance shall involve  only the  least  modification  necessary to provide relief.                ·.

(4)	In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall attach whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and to achieve the objectives of this Ordinance.

(5)	Whenever a variance is granted, the Zoning Hearing Board shall notify the applicant in writing that:.

(a)	The granting at the variance may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance;

(b)	Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.

(6)	In reviewing any request for a variance, the Zoning Hearing .Board shall consider, but not be limited to, the following:

(a)	That there is good and sufficient cause;
 
(b)	·That  failure  to  grant  the  variance  would  result  in  exceptional hardship to the applicant;

(c)	That   the  granting	of  the   variance   will   neither	result	in   an
. unacceptable or · prohibited . increase in flood heights, ·additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense; nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public, or conflict with any other applicable state statute or regulation, or local ordinance or regulation.	·
.	.
(7)	A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be maintained  by the .municipality.  In addition,  a report  of all variances granted during the year shall  be included  in the  annual  report to the Federal Insurance Administration.

(8)	Notwithstanding any of the above; however, all structures cshall be designed and constructed so as to have the capability  of resisting the
-100-year flood.	·

ARTICLE IV.

Should any section or any prov1s1on of this Ordinance be declared by any Court of competent ·jurisdiction to be invalid, illegal, or unconstitutional, such decision shall have no effect on the validity of this Ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof.

ARTICLEV.

Any ordinance or resolution or part of any ordinance or resolution inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be repealed to the extent of such inconsistency .
.. a A_O
 
SO ORDAINED this
 
.;,;
 
·	day of
 
MA.Vf-+----'' A.O. 1999.
 


.   HAYCOCK  TOWNSHIP BOARD   OF   SUPERVISORS

Jo rLf  e e  • )l./3a4/,.---  .•

.	a
 










8/2/99 12:49 pm  HAYCOCK\SPEEOLIM.ORD



ORDINANCE NO.  	


·AN ORDINANCE OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, ESTABLISHING A MAXIMUM SPEED
LIMIT OF THIRTY-FIVE	(35) M.P.H. ON WOODBINE LANE, HARRISBURG SCHOOL ROAD, CEDAR LANE, WEST SAWMILL ROAD, APPLEBACHSVILLE ROAD, CREAMERY ROAD (PAVED SECTION),
CIDER PRESS LANE,DOGWOOD LANE, MISSION ROAD,
COBBLER ROAD, EAST THATCHER ROAD, WOODCOCK LANE,
OLD BETHLEHEM ROAD (S. OF 563) ROUNDHOUSE ROAD,
LAKEWOOD DRIVE, AND A MAXIMUM SPEED LIMIT OF
TWENTY-FIVE	(25) M.P.H.	ON CHURCH VIEW DRIVE	(GRAVEL),
BOULDER LANE, KINZLER LANE	(GRAVEL), STRAWNTOWN ROAD,
CREAMERY ROAD	(GRAVEL), REED LANE AND CAMP TRAIL ROAD

BACKGROUND

A.	The Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township has the authority to enact maximum speed limits on local roads pursuant to the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
B.	An engineering and traffic investigation report for the purpose of determining reasonable and safe speeds has been prepared by C. Robert Wynn Associates, Inc., pursuant to Title 67, Chapter 610, of the Pennsylvania Transportation Code.
C.	The engineering and traffic investigation report estab- lishes that the maximum safe speed on Woodbine Lane, Harrisburg School Road, Cedar Lane, West Sawmill Road, Applebachsville Road, Creamery Road (paved section) Cider Press Lane, Dogwood Lane, Mission Road, Cobbler Road, East Thatcher Road, Woodcock Lane, Old Bethlehem Road (South of 563), Roundhouse Road and Lakewood Drive is thirty-five (35) miles per hour.
D.	The engineering and traffic investigation report estab­

lishes that the maximum safe speed on Church View Drive (gravel),
 



Boulder Lane,	Kinzler Lane	(gravel), Strawntown Road	(gravel), Creamery Road (gravel), Reed Lane and Camp Trail Road of twenty-five
(25) miles per hour.

E.	The Board of Supervisors bas determined that it is in the best interests of the health, safety and welfare of the residents of Haycock Township and the travelling public to establish a maximum speed of thirty-five (35) miles per hour on Woodbine Lane, Harris­ burg School Road, Cedar Lane, West Sawmill Road, Applebac sville Road, Creamery Road (paved section) Cider Press Lane, Dogwood Lane, Mission Road, Cobbler Road, East Thatcher Road, Woodcock Lane, Old Be.thlehem Road (South of 563), Roundhouse Road and Lakewood Drive.
F.	The Board of Supervisors has determined that it is in the best interests of the health, safety and welfare of the residents of Haycock Township and the travelling public to establish a maximum speed of twenty-five (25) miles per hour on Church View Drive (gravel), Boulder Lane, Kinzler Lane (gravel), Strawntown Road (gravel), Creamery Road (gravel), Reed Lane and Camp Trail Road.
NOW THEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Board

of Supervisors of Haycock Township as follows:

1.	The speed limit on Woodbine Lane, Harrisburg School Road, Cedar Lane, West Sawmill Road, Applebachsvile Road, Creamery Road (paved section) Cider Press Lane, Dogwood Lane, Mission Road, Cobbler Road, East Thatcher Road, Woodcock Lane, Old Bethlehem Road (South of 563), Roundhouse Road and Lakewood Drive shall be thirty­ five (35) miles per hour.


2
 

 
2 .	The speed limit on Church View Drive (gravel),
 
Boulder
 

Lane,	Kinzler Lane	(gravel), Strawntown Road	(gravel), Creamery Road (gravel), Reed Lane and Camp Trail Road shall be twenty-five
(25)	miles per hour.

3.	The engineering and traffic investigation report prepared by C. Robert Wynn Associates, Inc. , Township Engineer, for the purpose of determining the reasonable and safe speeds established herein, is attached hereto as Exhibit "A".
4.	Enforcement of this Ordinance shall be pursuant to the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code and all fines levied for violations thereunder shall be payable to the Township of Haycock.
5.	This	Ordinance	shall	become	effective	five	(5) days

following its enactment.
 
ORDAINED AND ENACTED this 7µ,	day o&pr-"'1118.8Z.
 

, 1999.
 

 



ATTEST:
 
HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS



rL fer t kaL.!r-­
thleen M. Babb


/	IA)
./Earl D. Winters





Michael Lennard
 






3
 

 

•   ·.• .l
 
JU_t _.1 ·:-."'::::I	14    ';1
.
 


c.·ROBERT JwYNN·..·A.ss·ocIATES;	!Ne.··

·.	llVHlf; f.PA!.   ' CIVIL.o l!HG/Nl!l!RING  ... ..  .
.i11 we" ar   ad street. ouakertown  ; PA, 1e9s.1 ··
.. ·    .·	. : 12.151 536·733! .·FAX :!2151  531·5361 · .·...····:
 

July 13, 1999  ·
 

.	'.·	.. '. ·._	·:  .
 
·· · ... _  _-.   ,-     -	.	.  .
 

Mr.  Thomas   Roeder,   Roadmaster    . Haycock Township	· · 271   Old   Bethlehem  R<lad Quakertown, PA 18951.

Subject:	Speed Limit Study	' .
File No..63-000   ·

 
Dear Mr. Roeder,
 
,.. .  ...,  .	.    .  .	I .  ..··	.   : .    ...  :	:.  .. .
 
·.·· .   . . :	.  . .	. .
 

This  office has reviewed the  PenntpoT  accident  studies  and  your  speed studies  for  the  posting  of the speed limit on 22_ T wnsh. ip roads.  All	a.peed studies appear .satisfactory and this offic::e concurs with your
proposed speed hm1ts on the roadWays.	.	· · ·  ·	·	·. · ·    . .	.   . .	.	·
.	. .	-·	. _·:	.  _.'	.  ,	.  .	.	.
The posting of speed limits must be approved by the Board ol Supervisors by.Ordinance.	· .

 

 





V'NO/ajp

cc:	Board of Supervisors
 



i



I,.:·.
I I I
l
I


I I I
I



I
 


Wayne v. Doyle, P.E...
 
-=-
 






 
 






 
twc\haYCOCk\asplundh\ordinance.S
 






ORDINANCE NO. 	
 


_AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, VACATING STRAWNTOWN ROAD

BACKGROUND

·A. Strawntown Road (T-428) is a public township road having been used for public travel, maintained and kept in repair by Haycock Township for a period of at least twenty-one (21) years and thereby constituting a public road pursuant to Section 2307 of the Second Class Township Code.
B.	On or about June 26, 1999, Christopher B. Asplundh, Jr., equitable owner of Tax Map Parcels numbered 14-7-21, 14-7-24 and 14-7-25 having frontage on Strawntown Road to vacate that portion of Strawntown Road fronting on the aforesaid tax parcels together with such additional sections as the Board of Supervisors may determine necessary.
C.	Section 2304 of the Second Class Township Code requires the· Board of Supervisors to act on the Petition within sixty (60) days of its filing.
D.	Public hearings on the question of vacating Strawntown Road

were duly advertised and hearings were held on August 2, 1999 and November 1, 1999. Additionally, all property owners abutting on Strawntown Road were given written notice of the hearing. A true and correct copy of the legal notice is attached hereto as Exhibit "A" and a true and correct copy of the notice sent to property owners and the list of property owners is attached hereto as Exhibit "B".
 
E.	A public hearing has been held on the question of whether it is in the public interest to vacate Strawntown Road in conformity with Section 2305 of the second Class Township Code and has been submitted to review by the Haycock Township Planning Commission in accordance with Section· 2703a thereof.
F.	In the judgment of the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, Strawntown Road as hereafter described, is used primarily only by those property owners abutting thereon a majority in both number and_ interest of which have requested its vacation.
G.	Strawntown Road is partially gravel, narrow, and not suitable

for modern vehicular traffic. The improvement of the road to modern standards would be expensive to the Township and unnecessarily burdensome to taxpayers with little or no corresponding benefit.
H.	Strawntown Road runs very near and between buildings on the

property of Petitioner Asplundh with less distance between those buildings and the legal right-of-way than is required by the current Haycock Township Zoning Ordinance.
I.	StraWiltown Road is not heavily used by the traveling public

and other nearby improved roads provide more convenient travel routes to the public.
J.	In . the	judgrnent	of	the	Board	of	Supervisors	of	Haycock

Township, Strawntown Road serves no public purpose or convenience to the general public as a public road.
NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing, it is ORDAINED

and ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township as follows:

1.	The land described in the legal description attached hereto as


2
 
Exhibit "C" being Strawntown Road (T-428) extending from Old Bethlehem Road to Apple Road, a distance of approximately 5,218 linear feet, located within Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania and shown on the Plan attached hereto and marked Exhibit "D" is hereby vacated as a public ·road of Haycock Township.
2.	Private property owners abutting the roadway herein shall be entitled to exercise such private rights of easement as is provided by the statutory and case law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
3.	Appropriate	Township	officials	are	hereby	authorized	to.

execute any and all documents necessary to effectuate this Ordinance.

4. The map, zoning map or plan of Haycock Township shall be amended by striking therefrom the portion of the road described in Exhibits "C" and "D" which are hereby vacated.
5.	All	ordinances or parts	thereof	inconsistent	herewith are

hereby repealed.
6.. This Ordinance shall become effective five (5) days after enactment.
ORDAINED and ENACTED this	/::fl" day ot._fe-e.rndJ,-v	' 1999.

ATTEST:	HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
By: f a;t1 f-<P  <  JV;2,,,,µ..6--
(}hleen M. Bab , Chai
Township Secretary

By:	!
/ Earl D. Winters, Vice-Chairman

 



3
 
11/22/99  2:22 pm HAYCOCK\OROINANCE.4







ORDINANCE NO. j"S-


AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING. HE UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE AS THE MUNICIPAL BUILDING CODE OF.
HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP AND REQUIRING PERSONS APPLYING FOR A ZONING USE AND OCCUPANCY PERMITS IN HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP TO OBTAIN SERVICES AT A CONSTRUCTION CODE OFFICIAL OR THIRD PARTY AGENCY TO CERTIFY PLANNING
REVIEW AND INSPECTION FOR COMPLIANCE WITH THE UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE


BACKGROUND


A.	The Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of November 10, 1999, provides for the establishment of a Uniform Construction  Code which applies to the construction,  alteration,  repair  and occupancy  _of all buildings in the Commonwealth of  Pennsylvania including the Township of Haycock.
B.	Section 301 of	the Act  provides  for the adoption of  the 1999 Building  Officials  and  Code  Administrators  International,  Inc.	("BOCA") National  Building Code,	14th Edition,  as the Uniform  Construction Code and  further provides  for  the  same  to be  amended,	from time to time,  by the Pennsylvania  Department  of  Labor  and  Industry.
c.	Section 501 (e)  of the Act provides regulations concerning non-

municipal	administration	and	enforcement	of	the  Uniform	Construction Code.
D.	The Board of supervisors of Haycock Township by this enactment

intends	to  establish  the	1999  BOCA  Building	Code,	14th Edition,	and
 
subsequent editions of same as the Building Code of Haycock Township and to provide for non-municipal administration of the Code.
NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing, it is ORDAINED and ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township as follows:
1.	The 1999 BOCA National Building Code, 14th Edition,		("BOCA Building :Code")		is hereby	adopteq	as the Building	Code		of Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, for the construction, alteration, repair and occupany of all buildings in Haycock Township.		The BOCA Building Code shall continue in force and effect until such time as the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry promulgates regulations establishing	a	Uniform	Construction	Code	after	which	the		Uniform Construction Code shall control the construction, alteration, repair and use of all buildings in Haycock Township.
2.	All persons who apply for a zoning permit or occupancy permit

for a one or two family dwelling unit, utility and miscellaneous use structures within the Township shall be notified of their obligation to obtain the services of a construction	code official	or third party' agency with appropriate categories of certification	to conduct plan review	and		inspections	of	all	construction.		"Construction	Code Official"	shall	mean	an		individual	certified	by	the		Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry to perform plan review of construction documents,		inspect construction or administer and enforce	codes and regulations.		"Third	party	agency"	shall	mean		a	person,		firm	or corporation	certified by the Department	of Labor and		Industry as a Construction Code Official and contracted to perform plan review of




2
 
construction documents, inspect construction or administer and enforce codes and regulations under the Uniform Construction Code.
3.	For one family and two family dwelling units and utility and

miscellaneous	use structures, all of the following five inspections shall be required:
(a)	Foundation inspection;

(b)	Plumbing, mechanical and electrical inspection;

(c)	Frame and masonry inspection;

(d)	Wall board inspection;

(e)	Final inspection.

The final inspection shall not be deemed approved until all previous inspections have been successfully completed and passed.
4.	It shall be the responsibility of the owner of structures other than one or two family units and utility and miscellaneous use structures, to obtain the services of the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry or a third party agency with appropriate categories of certification under contract to the Department of Labor and Industry to conduct the plan review and inspections required by the Uniform Construction Code.
5.	A copy of the final inspection report shall be provided to

Haycock Township, the property owner, the builder, and to a lender designated by the builder.
6 .-	No	occupancy	permit	or certificate	of	occupancy	shall be

issued for a building which has been constructed, altered or repaired as defined in the BOCA Building Code or Uniform Construction Code unless the Township receives a final inspection report certifying that all

3
 
inspections required by this Ordinance, the BOCA Building Code and/or
the Uniform Construction Code have been successfully completed and passed. Additionally, no occupancy permit or certificate or occupancy shall be issued for any new construction unless the Township is supplied with certification that the building constructed meets all of the applicable accessibility provisions of the BOCA Building Code and, when

in effect, the Uniform Construction Code.

7.	This Ordinance shall be 'effective at 12:00 o'clock midnight December 31, 1999.


 
RESOLVED
 
and	ENACTED	by
3r-.f
 
the	Board	of	Supervisors	of	Haycock
 
Township this  	
 
day of
 



ATTEST:	HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS





_N?c-"a- -c-y-"'.'--y-";-d---F7'1· '-.------- ·	Chairman Township Secretary

)
 
, "Earln . wi· nters,
 
v·ice-Chai·rman
 



 












4
 
8/7/00  u:o6:26AM/Haycock/ZOA.:.!ooo.dir/Ordinance
ORDINANCE NO.	<6' 't
AN ORDINANCE OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP, BUCKS COUNTY,
PENNSYLVANIAAMENDINGTHEZONINGORDINANCEOF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP TO REVISE THE REGUIATIONS FOR
FORESTRY, SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS AND THE
REGULATIONS  CONCERNING THE ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY

BACKGROUND



A.	The Haycock Township Board of Supervisors on or about September 26, 1994, duly adopted Ordinance No. 71 revising and restating the Haycock Township Zoning Ordinance as adopted in 1975.
B.	Since its adoption, the Zoning Ordinance has from time to time been amended.
C.	The Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township deems it in the best interest of the citizens of the Township to amend the Zoning Ordinance to make provisions for posting adequate financial security for the conduct of forestry; to provide additional regulations concerning swimming pools, hot tubs and spas; to revise the regulations concerning accessory apartments; and to require for new residential construction that driveways be installed or adequate financial security posted to ensure their installation.
D.	The Board of Supervisors specifically finds and determines that this Ordinance is consistent with the Township Comprehensive Plan and the Community Development Objective stated therein and in the Zoning Ordinance.
 
NOW THEREFORE, be it ORDAINED AND ENACTED as follows:




Section 1.


A new Section 278.1 is hereby added to state as follows:

Section 278.1 - Swimming Pools, Spas and Related Structures -

a.	Above-ground/ on ground swimming pool -A removable swimming pool of any shape that has walls and an impervious liner that is located on the surrounding earth and may be disassembled or stored and reassembled to its original integrity.

b.	Barrier -A fence, wall, a building wall or a combination thereof.

c.	Hot tub/spa - A structure containing water intended for recreational use, in which all controls, water heating, and water circulating equipment are an integral part of the product.

d.	In-ground pool -A permanent swimming pool in which the surface of the  water is approximately level with the surrounding ground surface and the volume of the water is below ground level.

e.	Swimming pool - Any structure, intended for swimming and/or diving purposes, made of concrete, masonry, metal or other man­ made impervious material or a combination thereof, in which the water is treated to maintain a sanitary condition, and that has a water depth of 24 inches or more. This includes in-ground, above- ground/ on ground swimming pools and hot tubs/spas.               ·



Section 2.

Section 404.A-4 Forestry §a(3)(i) is revised and restated as follows:

"Adequate financial security ill an amount determined by the Township Engineer shall be posted to secure the repair of damaged roads.
Section3.

Section 404.H.2(g) is revised and restated as follows:

g.	Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs





2
 
Swimming Pools
A swimming pool shall be permitted as an accessory to a single-family detached residential use subject to the following:
1. A zoning permit shall  be required to locate, construct or maintain a swimming pool.

2. No person, owner, or occupant of land shall install or maintain a swimming pool, spa or hot tub capable of being filled to a depth of twenty­ four (24) inches at the deepest or lowest point unless a permit is first obtained by the zoning officer and the required plans and information are filed, together with required permit fees. Ornamental pools and wading pools which do not exceed twenty-four (24) inches in depth are exempt from these provisions. Swimming pools shall include any pool, regardless of design or construction materials or the permanency of its location both above and below ground level, which is built, erected or used for the purpose of bathing or swimming and all buildings, equipment, and appurtenances thereto. This ordinance shall also apply to public swimming pools used and maintaine.d by an individual, firm, corporation, club or association of persons for use by the public or members and their invitees or guests. In the case of public swimming pools, this use need not be accessory to a residential use.

3.	Each pool area and the paving, coping or deck surrounding it or associated with it shall be located within the required setback of the zoning district in which the property is located.

4.	Safety. Any pool or water area shall be suitably designed, located and maintained so as not to become a nuisance or hazard either to adjoining property owners or the public generally. All detachable ladders shall be removed when the pool is not in use.

5.	Sanitary Quality of Water. The physical, chemical and bacterial qualities of the water in public swimming pools shall comply with the latest standards of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Health. Failure to maintain the sanitary quality of water prescribed by this section or to restore such water to the required quality within the time prescribed by the Department of Health shall be a violation of this section.

6.	Construction and Maintenance. The construction and design of all pools shall be such that the same can be maintained and operated as to be clean and sanitary at all times. The owners of every pool shall be responsible to maintain said pool in such condition as to prevent breaks in the pool chassis or water from the pool overflow into adjacent public or private property. Swimming pools :shall be constructed, equipped and maintained in strict conformity with the provisions of the swimming pool and public



3
 
health codes issued by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the Bucks County Health Department.

7.	Outdoor lighting, if used, shall be installed in such a way as to be shielded and not to reflect toward or into adjacent properties.

8.	All electrical work connected with the pool and all equipment incidental thereto shall comply with all underwriter laboratory regulations and must be inspected and certified by an electrical underwriter's inspection agency. Owner or his agent shall submit satisfactory documentation that the inspection and certification has occurred prior to the initial filing of the pool with water.

9.	A minimum isolation distance of twenty-five (25) feet shall be required between a swimming pool and any sewage disposal system.

10.	Approved filtration systems and circulators must be provided for all pools except such exempt or non-exempt wading pools as are emptied on a daily basis as hereinafter provided.

11. All pool installations shall conform to all applicable building codes.

12.	In no case shall water in the pool or pool area be permitted to emit an offensive odor or create any unhealthful condition. Further, it shall be a violation of this Ordinance to cause or allow drainage onto adjoining land.

13.	No pool shall be located under any electrical power lines (including service lines), and the pool must be located at least  ten (10) feet (measured horizontally) from such power lines.

14.	Fencing of Pools: An outdoor private swimming pool, including an in­ ground, above-ground or on-ground pool, shall be provided With a barrier which shall comply with the following:

a.	The top of the barrier shall be at least 48 inches (1219 mm) above finished ground level measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from the swimming pool. The maximum vertical clearance between finished ground level and the barrier shall be 2 inches (51 mm) measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from the swimming pool. Where the top of the pool structure is above-finished ground level, such as an above-ground pool, the barrier shall be at finished ground-level, such as the pool structure, or shall be mounted on top of the pool structure. Where the barrier is mounted on the pool structure, the opening between the top of surface of the pool frame and the bottom of the barrier shall not allow passage of a 2-inch (51 mm) diameter sphere.                                                                                         ·





4
 
b.	Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of a 4-inch (102 mm) diameter sphere.

c.	Solid barriers shall not contain indentations or protrusions except for normal construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints.

d.	Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of,t:he horizontal members is less than 45 inches (1143 mm), the horizontal members shall be located on the swimming pool side of the fence. Spacing between vertical members shall not exceed 13/4 inches (44 mm) in width. Decorative cutouts shall not exceed 13,4 inches (44 mm) in width.

e.	Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is 45 inches (1143 mm) or more, spacing between vertical members hall not exceed 4 inches (102 mm). Decorative cutouts shall not exceed 13,4 inches (44 mm) in width.

f.	Maximum mesh size for chain link fences shall be a 11/4 inch (32 mm) square unless the fence is provided with slats fastened at the top or the bottom which reduce the openings to not more than 13/4 inches (44 mm).

g.	Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members, such as a lattice fence, the maximum opening formed by the diagonal members shall be not more than 13/4 inches (44 mm).

h.	Access gates shall comply with the requirements of items a through g above and shall be equipped to accommodate a locking  device. Pedestrian access gates shall open outwards away from  the  pool  and shall be self-closing and have  a self-latching device. Gates other than pedestrian access gates shall have a self-latching device.  Where  the release mechanism of the self latching device is located less than 54 inches (1372  mm) from the bottom of the gate: (a) the release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate at least 3 inches (76 mm) below the top of the gate; and (b) the gate and barrier  shall not have an opening greater than 112 inch (13 mm)  within  18 inches (457 mm) of the release mechanism.

i.	Where a wall of a dwelling unit serves as part of the barrier and contains a door that provides direct access to the  pool, one of the following shall apply:

1)	All doors within direct access to the pool through that wall shall be equipped with an alarm which produces an audible warning when the door and its screen, if present, are opened.  The audible warning



5
 
shall commence not more than 7 seconds after the door and door screen, if present, are opened and shall sound continuously for a minimum of 30 seconds. The alarm shall have a minimum sound pressure rating of 85 dBA at 10 feet (3048 mm) and the sound of the alarm shall be distinctive from other household sounds such as smoke alarms, telephones and door bells. The  alarm shall be equipped with manual means, such as touchpads or switches, to deactivate temporarily the alarm for a single opening from either direction. Such deactivation shall last for not more than 15 seconds. The deactivation touchpads or switches shall be located at least 54 inches (1372 mm) above the threshold of the door.

2)	All doors with direct access to the pool through that wall shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching  device  with  the release mechanism located a minimum of 54 inches (1372 mm) above the floor.  Swinging doors shall open away from the pool area.

3)	The pool shall be equipped with a power safety cover. Where in a closed position, the cover shall be capable of holding a weight of
485 pounds (2175 N), shall not have any openings that allow passage of a 4 112 (114 mm) sphere and shall incorporate a system to drain standing water that collects on the cover. The cover control switch shall be permanently installed in accordance with NFPA 70
listed in Chapter 35, and be key-operated and of a spring-loaded or momentary-contact· type. Where the switch is released, the operation of the cover shall stop instantly and be capable of reversing direction immediately. The switch shall be in the line of sight of the complete pool cover.

j.	Where an above-ground pool structure is used as a barrier or where the barrier is mounted on top  of the pool structure, and tlie means of access is a fixed or removable ladder or steps, the ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier which meets the requirements of items a through i above. A removable ladder shall not constitute an acceptable alternative to enclosure requirements.

Spa/Hot Tub

Such pools are permitted as accessory uses to residential structures subject to the following conditions:
1.	A zoning permit shall be required to locate, construct or maintain a spa or hot tub.
 
2.	Fencing of a spa or hot tub shall be required and shall meet the provisions of Section 404.H.2(g)(14) above.

3.	A spa or hot tub with a manufacturer's approved safety cover shall be exempt from the fencing provisions of Section 404.H.2(g.14).



Sectioil4.

Section 404.H.3(a) is revised and restated as follows:

a.	The maximum floor area of an accessory apartment shall be 800 square feet whether attached to the primary residence or located in an accessory building.

Sections.

Section 1006 Certificate of Occupancy is revised to restate the last paragraph as follows:
"No certificate shall be issued until the premises in question has been inspected and found by the Zoning Officer to be in compliance with the Zoning Ordinance. For a new residence or building to be served by a new driveway, the Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued until the driveway has been installed in compliance with the requirements of Haycock Township Ordinance No. 75 and, where applicable, requirements of a Penndot Highway Occupancy Permit or adequate financial security has been deposited with the Township to assure its installation. The Township Engineer shall determine the adequacy of the amount of the financial security to be posted. The issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy in no way absolves the owner or authorized agent from compliance with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance or other Township ordinances."









7
 
Section6.

All other provisions of the Haycock Township Zoning Ordinance,· as amended, shall remain in full force and effect.
Sectionz.

This Ordinance shall be effective immediately upon enactment.
ORDAINED AND ENACTED this	1th	day of	jJ LIGll='>'(

2000.


HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS


 
ATIEST:
 


 	./Kathleen M. Babb, Chairman





"'Earl Winters


 



























8
 
ORDINANCE NO.· 8 9



AN ORDINANCE OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP,  BUCKS COUNTY, COMMONWEALTH  OF PENNSYLVANIA,  ELECTING TO ENROLL IN THE PENNSYLVANIA  MUNICIPAL  RETIREMENT  SYSTEM UNDER ARTICLE  IV OF THE PENNSYLVANIA  MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT  LAW: AGREEING TO BE BOUND BY ALL PROVISIONS  OF THE PENNSYLVANIA  MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT  LAW AS AMENDED AND AS APPLICABLE
TO MEMBER MUNICIPALITIES JOINING UNDER THE
PROVISIONS OF THIS ARTICLE: STATING WHICH OF CERTAIN OPTIONS PERMITTED UNDER THESAID LAW ARE ACCEPTED BY THE TOWNSHIP

Be it ORDAINED AND ENACTED by Haycock Township, Bucks County as follows:

SECTION I. Haycock Township hereby elects to enroll its municipal employees in the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System, as authorized by the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law, Act 15 of 1974 as amended, with the express purpose of having the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System administer the retirement plan established by the Township for the municipal employees. The Township does hereby agree to be bound by all the requirements and provisions of said Law and to assume all obligations, financial and otherwise, placed upon member municipalities. All references hereafter shall be based on benefits negotiated between the Board and the municipality under the provisions of Article IV of the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law.

SECTION IL Membership ih the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System shall be mandatory for all permanent municipal employees of the Township. Membership for elected officials and employees hired on a temporary or seasonal basis is prohibited, as is membership for individuals paid only on a fee basis.

SECTION III. Credit for prior service for original members is granted for each year or partial year thereof that the member was employed by the Township from original date of hire or the expiration of the member's probationary period if one so
·existed. Benefits provided to members in the agreement dated January 2, 2001, shall
accrue based on all credited service granted and earned in accordance with this section.

SECTION IV. Payment for any obligation established by the adoption of this Ordinance and the  agreement between the System and Haycock Township shall be made by the Township in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law and Act 205 of 1984, the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act.

SECTION V. As part of this Ordinance, the Township agrees that the System shall provide the benefits set forth in the agreement between the Board and Haycock Township,  dated  January  2,  2001.    The  passage  and adoption  of this  Ordinance by
 
Haycock Township is an official acceptance of said agreement and the financial obligations resulting from the administration of said benefit package. Haycock Township hereby assumes all liability for any unfundedness created due to the acceptance of the benefit structure outlined in the above-referenced agreement.

SECTION VI. By adoption of this Ordinance, the TOV\'Ilship agrees to terminate, upon the effective date of membership in the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System, any previously maintained municipal pension program applicable to those employees identified as members in Section II of this Ordinance and to transfer any assets from any existing plan to offset the established liability. Haycock Township also acknowledges that an affirmative vote representing at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the plan members indicated the members were in agreement with the establishment of the plan with the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System.

SECTION VII. Haycock Township intends this Ordinance to be the complete authorization of the Township's municipal pension plan and it shall be come effective and specifically repeal Ordinance Number 51 either immediately or on January 1, 2001, which is the effective date of the Agreement dated January 2, 2001, between the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System and Haycock Township, whichever is later.

SECTION VIII. A duly certified copy of this Ordinance and the referenced agreement shall be filed with the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Membership for the municipal pension plan of Haycock Township in the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System shall be effective the first day of January, 2001.

 
ORDAINED this	;\ a_q{. day of_J_.-.-_l'l_n_u_r1
 

:.:1c..:z'-ly'-·
 

, 200_/  .
 

ATTEST:	HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
 
.	J}	·
 

""'I	I ', ..ii-----
'\...;;:>
 
Earl Winters, Chairman


 
















2
 
Dec  14  '00	10 :58	P. 04





HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEE PENSION PLAN AGREEMENT


AN AGREEMENT, dated this  d.. ,lU  day of   ""-""! ,200 I , by and between Haycock Township (the Township) and the Pennsylvania Municipal - Retirement Board (the Board);

WHEREAS, Article IV, Section401 of the Act ofFebruacy  1, 1974,No.1:5, states:

"401. This article shall provide for the enrollment of those municipalities in the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System which want to offer retirement benefits to their employees ...",and;

WHEREAS, Haycock Township desires to establish a pension plan for its municipal employees and has negotiated an optional retirement plan contract with the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System;

NOW THEREFORE, rhe Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Board and Haycock Township hereby agree to the following retirement pension plan for the municipal  employees:

I.	Coverage:  This plan shall cover all permanent municipal employees, hereinafter referred to as member, of the Township.  Membership for elected officials and employees hired on a temporary or seasonal basis is prohibited as is membership for individuals paid only on a fee basis. Individual membership shall be effective as of the date the Township entered into the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System or upon the expiration of the individual's probationary status, whichever is more recent.

Credited service shall accrue from the original member's da1e of hire or the expiration of the member's probationary period if one so existed. Credited service time earned prior to the enrollment of the Township into the System shall be known as prior service.

No credited service time shall be granted for time employed in a status other than as an active employee of the municipality, excluding credit for purchased military service, reinstatement of previous service or service earned and credited under Section 11, the portability section of this agreement.

2.	Superannuation Retirement:  Eligibility for a superannuation retirement shall occur upon the member's attainment of sixty (60) yeais of age or older.

3.	Basic Benefit:  The basic ammal benefit shall be equal to one and five-tenths percent (1.5 %) of the member's final salary multiplied by all yeais of credited service.
 
uec  14  ·uu	iu::>':I	r'. u:,






4.	Final Salary: The final salary shall be the average aJUJual compensation earned and paid during the member's final three (3) consecutive years of employment, or if not so long employed, then the average annual compensation earned and paid during the whole period of such employment.

5.	Early Retirement: A member who has separated from employment after twenty (20) years of credited service may retire early. Benefits will be actuarially reduced for each year or partial year thereof that early retirement takes place prior to age sixty (60).

6.	Permanent Disability Benefits: A member who has ten (10) or more years of credited service may, upon application or on application of one acting in the member's beh.alf, or upon application of a responsible official of the municipality, be retired by the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Board on a disability allowance if the physician designated by the Board, after medical examination of the member shall cettify to the Board that the individual is unable to engage in any gainful employment and that said member ought to be retired.  When the disability of a member is detennined to be service-connected, as defined in Act 15 of 1974, no minimum period of service shall be required for eligibility.

A disability aJUJuity shall be payable from the total disability reserve account which, together with the municipal annuity and the Il)ember's alllluity, if any, shall be sufficient to produce a retirement allowance of thirty percent (30%) of the member's final salary. Where the disability of the member is determined to be service­ connected, the disability allowance shall equal fifty percent (50%) of the member's final salary. The disability annuity shall be reduced by the amount of any payments for which the member shall be eligible under the Act of June 2, 1915 (P.L. 736, No. 338), known as "The Permsylvania Workmen's Compensation Act" or the Act of June 21, 1939 (PL  566, No. 284), known as "The Pennsylvania Occupational Disease Act."

Should a disability annuitant die before the total disability retirement allowance received equals the amount of the member's accumulated deductions at the time of disability retirement, the Board shall pay to the named beneficiary (if living, or if the named beneficiary predeceased the annuitant, or no beneficiary was named, then the annuitant's estate) an amount equal to the difference between such total retirement allowance received and the annuitant's accumulated deductions.  If such difference is less than one hundred dollars ($100) and no letters have been taken out on the estate within  six (6) months after the disability annuitant's death, such difference may be paid to the undertaker or to any person or municipality who or which shall have paid the claim of the
undertaker.

7.	Death Benefit:  When a member dies and the member has:

(a)	met the requirements for a superannuation retirement found in Section 2 of this agreement but has not yet retired; or,
 
Dec  14  '00	10 :59	P. 06






(b)	met the requirement for vesting found in Section 10 of this agreement but has not yet vested; or,

(c)	actually elected to vest a benefit but has failed to attain superarinuation retirement age,

a death benefit shall then be paid to the member's named beneficiary. The death benefit shall be a payment equal to the present value of the accrued benefit as of the date of the member's death.

A member who is entitled to a superannuation retirement allowance because of meeting the requirements found in Section 2, or a member who is eligible to vest or who has vested in accordance with Section l0 of this agreement may file a written applica1ion for a retirement benefit, selecting a retirement option and requesting that such election become effective upon the death of the member. The application must be filed with the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Board on a PMRB-8 form. The application shall be held by the Board until l) the member files a later application (PMRB-8) for a retirement allowance or2) the death of the member.

Ifno application for retirement was pre-filed by a member who dies and who was eligible for the death benefit found in this Section, it shall be considered that the member elected Option 1 as provided in Section 12 of this agreement.  In such event the payment under Option l shall be made to the beneficiary designated in the Nomination of Beneficiary form (PMRB-2) on file with the Board or in the absence of such a form, the estate of the member.

8.	Military Service: Any member employed by the Township who enters the uniformed services as defined by the 1994 Unifonned Services Employment and Re-Employment Rights Act (P.L. 103-353) and returns to the Township to again be a member of the plan within the authorized time period of the law, shall have the
authorized time spent in such service credited to the member's employment record for pension or retirement benefits if the individual IIlllkes the required employee contributions.

An active member may also pun;hase credit for other than intervening military service performed for the United States in times of war, armed conflict or   · national emergency, so proclaimed by the President of the United States, for a period not to exceed five (5) years, provided the member has completed five (5) years of service to the municipality subsequent to such military service. An active member may file an application with the Board for permission to pun;hase credit for nonintervening military service upon completion of five (5) years of subsequent service to the municipality.

The amount due from the member shall be certified by the Board in accordance with methods approved by the actuary.  It may be paid in a lump sum within
 
Dec 14 '00	11:00	P.07





thirty (30) days or it may be amortized with additional interest through salary deductions in amounts agreed upon by the member and the Board.
The rate of interest to be charged to a member on purchase of credit for noninteivening military service shall be the rate being credited by the System to members' accounts in effect on the date of the member's application, compounded annually.

A member may purchase credit for intervening or nonintervening military service only if discharge or separation from the service was granted under other than dishonorable conditions.  A member may not purchase military credit for any service that is covered by another retirement system administered and wholly or partially paid for by any other government agency or private employer.

9.	Contributions by Members: Members shall nor be required to contribute to the funding of the plan. Member contributions will be treated as taxed at the time they are made to the System, will be tracked separately, and will not be treated as taxable when paid out to the member.

If a member tenninates prior to becoming eligible for any benefit or the member elects not to receive a benefit, that individual shall be entitled to all accumulated contributions, interest and any excess investment monies allocated to the member's account.

10.	Vesting:  After eight (8) years of credited service, a member may vest by filing an application with the Board within ninety (90) days of separation from employment.  Upon a1tainment of the superannuation age requirement found in Section 2 of this agreement, a basic benefit will be calculated in accordance with Section 3 of this agreement.

11.	Portability:  When a member leaves the employ of the Township and enters within one year of separation into the employ of another municipality that has joined the System, the member's service credits shall remain unimpaired.  Should a member from the employ of another municipality that has joined the System separate from service and within one year of separation join the pension plan, the member's service credits will remain unimpaired.  In such cases, the municipal liability for past service shall be prorated by the System between the municipalities on an equitable basis.

12.	Optional Forms of Benefit Pavment:  At the time a member elects to receive a retirement benefit allowance, the benefit may be payable throughout the member's life, in which case, the benefit is known as a Single Life Annuity.  The member may alternatively elect at the time of retireme"nt to receive the equivalent actuarial value in a lesser allowance, payable throughout life with provisions that:
 
Dec   14  '00	11 :OO	P. 08






(a)	Option  1. If the member dies before receiving in payments  the present value of the retirement allowance as it was at the time of retirement, the balance, if less than five thousand dollars ($5,000), shall be paid  in a lump sum to the designated beneficiary  if living, or if the named beneficiary predeceased the member of if no beneficiary was named, then to the member's  estate.  If the balance  is five thousand dollars ($5,000) or more,
!he beneficiary may elect, by application duly acknowledged and filed
with the Board to receive payment of such balance according to any one of the following provisions:

(i)	in a lump-sum payment, or

(ii}	in an annuity having a present value equal to the balance payable, or

(iii)		in a lump-sum payment and an annuity. Such annuity shall be of equivalent actuarial value to the balance payable less the amount 9f the lump-sum payment specified by the beneficiary.

(b)	Option 2. Upon the annuitant's death, the retirement allowance shall be continued throµghout the life of and paid to the survivor annuitant, if then living.

(c}	Option 3. Upon the annuitant's death, one-half of the retirement allowance shall be continued throughout the life of and paid to the survivor annuitant, if then living.

Should a member who has elected a Single Llfe Annuity die before receiving in annuity payments the full amount of the total accumulated deductions standing to their credit in the member account on the effective date of retirement, the balance shall be paid to the designated beneficiary.

13.	Social Security Offset: There shall be no offset for Social,Security retirement benefits received by a member.

14.	Determination of Municipal Liability: The Board will actuarially determine the normal cost of the plan and any liability associated with tbe·plan's actuarial experience which shall be contributed annually by the municipality for the sexvice credits of the members. If applicable, any additional amount which shall be contributed annually towant a n:serve account for the disability allowances which may be payable in acconiance with this agreement shall also be determined and charged the municipality.
 
Dec  14  '00	11:01	P. 09





The amounts so detennined shall be computed in accordance with the requirements of Act 205 of 1984, the Municipal Pension Plan Fund Standard and Recovery Act, and Act 15of1974, the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law, and subsequent amendments to either Act.

15.	Procedure: Matters or procedure not covered in this agreement shall be as set forth in Act 15of1974 and as found in Act 205of1984, as they shall, from time to time, be amended.

Should any change or mistake in records result in any member, beneficiary or survivor annuitant receiving from the System more or less than the individual would have been entitled to receive had the records been correct, then regardless of the intentional or unintentional nature of the error and upon the discovery of such error, the Boanl will correct the error and so far as practicable adjust the payments which may be made for and to such person in such a manner that the actuarial equivalent of the benefit to which the imlividual was correctly entitled shall be paid.

16.	Unfunded Liability: Any unfunded liability incurred by the creation of benefits under this agreement shall be borne by Haycock Township.

17.	Effective Date: This agreement shall be effective the first day of January, 2001, with the acceptance of the same by Haycock Township and the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Board. Termination of this agreement shall be in accoroance with Section 412 of Act  15of1974.




(THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK)
 
Dec 14 '00	11:01	P. 10





IN WITNESS WHEREOF, we have hereunto set our hands and seal the day, month and year above written.

 
ATTEST:




 



ATIEST:




 




Approved as to form and legality:



BY:	,,,_- .,--
Office of Attomey General



BY:	-,--,:-- :--
Office of General Counsel
 

HAYCOCK TOWNSIDP, BUCKS COUNTY
9	..	\2Jh$/t,O	)
. airman



PENNSYLVANIA   MUNICIPAL
RETIREMENT BOARD
 


 
BY:
 


Chief Counsel
 






ELB:KMG:tme
12/11/00
 
ORDINANCE NO._fu




AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK APPOINTING THE ELECTED TAX COLLECTOR AS THE DELINQUENT TAX COLLECTOR




NOW THEREFORE, be it, and it is hereby ORDAINED and ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, as
follows:
,
WHEREAS, Act 104 of 2000 amended section 26.1 of the Local Tax Collection Law, 72 P.S. §5511.26a, to require that townships annually, on or before December 31 of each year, appoint the elected tax collector as a delinquent tax collector and provide for the collection of delinquent taxes in accordance with and providing for the same powers, rights, privileges, duties and obligations as are set forth in section 686 of the act of March 10, 1949 (P.L. 30, No. 14), known as the Public School Code of 1949.
WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township have decided to appoint the elected tax collector as the delinquent tax collector and to provide for the collection of delinquent taxes in accordance with and to provide for the same powers, rights, privileges, duties and obligations as are set forth in section 686 of the act of March 10, 1949 (P.L. 30, No. 14), known as the Public School Code of 1949.
 
NOW THEREFORE, be it and it is hereby ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, and it is hereby ENACTED and ORDAINED by authority of same as follows:
1.	The elected tax collector is hereby appointed as the delinquent tax

collector.

2.	The collection of delinquent taxes shall be in accordance with section 686 of the act of March 10, 1949 (P.L. 30, No. 14), known as the Public School Code of 1949, 24 P.S. §6-686.
3.	The elected tax collector shall have the same powers, rights, privileges, duties and obligations as are set forth in section 686 of the act of March 10, 1949 (P.L. 30, No. 14), known as the Public School Code of 1949, 24 P.S. §6-686.
4.	All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
5.	The provisions of this Ordinance are declared to be severable.	If

any sentence, clause, section or part of this Ordinance is for any reason determined to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this Ordinance. It is hereby declared as the intent of this authority that such remainder shall be and shall remain in full force and effect.
 
6.	All  provisions  of this  Ordinance shall  take effect  immediately upon

 
adoption of this Ordinance.
 

-;-t:,
 



2002.
 
ORDAINED and ENACTED this 7---
 

 


Attest:

.2'0 /?-. 0f,_µ;;
Nan Yodis (J
 
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP
 
Township Secretary	Kailil=M. llabb, ·	.
-	.
Michael A. Lennard, Vice Chair




Henry De:Pne, Mem ef
 

 
ORDINANCE  N0._-"9
 
,_1	_
 



AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, ADOPTING A STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE

IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED AND  ENACTED  by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Haycock, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, as follows:

I.	Adoption of Stormwater Management Ordinance

Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania hereby adopts a Stormwater Management Ordinance, which contains a statement of findings and purpose, repeals inconsistent ordinances, provides for applicability and exemptions, defines terms used, establishes requirements for stormwater management, including peak rate control in certain stormwater management districts, stormwater management implementation, water quality requirements, calculation methodology, standards during land disturbance; establishes stormwater management plan requirements including plan contents, submission, review and modification procedures; provides for inspections and a procedure for collection fees and expenses; establishes maintenance responsibilities and provisions to assure performance of maintenance responsibilities including providing for maintenance agreements and a Municipal Stormwater Maintenance Fund; establishes procedures for enforcement including right of  entry, notification, suspension and revocation of permits; provide penalties for violation and a procedure for appeals of notices of violations.

II.	Repealer

All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict. Haycock Township Ordinance No. 87 is hereby specifically repealed.

Ill.	Pending actions

Nothing in this Ordinance or in the Stormwater Management Ordinance hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in Section II of this Ordinance; nor shall any just or legal right of remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this Ordinance.

IV.	Savings Clause

In the event any portion  of this Ordinance is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or unenforceable, it shall not affect any of the  other  provision  of this  Ordinance  or the  Code of  the  Township  of
 
.(





Haycock.  All other provisions of this Ordinance and Code of Haycock Township shall remain in full force and effect.

V.	Severability

The provisions of this Ordinance are declared to be severable. If any sentence, clause, section or part of this Ordinance is for any reason determined to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this Ordinance. It is hereby declared as the intent of this authority that such remainder shall be and shall remain in full force and effect.


VI.	Captions

The captions to sections throughout this Ordinance are intended solely to facilitate reading of, and reference to, the sections and provisions of this Ordinance. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this Ordinance.

VII.	Effective Date

All provisions of this Ordinance shall be in force and effect five (5) days after adoption.
ORDAINED AND ENACTED this _2_ day of  tfJ	--
2002.


 


Attest:


2
Na dis,71cretary
 
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF
HAYCOCK  TOWNSHIP



.tL_  	
/kathleen M. Babb, Chair




Michael Lennard, Vic	Chair
J;D.#-e-m_,.b-e"'r --
 



U \TWC Qlents\liAYCOCK\Ord1na11<;1J dir\Stom:w.1tlir Qrd1n.11:co\OfU>INAl'JCt-p1oposc::I doc







2
 
ORDINANCE   NO.	Cj,;2...

AN ORDINANCE OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, REGULATING THE INSTALLATION AND OPERATION OF INDIVIDUAL RESIDENTIAL SPRAY IRRIGATION SYSTEMS AND REPEALING ORDINANCE NO. 57



The Haycock Township Board of Supervisors hereby ordains: Section 1.	Purpose:
The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish procedures for the installation, use, and maintenance of individual residential spray irrigation systems (IRSIS) within Haycock Township when the system is permitted through the Bucks County Department of Health.

Section 2.	Supplemental Standards:

This Ordinance. by reference, hereby incorporates the individual residential spray irrigation system standards of the Department of Environmental Protection, Title  25. Environmental Protection, Chapter 73, dated April 18, 1998, as amended pertaining to design, construction, maintenance, and operation.  lf the referenced standard is less restrictive, requires a smaller setback, or in any other way is modified by design requirements of Section 3 of this Ordinance, the design requirements of Section 3 of this Ordinance shall govern.

 
Section 3.

A.




B.






C.
 
Design Requirements:

No component of an IRSIS (including the wetted perimeter of the spray field) shall encroach within the required front, side, or rear yard area designated by the Township Zoning Ordinance.

Whenever the wetted perimeter of the spray irrigation field is located within fifty
(50) feet of a property boundary, a fence at least four (4) feet in height of material approved by the Township (such as split rail fencing with wire backing) shall be
installed along the property line. Fence shall extend at least twenty-five (25) feet beyond the limits of the spray field.

Buffering

1)	Whenever the wetted perimeter of the spray irrigation field is located within one hundred (100) feet, but not less than fifty (50) feet of a property boundary, buffering shall be required as follows:

Buffer plantings shall include a minimum of one (1) evergreen tree per. thirty (30) feet and one (1) canopy tree per forty (40) feet arranged along and within twenty-five (25) feet of the property boundary.

2)	Whenever the wetted perimeter of the spray irrigation field is located within fifty (50) feet of a property boundary, buffering shall be required as follows:
 
Buffer plantings shall include a minimum of one (1) evergreen tree per twenty (20) feet arranged along and within twenty-five (25) feet of the property boundary.

3)	Buffer plant material shall conform to requirements of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.

4)	Where natural features/vegetation exist on the site which duplicate or essentially duplicate requirements for buffering, buffer requirements may be waived by the Board of Supervisors.

D.		Spray  irrigation  of  the  chlorinated   effluent  shall   be  permitted  only   between  the hours of  11:OO PM to 5:00 AM.	·

E.		Spray nozzles located within fifty (50) feet of a property boundary shall be directed toward the interior of the lot and away from the adjacent property boundary.

Section 4.	Procedure for Obtaining an Individual Spray Irrigation System Permit:

A.	Before an IRSIS permit may be issued, the property owner shall:

1)	Obtain verification from the Bucks County Department of Health indicating that the site is generally suitable for installation of an IRSIS.

2)	File copy of the site plan and design of the proposed IRSIS with the Township.

3)	Submit such additional information on size, location, or otherwise as the Township may require in order to complete a review.

4)	Pay a fee to the Township for the IRSIS permit in accordance with the appropriate Resolution as adopted by the Board of Supervisors from time to time.

5)	Execute an agreement for maintenance and hold the Township harmless in the event of a claim against the Township arising from the operation of the IRSIS.

. 6) Deposit and/or post the sum of money for security in the form and/or amount as provided by the IRSIS Maintenance Agreement. These funds are to be held by the Township and used only in the event the Township is required to perform any services, or pay for any services, relative to the IRSIS.	Board of Supervisors shall have the right to claim the  entire escrow deposit as reimbursement for Township expenses.

B.	Permit issued under the terms of this agreement shall become null and void if the IRSIS installation has not been completed to the satisfaction of the Township within two (2) years of the date of issuance.
 
Section 5.	IRSIS Maintenance Agreement:

The owner of a property that utilizes an IRSIS shall execute a maintenance agreement approved by Township to ensure compliance with the regulations and standards of operation and maintenance of the system. The escrow or other security shall be sufficient to cover the cost of future operation and maintenance of the system over its design life up to a maximum of 50% for each of the first two (2) years of operation and not more than 10% for each year thereafter of the equipment and installation cost of the system.

Section 6.	Public Sewer Connection:

If public sewage service becomes available to any property utilizing an IRSIS, each and every owner of such properties shall be required to make the necessary connection to the abutting or adjoining sewer line. The IRSIS must be disconnected and disposed of in accordance with applicable Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection regulations and connection to the public sewer system shall be made upon notice by the Township and in accordance with the applicable standards of the servicing municipal authority. All authority costs relative to the public sewer connection shall be the responsibility of the property owner.

Section 7.	Abatement of Nuisances:

In addition to any other remedies provided by this Ordinance, any violation of the Ordinance shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the Township through equitable or legal relief from the Bucks County Court of Common Pleas.

Section 8.	Violations:

Any person who violates any provision of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof and summary proceedings, be sentenced to a fine of not more than five-hundred dollars ($500.00) in costs, or to undergo an imprisonment in the Bucks County Prison for a period not in excess of fifteen (15) days. Each day that a violation of this Ordinance continues shall constitute a separate offense.


Section 9.	Repealer:

All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.  The following Ordinance is specifically repealed:

Ordinance 57.

Section 10.	Severabilitv:

If any sentence, clause, section, or part of this Ordinance is for any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality, or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining· provisions, sentences, clauses, sections, or part of this Ordinance. It is hereby declared that the intent of the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township that this Ordinance would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid sentence, clause, section, or part thereof not been included therein.
 
Section 11.	Effective Date:

 
This Ordinance shall become effective five (5) days after its adoption.
ENACTED  AND   ORDAINED   into  an  ordinance   this	4 -ri.  day  of	Novf"m(J£";e 	
 


. A.O ..
 
2002, by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township and lawful session fully assembled.



HAYCOCK  TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS



J        '.il
athleen M. Babb, Chair
/




Michael Lennard, Vice Chair	-





Henry Depue, Member

U:\TWC     Clients\HAYCOCK\Ordinance.dir\IRSJS\ORDINANCE.doc
 




ORDINANCE NO. {jj



AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AMENDING ORDINANCE  NO. 85, WHICH WAS ADOPTED ON JANUARY 3, 2000, TO PROVIDE FOR DELETIONS, MODIFICATIONS AND ADDITIONS TO THE BUILDING CODE OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP.



BACKGROUND

WHEREAS, Section 1517 of the Second Class Township Code provides that the corporate powers of the board of supervisors include the enactment and enforcement of ordinances to govern and regulate the construction, alteration, repair, occupation, maintenance, sanitation, lighting, ventilation, water supply, toilet facilities, drainage, use and inspection of all buildings and housing constructed, erected, altered, designed or used for any use or occupancy and the sanitation and inspection of land (53 P.S. Section 66517);

WHEREAS, Section 1518 of the Second Class Township Code provides that the corporate powers of the board of supervisors include the appointment of one or more building and housing inspectors to enforce the building and housing regulations of the township and for the inspection of the construction, alteration, repair and sanitation facilities of buildings and housing in the township (53 P.S. Section 66518);

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, a Second Class Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania ("Board of Supervisors"), by Ordinance No. 85, enacted on January 3, 2000, has adopted the 1999 BOCA National Building Code, 14th Edition, ("BOCA Building Code") as the Building Code of Haycock Township to govern and regulate the construction, alteration, repair and occupancy of all buildings in the Township;

WHEREAS, Section 1601 of the Second Class Township Code provides that the board of supervisors may adopt ordinances in which general or specific powers of the township may be exercised, and, by the enactment of subsequent ordinances, the board of supervisors may amend, repeal or revise existing ordinances {53 P.S. Section 66601);

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors deems that it is in the best interests of the Township and of its citizens to amend Ordinance 85, to make certain deletions, modifications and additions, including but not limited to the appointment of a Code 'Enforcement Officer, to the Building Code of Haycock Township;

NOW THEREFORE, in· consideration of the foregoing, be it ENACTED and ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township that Ordinance No. 85 is hereby amended as follows:
 



A.	Paragraph 1 of Ordinance 85 is hereby amended to read as follows: Adoption of code by reference; modifications.
A.	The  1999 BOCA National Building Code in its entirety  is hereby reaffirmed as the Haycock Township Building Code, as modified in this Ordinance
and may be amended from time to time hereafter. Until a section marked "enacted
unchanged" is updated, modified or amended, it is the intent of the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors that the corresponding chapter in the 1999 BOCA
National Building Code is adopted in full and enacted unchanged.

B.	The 1999 BOCA National Building Code, with enacted modifications and amendments, shall be on file in the office of the Haycock Township Secretary.

8.	Paragraphs 2 through 6 of Ordinance 85 are deleted and the following is hereby added:

CHAPTER 1, ADMINISTRATION, of the 1999 BOCA National Building Code, is reaffirmed with the following  changes:

Section 101.0  SCOPE

101.1	Title: These regulations shall be known as the "Building Code of Haycock Township," hereinafter referred to as "this code."

101.2	Scope through 101.4 Intent: enacted unchanged.

Section 102.0  APPLICABILITY

102.1 General through 102.3  Matters not provided for:  enacted unchanged.

102.4 Referenced standards: The standards referenced in this code shall be the most recent. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply.

Section 103.0 VALIDITY:  entire section enacted unchanged.

Section 104.0  DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING INSPECTION

104.1	Code official: The Department of Building Inspection is hereby created. The Haycock Township Board of Supervisors may appoint a building inspector or other code official who shall for purposes of this Ordinance be known as the "Code Enforcement Officer." The Department shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of the building codes. Throughout this code, the Code Enforcement Officer is also referred to as the "Code Official."
 

104.2	Appointment: Any code Enforcement Officer appointed by the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors shall serve at the will of the Board of Supervisors.

104.3	Organization: The Code Official shall appoint such number of officers, technical assistants, inspectors and other employees as shall be necessary for the administration of this code and as authorized by the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors. The following are hereby appointed to assist the Code Official with the enforcement of this code: the Zoning Officer.

104.4	Deputy: The Code Official is authorized to designate an employee as deputy who shall exercise all the powers of the Code Official during the temporary absence or disability of the Code Official. The following are hereby authorized to act in the absence of the Code Official: the Zoning Officer.

104.5	· Restriction of employees through 104.7 Official records:  enacted unchanged.

Section 105.0  DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE CODE OFFICIAL

105.1	General:  enacted unchanged.

105.2	Applications and permits: The Code Official shall receive applications and issue permits for the erection and alteration of buildings and structures, inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued and enforce compliance with the provisions of this code. The Code Official may authorize the Zoning Officer to receive applications.

105.3	Notices and orders: The Code official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this code.  The Code Official may authorize the Zoning Officer to issue compliance notices or orders.

105.4	Inspections: The Building Inspector shall make all of the required inspections, or the Code Official shall accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. All reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The Department of Building Inspection is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the prior approval of the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors.

105.5	Identification: enacted unchanged.

105.6	Rule-making authority: The ·code Official shall have the authority to recommend, as necessary in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare, rules and regulations to interpret and implement the provisions of this code to secure the intent thereof and to designate requirements applicable because of local climatic or other conditions.  No such rule or regulation shall be in force until
 
adopted by the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors. No such rule or regulation shall have the effect of waiving structural or fire performance requirements specifically provided for in this code or of violating accepted engineering practice
·	involving public safety.

105.7	Department records:  enacted unchanged.

105.8	Annual report: On or before the second Tuesday of each February, the Code Official shall submit to the Chair of the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors a written statement of operations in the form and content as shall be prescribed by the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors.

Section 106.0  APPROVAL:  entire section enacted unchanged.

Section 107.0 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT

107.01 General: Applications for building and use permits shall be submitted with all other permits required by state or county agencies, such as but not limited to the Board of Health, Department of Environmental Resources and the Department of Transportation, if required by the use.

107.1	Permit application: An application shall be submitted to the Department of Building Inspection for the following activities, and these activities shall not commence without a permit being issued in accordance with Section 108.0:

1.	Construct or alter a structure.

2.	Construct an addition.

3.	Construct an accessory structure with a proposed building area of 288 square feet or more.

4.	Demolish or move a structure.

5.	Make a change of occupancy.

6.	Install or alter any equipment which is regulated by this code.

7.	Move a lot line which affects an existing structure.

It shall be unlawful to construct, enlarge, alter or demolish a structure, or change the occupancy  of  a  building or  structure  requiring  greater  strength,  exit  or sanitary provisions, or change to a new use not lawfully in existence, or to install or alter any equipment for which  provision is made or the installation of which is regulated by this code without  first filing an application  for a· land use permit with the Zoning Officer or Code Official.  Upon receipt of a valid land use permit, the applicant may then file applications for the required building permit; provided, however, that repairs
 
as defined in this code and which do not involve any violation of the code shall be exempt from this provision.

107.1.1 Repairs through 107.4 Description of work: enacted unchanged.

107.5	Construction  documents:	The  application  for  a  permit  shall  be accompanied by not less than three sets of construction documents.  The Code Official is permitted to waive the requirements for filing construction documents when the scope of the work is of a minor nature. When the quality of the materials is essential for conformity to this code, specific  information shall be given to. establish such quality, and this code shall not be cited, or the term "legal" or its equivalent used as a substitute for specific information.	Permits for all building groups, with the exception of Groups R-3 and R-4, are subject to the building regulations for protections from Fire and Panic by the Department of Labor and lndustry of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.  No permit will be issued until the applicant has furnished proof that the plans have been reviewed by the Department of Labor and Industry, if required. Approval of the plans by Labor and Industry shall not constitute a waiver of any applicable plan reviews and architectural review by the Building Inspector and Zoning Officer prior to approval and the issuance of building permits, at the cost as determined by the adopted fee schedule.

107.6	Survey plot plan: As a requirement for all new construction (except for construction of an accessory structure having a building area less than 288 square feet and for temporary structures on residential lots) prior to issuance of a building permit, and as part of the application for a land use permit, a survey plot plan, prepared by a Pennsylvania licensed surveyor, registered architect or licensed engineer shall be submitted to the Code Official, unless waived. Such survey shall bear the name and seal of the preparer, shall conform to all applicable state law (i.e., Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act, Pennsylvania Uniformed Planned Community Act, etc.), and shall conform to the following requirements:

1.	A boundary line survey of the proposed building lot, to a scale of not less than one inch equals 20 feet, showing all metes and bounds of the property.

2.	The size and location of all new construction. This shall include the proposed principal structure and alf accessory structures, including garages, porches, decks, driveways, pools ahd sidewalks.

3.	A building envelope established by the Zoning Ordinance requirements forthat district of the approved subdivision plan shall be shown on the survey plan.

4.	Lot area shall be defined in square feet, and the ratio of impervious lot coverage (including alf improvements) shall be expressed as a percentage of the total Jot area.

5.	Alf easements, restrictions, utility structures, land features to be removed for construction and surrounding properties shall be identified on the plot plan.
 


6.	Topographical site information at a contour interval of no less than two feet shall be provided. In lieu of this requirement for swimming pools, application for permanent pools shall be installed a minimum of eight inches above the ground, and a plan shall be submitted showing compliance with this requirement.

7.	The following grade elevations shall be indicated on the survey site plan: top of curb depression, basement, garage, first floor and spot elevations generally consistent with the approved grading plan.

8.	In addition to the above, the following detail shall also be provided: dimensions for all building and structure setbacks, the slope of the driveway as expressed as a gradient percentage, dimensions to the nearest off-lot principal structures (except on the street or open space of the lot), a legend indicating all zoning plan approval data (if different than the Zoning Ordinance standard) and locations of on-lot survey markers.

9.	In the case of demolition, the plot plan shall show all construction to be demolished and the location and size of all existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site. With historical structures, the required waiting period shall be observed.

107.6.1 Private sewage disposal system through 107.9 Time limitation for application:  enacted unchanged.

Section 108.0  PERMITS

108.1	Action on application: The Code Official shall examine or cause to be examined all applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or the construction documents do not conform to the requirements of all pertinent laws, the Code Official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. The Code Official may withhold the issuance of any permit until all applicable state, county and federal permits have been received.
108.2	Suspension of permit through 108.9 Notice of start: enacted unchanged. Section 109.0 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES: entire section enacted unchanged. Section  110.0     DEMOLITION  OF  STRUCTURES:     entire  section  enacted
unchanged.

Section 111.0  CONDITIONS OF PERMIT

111.1 Payment of fees through 111.3 Compliance with permit: enacted unchanged.
 
111.4	Compliance with survey plan: All new work shall be located strictly in accordance with the approved survey plan.

111.5	Access: The permit holder shall be responsible for providing acceptable and stable access to all authorized emergency personnel and inspectors.

Section 112.0 FEES

112.1  General through 112.2  Special Fees:  enacted unchanged.

112.3 New construction and alterations: The fees for plan examination, building permit, inspection and reinspection shall be as prescribed in Section 112.3.1 and the Code Official is authorized to establish with Board of Supervisors approval, a schedule of unit rates for buildings and structures of all use groups and types of construction.

112.3.1 Fee schedule: A fee for each plan examination, building permit, inspection and reinspection shall be paid in accordance with the fee adopted by resolution of the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors.

112.4  Accounting through 112.5 Refunds:  enacted unchanged.

Section 113.0  INSPECTION:  entire section enacted unchanged.

Section   114.0      PROFESSIONAL   ARCHITECTURAL   AND   ENGINEERING
SERVICES:  entire section enacted unchanged.

Section        115.0  WORKMANSHIP

115.1  General:  enacted unchanged.

Section 116.0  VIOLATIONS

116.1	Unlawful acts:  enacted unchanged.

116.2	Notice of violation: The Code Official, or when authorized by the Code Official, the Zoning Officer, shall serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, removal, demolition or occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of this code or in violation of a detail statement or a plan approved thereunder or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. The violation notice shall be based on direct and personal observation of the condition.

116.3	Prosecution of violation: enacted unchanged.
 

116.4	Violation penalties: Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the Code Official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall
be deemed a separate offense.

116.5	Abatement of violation: enacted unchanged.

Section 117.0  STOP WORK ORDER

117.1	Notice to owner:  enacted unchanged.

117.2	Unlawful continuance: Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop-work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.

Section 118.0  CERTIFICATE  OF OCCUPANCY

118.1  General through 118.2  Temporary occupancy:  enacted unchanged.

118.3	Issuance of certificate: Upon written requestfrom the owner of an existing structure, the Code Official shall issue a certificate of occupancy, provided that there are no violations of law or orders of the Code Official pending and it is established after inspection and investigation that the alleged occupancy of the structures has heretofore existed. This code shall not require the removal, alteration or abandonment of or prevent the continuance of the occupancy of a lawfully existing structure unless such use is deemed to endanger public safety or welfare. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy (except for decks, additions and accessory buildings on residential Jots), an "as-builf' survey, with all the detail and requirements established in Section 107.6 hereof, shall be filed with the Department of Building Inspection containing the approval of the Haycock Township Engineer or his designated official.

118.4	Contents of certificate: enacted unchanged.

118.5	Weather delay: In the event of weather-related problems, a certificate of occupancy may be issued, provided that the builder or permit applicant has posted escrow moneys in sufficient amount as determined by the Haycock Township Engineer or his appointed official to cover the cost of the incomple!e items.

Section 119.0 UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT: entire section enacted unchanged.

Section 120.0  EMERGENCY MEASURES:  entire section enacted unchanged.
 



Section 121.0  MEANS OF APPEAL

121.1	Application for appeal:  enacted unchanged.

121.2	Membership of board: The Board of Appeals shall consist of the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors.

121.3	Appellate review: Any person who is aggrieved by a decision of the Department of Building Inspection may appeal to the Board of Appeals by filing a written Notice of Appeal and the payment of the appropriate filing fee with the Haycock Township Secretary within 15 days of the decision of the Department. The Board of Appeals will thereafter hold a hearing on the appeal within 30 days, or longer if mutually agreed by the appellant. The hearing may be continued from time
·	to time as is necessary. Any person who demonstrates to the Board of Appeals'
satisfaction a direct, immediate, pecuniary and substantial interest in the subject matter may request to be a party to the appeal. The Board of Appeals shall decide all requests for party status.

121.3.1	Conduct of hearing: At the cost of the appellant, all hearings before the Board of Appeals shall be open to the public and shall  be stenographically recorded. The appellant and the appellant's representatives shall be given an opportunity to be heard and present any evidence in support of their position. The Building Inspector and/or Zoning Officer shall present any evidence in support of their position. The Board may receive the testimony of the Haycock Township Engineer and any other witnesses it requires to decide the appeal. Compliance with the strict rules of evidence is not required, but only relevant information shall be received by the Board of Appeals.

121.3.2	Postponed hearing: When a quorum of the Board of Appeals is not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the applicant's representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the hearing.

121.4	Decision of board: The Board of Appeals shall announce a determination within five days of the final hearing, and shall render a written decision within 15 days of the final hearing. The decision shall uphold, modify or reverse the action of the Department of Building Inspection. The decision shall contain finds of fact and conclusions of law and cite the applicable sections of this code in support thereof.

121.5	Court review: Any person who is aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Appeals and was a party to the appeal before the Board of Appeals shall have the right to appeal an adverse decision of the Board of Appeals to the Bucks County Court of Common Pleas in the manner and time provided by law.

121.6	Stay of proceedings: No permit will be issued and no affected work may begin or continue while any appeal is pending before the Board of Appeals.  The
 

appeal of any decision of the Board of Appeals, which would otherwise permit work to begin or continue or allow a permit to be issued, by any party to the appeal will not stay the issuance of any permit or the commencement or continuation of any affected work except upon an order of court.

CHAPTER 2, DEFINITIONS, of the 1999 BOCA National Building Code, is reaffirmed unchanged, with the following additions:

Manufactured Home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days.

Substantial Damage: Damage from any cause sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

Substantial Improvement: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term intludes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.

Zoning Officer: As used in this chapter, the officer or designated authority appointed by the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors charged with the administration of the Haycock Township Zoning Ordinance, and authorized to assist the building inspector in the administration and enforcement of this code.

CHAPTER 3, USE OR OCCUPANCY through CHAPTER 35, REFERENCED
STANDARDS, of the 1999 BOCA National Building Code, are enacted in the entirety, unchanged.

C.	Savings clause. Nothing in this chapter or in the building code, as amended and adopted hereby, shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any court cir any rights acquired or liability incurred or any cause(s) of action acquired or existing under any ordinance repealed hereby; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this enactment.

D.	Inconsistent provisions.	In addition, all inconsistent provisions of all other Ordinances and Resolutions on the Township of Haycock, Bucks County, Pennsylvania are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency.  All other provisions of the
 
Ordinances and Resolutions of the Township of Haycock, Bucks County, Pennsylvania shall remain in full force and effect.

E.	Severability.	The provisions of this Ordinance are declared to be severable.  If any sentence, clause, section or part of this Ordinance is for any reason determined to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this Ordinance.  It is hereby declared as the intent of this authority that such remainder shall be and shall remain in full force and effect.

F.	Jurisdiction.    In the event any portion of this Ordinance is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or unenforceable, it shall not affect any of the other provision of this Ordinance. All other provisions of this Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.

G,	Effective Date.	All provisions of this Ordinance shall take effect five (5) days after the date of its enactment.



_  .   pRDAINED  and E ACTED  by the  Board of Supervisors  of Haycock Township  this day of	f1tft,,_J:._, 2003.
'
ATTEST:	HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS


 

























U:\TWC Clients\HAYCOCK\Ordinance.dir\Buiding   Code Amend 2003\Building  Code Ord. amend't.2003.doc
 
ORDINANCE NO.   q 'f

AN ORDINANCE REPEALING HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP ORDINANCE NO. 34 AND PROVIDING FOR THE LEVY, ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION OF A TAX FOR GENERAL REVENUE PURPOSES FOR THE YEAR TWO THOUSAND AND THREE AND ANNUALLY THEREAFTER, UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT, UPON SALARIES, WAGES, COMMISSIONS AND OTHER COMPENSATION EARNED DURING THE PERIOD BEGINNING JANUARY 1, AND ENDING DECEMBER 31, BY RESIDENTS OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, AND ON THE NET PROFITS EARNED DURING THE SAME PERIOD, OF BUSINESSES, PROFESSIONS AND  OTHER ACTIVITIES CONDUCTED BY SUCH RESIDENTS; AND ON THE SALARIES, WAGES, COMMISSIONS AND OTHER COMPENSATION EARNED BY OR PAID TO ALL OTHER PERSONS EMPLOYED IN SAID TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK DURING THE SAME PERIOD, AND ON THE NET PROFIT EARNED BY ALL OTHER PERSONS DERIVED FROM BUSINESSES, PROFESSIONS AND OTHER ACTIVITIES CONDUCTED IN SAID TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK DURING THE SAME PERIOD; PROVIDING FOR THE FILING OF DECLARATIONS, QUARTERLY RETURNS AND FINAL RETURNS; REQUIRING EMPLOYERS TO REGISTER AND TO DEDUCT THE TAX FROM THEIR EMPLOYEES' WAGES AND TO FILE RETURNS AND PAY THE TAX; MAKING AN EMPLOYER WHO WILLFULLY OR NEGLIGENTLY FAILS OR OMITS TO MAKE THE DEDUCTIONS LIABLE FOR PAYMENT OF THE TAX; SETTING FORTH THE DUTIES OF THE INCOME TAX OFFICER, PROVIDING FOR THE BONDING OF THE OFFICER; FOR HIS COMPENSATION, AND AUTHORIZING HIM TO SUE; PROVIDING FOR INTEREST AND PENALTIES FOR LATE PAYMENT; PROVIDING FINES AND PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF THE ORDINANCE; AND PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY OF ITS TERMS.

WHEREAS, Section 1506 of the Pennsylvania Second Class Township Code provides that the corporate powers of the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township (the "Board of Supervisors") include the ability to make and adopt any ordinance not inconsistent with or restrained by the Constitution and laws of this Commonwealth necessary for the proper management, care and control of the township and its finances (53 P.S. Section 66506);


WHEREAS, the Local Tax Enabling Act (53 P.S. 6901 et. seq.), as amended from time to time, empowers townships of the second class to levy, assess and collect certain taxes subject to maximum limitations for general revenue purposes;
 
WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors found it is necessary in the judgment of the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, Bucks County, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to impose a tax on the salaries, wages, commissions and compensation earned by residents and on the net profits earned of businesses, professions and other activities conducted by residents and on the salaries, wages, commissions and other
·	compensation earned by or paid to all other persons employed in the said Haycock

Township for general revenue purposes, occasioned by increased Township costs and operating expenses and on or about May, 4, 1977, duly adopted Ordinance No. 34, providing for an Earned Income Tax, under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act (53 P.S. 6901 et. seq.);


WHEREAS, Act 50 of 1998, (53 Pa.C.S. 8711) authorizes school districts to levy earned income taxes up to 1.5% with the approval of the voters;


WHEREAS, the Board of School Directors of Quakertown Community School District held a vote of the electors at the November 5, 2002 municipal election to eliminate the Occupation Tax, effective July 1, 2003, and replaces it with an increase of the earned income and net profits tax rate to 1% in addition to the .5% earned income tax and net profits tax imposed by the municipality in which the taxpayer resides;


WHEREAS, a majority of those voting on the question voted in favor of the elimination the Occupation Tax and the imposition of the tax;


WHEREAS, the Board of School Directors of Quakertown  Community School District by Resolution dated March 13, 2003, eliminated the Occupation Tax and imposed an increase of the earned income and net profits tax rate to 1% in addition to the .-5% earned income tax and net profits tax imposed by the municipality in which the taxpayer resides;


WHEREAS, Section 1601 of the Pennsylvania Second Class Township Code provides that the  Board of Supervisors  may adopt  ordinances  in which  general or
 
specific powers of the township may be exercised, and, by the enactment of subsequent ordinances, the Board of Supervisors may amend, repeal or revise existing ordinances (53 P.S. Section 66601);


WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors finds it is in the interests of the Township and of its citizens to revise the Earned Income Ordinance to incorporate the actions taken by the Board of School Directors of Quakertown Community School District and the recent amendments to the Local Tax Enabling Act by repealing Haycock Township Ordinance No. 34 and replacing it with this Ordinance;


NOW THEREFORE, in ·consideration of the foregoing, be it ENACTED and ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania,  as follows:


Section 01: Haycock Township Ordinance No. 34 and any other Ordinances and/or Resolutions inconsistent herewith are repealed and replaced by the following:


ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS



Definitions: The following words and phrases when used in this Ordinance shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context indicates a different meaning:
(a)	"Association" - shall mean a partnership, limited partnership, or any other unincorporated group of two or more persons.
(b)	"Business" - shall mean any enterprise, activity, profession  or any other

undertaking of an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for profit whether by a person, partnership, association or any other entity.
(c)	"Corporation" - shall mean a corporation or joint stock   association

organized under the laws of the United States of America, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any other state, territory, foreign country or dependency.
(d)	"Current year" - shall mean the calendar year for which the tax is levied.
 

(e)	"Domicile" - shall mean the place where one lives and has his permanent home and to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent. Actual residence is not necessarily domicile, for domicile is the fixed place of abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than transitory.  Domicile is the place in which a man has voluntarily fixed the habitation of himself and his family, not for mere special or limited purpose, but with the present intention of making a permanent home, until some event occurs to induce him to adopt some other permanent home. In the case of businesses, or associations, the domicile  is that place considered as the center of business affairs and the place where its functions are discharged.
(f)	"Earned Income" - shall mean "compensation" as determined under section 303 of the act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform Code of 1971," and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Pt. I Subpt. B Art. V (relating to personal income tax) [specifically 61 Pa Code Section 101.6, attached for reference]. Employee business expenses are allowable deductions as determined under Article Ill of the ''Tax Reform Code of 1971." The amount of any housing allowance provided to a member of the clergy shall not be taxable as earned income.
(g)	"Employer" - shall mean a person, partnership, association, corporation, institution, governmental body or unit or agency, or any other entity employing one or more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation.
(h)	"Income Tax Officer" or "officer" - shall mean a person, public employee or private agency designated by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township to collect and administer the tax on earned income and net profits.
(i)	"Net profits" - shall mean the net income from the operation of a business, profession or other activity, except corporations, determined under section 303 of the act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform Code of 1971," and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Pt. I Subpt. B Art. V (relating to personal income tax) [specifically 61 Pa Code Section 103.12, attached for reference]. The term does not include income which is not paid for services provided and which is in the nature of earnings from an investment. For taxpayers engaged in the business, profession or activity of farming, the term shall not include:
 
(1)	any interest earnings generated from any monetary accounts or investment instruments of the farming business:
(2)	any gain on the sale of the farm machinery;

(3)	any gain on the sale of livestock held twelve months or more for draft, breeding or dairy purposes; and
(4)	any gain on the sale of other capital assets of the farm.

0)	"Nonresident" - shall mean a person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled outside the Township of Haycock.
(k)	"Person or individual" - shall mean a natural person.

(I)	"Preceding year" - shall mean the calendar year before the current year.

(m)	"Resident" - shall mean a person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled in the Township of Haycock.
(n)	"Succeeding year" - shall mean the calendar year following  the current
 

year.
 



(o)	"Taxpayer" - shall mean a person, partnership, association or any  other
 

entity required hereunder to file a return of earned income or net profits, or to pay a tax thereon.
(p)	''Township" - shall mean the Township of Haycock, County of Bucks and

Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

In this ordinance, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.


ARTICLE II. IMPOSITION AND RATE OF TAX



The following taxes are hereby imposed for general revenue purposes, under the authority of The Local Tax Enabling Act for the year 2003 and annually thereafter:
(a)	One and one half percent (1 Y.%) of all earned income received in the period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of the current year by residents of the Township.
 

(b)	One and one half percent (1 Y.%) of all net profits earned in the period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of the current year of businesses, professions and other activity conducted by residents of the Township.
(c)	One and one half percent (1 Y.%) of all earned income  received in the

period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of the current year by all other persons employed in the Township.
(d)	One and one half percent (1 Yi%) of all net profits earned in the period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of the current year of businesses, professions and other activity conducted by all other persons in the Township.


ARTICLE Ill. DECLARATIONS, PAYMENT OF TAX AND RETURNS



(a)	Every taxpayer who anticipates net profits ·shall on or before April 15, of the current year, make and file with the Income Tax Officer on a form prescribed or approved by the officer, a declaration of his estimated net profits during the period beginning January 1 and ending December 31, of the current year,  and  pay to the officer in four equal quarterly installments the tax due thereon as follows: the first installment at the time of filing the declaration, and the other  installments on or before June 15 and September  15 of the current year, and January 15 of the succeeding year, respectively.
(b)	Any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profit after April 15, of the current year, shall make and file the declaration hereinabove required on or before June 15, of the current year, September 15, of the current year, or December 31, of the current year, whichever of these dates next follows the date on which the taxpayer first anticipates such net profit, and pay to the officer in equal installments the tax due thereon on or before the quarterly payment dates which remain after the filing of the declaration.
(c)	Every taxpayer, earning net profits in the current year, shall on or before April 15 of the succeeding year, make and file with the officer on a form prescribed or approved by the officer a final return showing the amount of net profits earned during the period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of the current year, the total
 
amount of tax due thereon and the total amount of tax paid thereon. At the.time of filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay to the officer the balance of the tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in the case of overpayment.
Any taxpayer may, in lieu of paying the fourth quarterly installment of his estimated tax, elect to make and file with the officer on or before January 31, of the succeeding year, the final return as hereinabove required.
(d)	Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31, of the current year, shall, within thirty (30) days after the discontinuance of business, file his final return as hereinabove required and pay the tax due.
(e)	Every taxpayer who is employed for a salary, wage, commission, or other compensation and who received any earned incoi:ne not subject to the provisions of Section IV of this Ordinance relating to the collection at the source, shall make and file with the officer on a form prescribed or approved by the officer a quarterly return on or before April 30 of the current year, and July 31 and October 31 of the current year and January 31 of the succeeding year, setting forth the  aggregate amount of earned income not subject to withholding by him during the three-month periods ending March 31, of the current year, June 30 of the current year, September 30 of the current year, and December 31 of the current year, respectively, and subject to the tax, together with such other information as the officer may require. Every taxpayer making such return shall at the time of filing thereof, pay to the officer the amount of tax shown as due thereon.
(f)	Every tax payer shall, on or before April 15, of the succeeding year, make
>
and file with the officer on a form prescribed or approved by the officer a final return showing the amount of earned income received during the period beginning January 1, of the current year, and ending December 31, of the current year, the total amount of tax due thereon, the amount of tax paid thereon, the amount of tax thereon that has been withheld pursuant to the provisions of Article IV of this Ordinance relating to the collection at the source and the balance of tax due. At the time of filing the final return the taxpayer shall pay the balance of the tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in the case of overpayment.
 

(g) Any tax payer who has complied with those provisions of the Haycock Township Ordinance levying a tax of one and one half percent (1 %%) on salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation and one and one half percent (1 %%) on net profits earned and received in the year 2003 which relate to the filing of declarations, shall be deemed to have complied with the requirements of this Ordinance relating to the filing of declarations for the year 2003, only.


ARTICLE IV.  COLLECTION AT SOURCE



(a)	Every employer having an office, factory,  workshop,  branch, warehouse, or other place of business within the Township who employs one or more persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage, commission, compensation or other earned income, who has not previously registered, shall, within fifteen (15) days after the effective date of this Ordinance or within fifteen (15) days after becoming an employer, whichever occurs first, register with the Income Tax Officer his name and address  and such other information as the officer may require.
(b)	Every employer having an office, factory,  workshop,  branch, warehouse, or other place of business within the Township who employs one or more persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage, commission, compensation or other earned income, shall deduct at the time of payment thereof, the tax imposed by this Ordinance on the earned income due to his employee or employees, and shall on or before April 30 of the current year, July 31 of the current year, October 31 of the current year and January 31 of the succeeding year, file a return and pay to the officer the amount of taxes deducted during the preceding three-month periods ending March 31  of  the current year, June 30 of the current, September 30 of the current, and December 31 of the current year, respectively. Such return unless otherwise agreed upon between the officer and employer shall show the name and social security  number  of  each employee, the earned income of such employee during such preceding  three-month period, the tax· deducted therefrom,· the political subdivisions imposing  the  tax  upon such employee,  the total earned income of all such employees during such preceding three-month period, and the total tax deducted therefrom and paid with the return.
 

Any employee who for two (2) of the preceding four (4) quarterly periods has failed to deduct the proper tax, or any part thereof, or has failed to pay over the proper amount of tax shall be required by the officer to file his return and pay the tax monthly. In such cases, payments of tax shall be made to the officer on or before the last day of the month succeeding the month for which the tax was withheld.
(c)	On or before February 28, of the succeeding year, every employer shall file with the officer:
(1)	An annual return showing the total amount of earned income paid,

the total amount of tax deducted, and the total amount of tax paid to the officer for the period beginning January 1, of the current year, and ending December 31, of the current year.
(2)	A return withholding statement for each employee employed during

all or any part of the period Beginning January 1, of the current year and ending December 31, of the current year, setting forth the employee's name, address and social security number, the amount of earned income paid to the employee during said period, the amount of tax deducted, the political subdivisions imposing the tax upon such employee, the amount of tax paid to the officer. Every employer shall furnish two copies of the individual return to the employee for whom it is filed.
(d)	Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31, of the current year, shall, within thirty (30) days after discontinuance of business, file the returns and withholding statements hereinabove required and pay the tax due.
(e)	Every employer who willfully or negligently fails or omits to make the deductions required by this Ordinance shall be liable for payment of the taxes which he was required to withhold to the extent that such taxes have not been recovered from the employee.
(f)	The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions required

by this section shall not relieve any employee from the payment of the tax or from complying with the requirements of this Ordinance relating to the filing of declarations and returns.


ARTICLE V. POWERS AND DUTIES OF OFFICER
 



(a)	It shall be the duty of the Income Tax Officer to collect and receive the taxes, fines and penalties imposed by this Ordinance. It shall also be his duty to keep a record showing the amount received by him from each person or business paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
(b)	The officer, before entering upon his official duties shall give and acknowledge to the Township a bond in the form and amount as is required by law. The bond shall be joint and several with such sureties as are authorized by law; it shall contain the name(s) of the surety company or companies bound thereon. The Township shall fix the amount of the bond at an amount equal to the maximum amount of taxes which may be in the possession of the officer at any given time.
The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful discharge by the officer, his clerks, assistants and appointees of all trusts confided in him by virtue of his office, upon the faithful execution of all duties required by him by virtue of his office, upon the just and faithful accounting or payment over, according to law, of all moneys and all balances thereof paid to, received or held by him by virtue of his office and upon the delivery to his successor or successors in office of all books, papers, documents or other official things held in right of his office.
The bond shall be in the name of the Township and shall be for the use of the Township and for the use of such other person or persons for whom money shall be collected or received, or as his or her interest shall otherwise appear, in case of a breach of any of the conditions thereof by the acts or neglect of the principal on the bond. The Township or any person may sue upon the said bond in its or his own name for its or his own use.
(c)	The officer is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this Ordinance, provided that all such rules and regulations m.ust be first approved by resolution of the Township Supervisors.
(d)	The officer shall refund, on petition of, and proof by the taxpayer, earned

income tax paid on the taxpayer's ordinary and necessary business expenses, to the extent that such expenses are not paid by the taxpayer's employer.
 

(e)	The officer and agents designated by him are hereby authorized to examine the books, papers and records of any employer or of any taxpayer or of any person whom the officer reasonably believes to be an employer or taxpayer, in order to verify the accuracy of any declaration or return, or if no declaration or return was filed, to ascertain the tax due. Every employer and every taxpayer and every person whom the officer reasonably  believes to be an employer or taxpayer is hereby directed and required to give to the officer, or to any agent designated by him, the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination and investigations, as are hereby authorized.
(f)	Any information gained by the officer, his agents, or by any other official or

agent of the Township, as a result of any declarations, returns, investigations, hearings or verifications required or authorized by this Ordinance, shall be confidential, except for official purposes and except in accordance with a proper judicial order, or as otherwise provided by law.
(g)	The officer is authorized to establish different filing, reporting and payment dates for taxpayers whose fiscal years do not coincide with the calendar year.
(h)	The officer shall, at least quarterly, distribute earned income taxes to the

appropriate political subdivisions. The political subdivisions shall at least annually reconcile their receipts with the records of the officer and return to or credit the officer with any overpayment. If the officer, within one (1) year after receiving a tax payment, cannot identify the taxing jurisdiction entitled to a tax payment, he shall make payment to the municipality in which the tax was collected.


ARTICLE VI. COMPENSATION OF INCOME TAX OFFICER



The Income Tax Officer shall receive such compensation for his services and expenses as the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors shall determine.


ARTICLE VII.  SUIT FOR COLLECTION OF TAX
 

(a)	The Income Tax Officer may sue in the name of the Township for the recovery of taxes, interest and penalties due and unpaid under this Ordinance, or for the recovery of an erroneous refund, subject to such limitations as are provided by law.
(b)	Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by the Ordinance shall be begun within three (3) years after such tax is due, or within three (3) years after the declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is later, provided, however, that this limitation shall not prevent the institution of a suit for the collection of any tax due or determined to be due in the following cases:
(1)	Where no declaration or return was filed by any person although a declaration or return was required to be filed by him under provisions of the Ordinance or resolution, there shall be no limitation.
(2)	Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any person, or of other evidence relating to such declaration or return in the possession of the officer, reveals a fraudulent evasion of taxes, there shall be no limitation.
(3)	In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability of twenty- five percent (25%) or more and no fraud, suit shall be begun within six (6) years.
(4)	Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of the Ordinance or resolution, and has failed to pay the amounts so deducted to the officer, or where any person has willfully failed or omitted to make the deductions required by this section, there shall be no limitation.
(5)	This section  shall not be construed to limit the Township  from recovering delinquent taxes by any other means provided by this Ordinance.
(c)	The officer may sue for recovery of an erroneous refund provided such suit is begun two (2) years after making such refund, except that the suit may be brought within five (5) years if it appears that any part of the refund was induced by fraud or misrepresentation of material fact.


ARTICLE VIII. INTEREST AND PENALTIES



If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum on the amount of said tax, and an additional penalty of one-half of one
 

percent (Y, of 1%) of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof during which the tax remains unpaid, shall be added and collected. Where suit is brought for the recovery of any such tax, the person liable therefore shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of collection and the interest and penalties herein imposed.


ARTICLE IX. FINES AND PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF ORDINANCES

OR RESOLUTIONS



(a)	Any person who fails, neglects, or refuses to make any declaration or return required by this Ordinance, any employer who fails, neglects or refuses to register or to pay the tax deducted from his employees, or fails, neglects or refuses to deduct or withhold the tax from his employees, any person who refuses to permit the officer or any agent designated by him to examine his books, records, and papers, and any person who knowingly makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent return, or attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full disclosure of the amount of his net profits or earned income in order to avoid the  payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed by this Ordinance, shall, upon conviction thereof before any justice of the peace, alderman or magistrate, or court of competent jurisdiction in the county or counties in which the political subdivision imposing the tax is located, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500) for each offense, and costs, and, in default of payment of said fine and costs to be imprisoned for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days.
(b)	Any person who divulges any information which is confidential under the provisions of this Ordinance, shall, upon conviction thereof before any justice of the peace, alderman or magistrate, or court of competent jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500) for each offense, and costs, and, in default of payment of said fines and costs to be imprisoned for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days.
(c)	The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any other

penalty imposed by any other section of this Ordinance.
 

(d)	The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for making the declaration or returns required by this Ordinance shall not excuse him from making such declaration or return.·


ARTICLE X.  INCORPORATION OF LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT



All provisions of the Act No. 511 of 1963, "The Local Tax Enabling Act'' (the "Act") and all subsequent amendments to the Act are incorporate herein by reference.  If there exists any conflict between the Act and this Ordinance, the Act controls.


ARTICLE XI.  SEVERABILITY



The provisions of this Ordinance are severable. If any sentence, clause, or section if for any reason is found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, this shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions which are intended to remain in full force and effect.


ARTICLE XII.  MISCELLANEOUS



The provisions of this Ordinance so far as they are the same as those of Ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of this Ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such Ordinances and not as new enactments. Any subsequent amendment to this Ordinance may be made and ratified by the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors via resolution. The provisions of this Ordinance shall not affect any act done or liability incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any offense under the authority of any Ordinance repealed by this Ordinance.


ARTICLE XIII. EFFECTIVE DATE

All provisions of this Ordinance shall be in force and effect July 1, 2003.
 



 
SO ENACTED AND ORDAINED this ;23	day of	&­

by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township.
 
, A.O., 2003,
 


. ATTEST:	BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP


/U'tA.	7n ·
Nancy dcdis, Setary	athleen M. Babb, Chair	---···---·)


"/	/
Midhael Lennard, Vice Chair
. ,()JI
 
Jun 23 03 10:48a	Terr W Clemons	Assoc PC
 


215-348-9450	p.2
 


 
nr filnnnfy-,	.
NOTICE
TAKE NOTICE that the H•vcoCk Township Board of Supervisors will hotd a ·public hearin9 on Mand June  23,  2003, al 8:00 p.m. at the Haycock Township Municipal Building, 640
Harrisburg School  Road QuaR:ertown, Pennsyl vanla. and, if appropriata, adopt     B.rl       Ordinance
..rep ling Haycock Tow_nshfp Ordinance Na. 34 and providing for the levy, ass \'5mDnt and ccllection of a tax tor general ravenve purpos­ es  for  the  year  TWo
_   ThaUsand    and    Three
..and itnnuattv thereattGr
und r.the authori!Y of th
local tax e_nabH"ng act, upon .salat'les, wages, comm1ssions  and other
. compensation eamed dJr..
fnQ  1he  period  Oeginning
·	January  1,. and  anding
December   31,   by-   resi­
dents Of lhe Township of
Hayc:oc1<,. and .on the net
profits.earned during the same period, of bui;;in55l;I-
. $, professions: and other
cttvitle  condumed  by
-.such_r&llldonts:. and on the, arias, wages,  commiB<-   i
•	s1011s and !'-'ther r;ompen­
satlon earned by or paid to
au   . other	person&
efr!ployed	in	aid
! Pof Haycock dur· mg_ 1he. same per!Ccf, and on the net profit earned by
·all other·.PSroone derived
•	lreni  businesses,  profes-­
. sicns arn:t other acliviUes
oonducted       in       said
Townshlp of HaycoCk. dur­ i g. !hf! s.Wne pel'lod;  pro­ viding fur !he tiling of dec­ larations, quarterly retums and final returns; requiring
emp!oye15 to register and
·	to de:duct the tax from \heir
'employees' wages and to
lile .ratums and pay the l_ax;. m_aklng an employer wh willfully or negUgenlly fil.!!s or omits lo make the deductions liable !or pay­ mejlt   of  1he.  blx;   setting
·	forlh .the  duties  of  the
.Income tax officer, provid­
ing tor the· bc;mding of the
r; for his compensa­ tion, and authorizl11g him to Sue; providing for !nter­ est _and penaltles 1or late
_Payment; providing fines and penalties for '1iolation
? a Ocdrnanca: anct pro­
viding tor severablllty of Its
terms.
.    A	copy	of	the Ordlnarrce  summarized above   is   available   for inspeclion during normal business    hour.;    at    the. Haycock   ·	Township MunJaipat   Building,   640
Harnsburg  School  Road
Ou.akartown,	Pennsyl
Vania;  the  Bucks  County Law Libiary, Doylestown, P nnsylvanla;   and  at  fllG offlc.es of this .newspaper. Terry W•.CIBmons,
Esquire ·
So!lcitOrto He.ycookiownship Terry W. Clemons &
AssociafeS,  P. c.
·107 East Oakland Avenue
novlro;tnwn
 









......?.:!.S..\':!!..!:! .q!\E!!'...........................................................  being  duly
affirmed according to law, deposes and says that he/she is the
......;!,lU1:1&..i1;m.'>g x ......................................................................  ..
(Manager or Designated Agent)
of  the  CALKINS  NEWSPAPERS  INCORPORATED,   Publisher
of the Intelligencer, a newspaper of general  circulation, published and having its place of business at  Doylestown, Bucks County, Pa. and  Horsham,  Montgomery  County,  Pa.; that said newspaper was established in 1886; that securely attached hereto is a printed notice which is exactly as printed and published in said newspaper on.............................................. .
......J..u..n...e.....9.....&....1...6..,.....Z..0...0..3....................................................................


and is a true copy thereof; and that this affiant is not interested in said subject matter of advertising; and that all of the allegations in this statemenl as to the time, place and character of publication are true .






........AM<.\c.v.<i .....1'....'.'.ffi. .J.ki.d................................................ ..








Affirmed and subscribed to before me this	19	day of  June A.D.20

NOTARIAL$
NORMAJEAN  LEIDY,  NOTARY   UE!LIC DOYLESTOWN TWP., 90UNTY OF SUCKS Wff COMMISSION EXPIRES APRIL 2 2007
 
ORDiNANCE NO...!i.2




AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AMENDING ARTICLE IV SECTION 404 OF THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, ESTABLISHING STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS FOR TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES WITHIN HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP



WHEREAS, Section 1516 (53 P.S. §66516) of the Pennsylvania Second Class Township Code provides that the corporate powers of the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township (the "Board of Supervisors") include the abHity to plan for the development of the township through zoning, subdivision and  land  development regulations under the act of July 13, 1968 (P.L. 805, No. 247), known as the "Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code."

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors on or about September, 26, 1994, duly adopted Ordinance No. 71, revising and restating the Haycock Zoning Ordinance as adopted in 1975;

WHEREAS, Section 1601 of the Second Class Township Code provides that the Board of Supervisors may adopt ordinances in which general or specific powers of the township may be exercised, and, by the enactment of subsequent ordinances, the Board of Supervisors may amend, repeal or revise existing ordinances (53 P,S. Section 66601);

WHEREAS, the since its adoption, the Zoning Ordinance has from  time to time been amended;

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors finds it is in the interests of the of the Township and of its citizens to amend the Zoning Ordinance to make provisions for the establishment of standards and regulations for telecommunications facilities within the Township;

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors finds and determines that this Zoning Ordinance amendment is consistent with the Township Comprehensive Plan and the Community Development Objective stated therein and in the Zoning Ordinance.

NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing, be it ENACTED and ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, as follows:

Section 01: Article IV section 404 of the Zoning Ordinance is amended by adding the following section I. as follow:
 
l.	TELECOMMUNICATIONS  FACILITIES

11	PURPOSE

The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Haycock Township and of those who visit this community, while accommodating the telecommunication needs of residents, visitors, community services and businesses. This section shall:

A.	Preserve the character and appearance of Haycock Township, while allowing adequate telecommunications services to be developed;

8.	Protect the scenic, historic, environmental,  and  natural  resources  of Haycock Township, and property values therein;

 
C.	Provide standards and requirements appearance, construction, monitoring, telecommunications  facilities;
 
for  the  operation,  siting,  design, modification,	and	removal	of
 

D.	Minimize tower and antenna proliferation by encouraging the sharing of existing telecommunications facility sites where possible and appropriate;

E. Facilitate the provision of telecommunications services  to  the  residences and businesses of Haycock Township;

F. Require, through performance standards, the location of telecommunication facilities in nonresidential areas and away from other sensitive areas such as schools, hospitals, senior centers, and child care facilities.

12	AUTHORITY TO HIRE INDEPENDENT CONSULTANTS

A.	Upon review of an application for use by special exception and/or Site Plan Review for a telecommunications facility, the  Haycock  Township  Zoning Hearing Board (hereinafter "Zoning Board") and/or the ·Haycock Township Planning Commission (hereinafter "Planning Commission") may determine that it needs the assistance of an independent consultant or consultants to evaluate the application. Upon making such a determination, it may hire independent consultants, the reasonable costs of whose services shall be paid for by the applicant from escrow funds held with the Township pursuant to the fee schedule set by the Board of Supervisors via Resolution. These consultants shall be qualified professionals with an appropriate combination of training, record of service, and/or certification in one or more of the following areas of expertise: 1) telecommunications/radio frequency engineering; 2) structural engineering; 3) assessment of electromagnetic fields; 4) legal issues; 5) other areas, · if determined necessary by the Zoning Board or the Planning Commission.





2
 
"


B.	The Zoning Board and Planning Commission may provide  the  full application to any independent consultant(s) hired pursuant to this section for their analysis and review. Consultants shall report directly to the Zoning Board and/or the Planning Commission.

13	CONSISTENCY WITH FEDERAL LAW

The Zoning Board's decision regarding an application is intended to be in agreement with federal law, particularly the Telecommunications Act of 1996 as it may be amended. This section is not intended to:

A.	Prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services;

B.	Unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services; or

C. Regulate personal wireless services on the basis of the  environmental effects of radio frequency emissions, to the extent that the regulated services and facilities comply with the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulations concerning such emissions.

14	EXEMPTIONS

The following telecommunications facilities and uses are exempt from the requirements of this section: police, fire, ambulance, and other emergency dispatch; amateur (ham) radio, citizens-band radio, single-use local business radio dispatch, television antennas for home use, or temporary mobile facilities for television or radio broadcasts ("Exempt Facilities").

No FCC-licensed telecommunications facility or  use  shall  be  considered exempt from this section for any reason, whether or not said facility or use is proposed to share a tower or other structure with Exempt Facilities.

15	DEFINITIONS

Definitions contained in this section shall be applicable to this section only, and do not pertain to the remainder  of the Haycock Township Zoning Ordinance. Definitions in the Haycock Township Zoning Ordinance will pertain to this section unless the term is specifically defined herein.

ANTENNA:   A device for transmitting and/or receiving electromagnetic signals.

APPLICANT: A person who applies for a telecommunications facility siting. An applicant can be the  landowner of record, or the telecommunications service provider or agent of record, with the landowner's (or other legally designated representative) written permission.
 
"




BASE STATION: The primary sending and receiving site in a telecommunications facility. More than one base station and/or more than one variety of telecommunications provider can be located on a single tower or structure.

CELLULAR TELECOMMUNICATIONS: A commercial Low Power  Mobile Radio Service bandwidth licensed by the FCC to providers in a specific geographical area in which the radio frequency spectrum is divided into discrete channels which are assigned in groups to geographic cells within a service area and which are capable of being reused in different cells within the service area.

CHANNEL: The segment of the radiation spectrum to or from  an antenna which carries one signal. An antenna may radiate ·on many channels simultaneously.

CO-LOCATION: Locating wireless telecommunications equipment from more than one provider at a single site or structure.

FCC: Federal Communications Commission. The government agency responsible for regulating telecommunications  in the United States.

LOCATION: References to site location shall be the exact longitude and latitude, to the nearest tenth of a second. Bearing or orientation should be referenced to true north.

MODIFICATION   OF  AN   EXISTING   TELECOMMUNICATIONS    FACILITY:
Any change, or proposed change, in power input or output, number of antennas, change in antenna type(s) or model(s), repositioning of antenna(s), or change in number of channels per antenna above the maximum number approved under an existing permit.

MODIFICATION OF AN  EXISTING TOWER OR STRUCTURE:   Any change,
or proposed change, in dimensions of an existing and permitted tower or other
structure designed to support  telecommunications  transmission,  receiving and/or relaying antennas and/or equipment.

MONITORING: The measurement,  by the use of instruments in the field, of non-ionizing radiation exposure at a telecommunications facility site as a whole, or  from the towers, antennas or repeaters.

MONITORING PROTOCOL: The testing protocol, such as the Cobbs Protocol or the FCC Regulations (Title 47, Part 1, Section 1.1307 referenced as IEEE C95.3 1991), or one substantially similar, including compliance determined in accordance with the National Council on Radiation Protection  and Measurements, which is to be used to monitor the emissions and determine exposure risk from existing and new telecommunications facilities.
 

 



MONOPOLE: A single self-supporting vertical pole with no guy wire anchors, usually consisting of a galvanized or other unpainted metal or a wooden pole with below-grade foundations.

PERMIT: An official action which sets forth the rights and obligations extended by Haycock Township to an operator to own, construct, maintain, and operate its telecommunications facility within the boundaries of the township.

PERMITTEE: An applicant who is granted a permit for a telecommunications facility by Haycock Township.

RADIAL PLOTS: Radial plots are the result of drawing equally spaced lines (radials) from the point of the antenna, calculating the expected signal and indicating this graphically on a map. The relative sigrial strength may be indicated by varying the size or color at each point being studied along the radial. A threshold plot  uses a mark to indicate whether that point would be strong enough to provide adequate coverage i.e., the points meeting the threshold of adequate coverage. The draw back is the concentration of points close to the antenna and the divergence of points far from the site near the ends of the radials.

REPEATER: , A small receiver/relay transmitter and antenna of relatively low power output designed to provide service to areas which are not able to receive adequate coverage directly from a base or primary station.

ROOF AND/OR  BUILDING MOUNT TELECOMMUNICATIONS  FACILITY:  A
telecommunications   facility   where   antennas   are   mounted   to   an  existirig
structure on the roof (including rooftop appurtenances) or a building face.

STRUCTURALLY ABLE: The determination that a tower or  structure  is capable of safely carrying the load imposed by the proposed new antenna(s) under all reasonably predictable conditions as determined by professional structural engineering analysis including the wind load or any other structural requirements.

STRUCTURE: Any pole, telescoping mast, tripod or the like which supports a device used in the transmitting and/or receiving of electromagnetic signals.

TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING: A structure  located at a base station designed principally to enclose equipment used in connection with telecommunications transmissions including any foundatiori that may  be required.

TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY: All equipment, including any tower, structure, building, antenna, repeater and other related device which a telecommunications provider needs to broadcasts and receives radio frequency signals which carry their services.
 
•'	,•



TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY  SITE: A property, or any part thereof, which is owned or leased by one or more telecommunications providers and upon which one or more telecommunications facility(ies) and any required landscaping are located.

TELECOMMUNICATIONS	PROVIDER: An entity licensed by the FCC to provide telecommunications  services to individuals or institutions.

TEMPORARY   WIRELESS   TELECOMMUNICATIONS    FACILITIES:      Any
telecommunications facility designed for use while a permanent  wireless telecommunications facility is under construction, rehabilitation or restoration.

TILED COVERAGE PLOTS: Tiled plots result from calculating the signal at uniformly spaced locations on a rectangular grid, or tile, of the area of concern. Tiled plots  (in comparison to  radial plots) 1) provide a uniform distribution of points over the area of interest, 2) usually allow the same grid to be used as different sites are examined, and 3) do not necessitate the transmitter site be within the grid or area of interest. As with radial plots, the graphic display or plot can be either signal strength or adequate threshold. Tile plotting require more topographic data and longer (computer) execution time than radial plotting, but is preferable for comparative analysis.

TOWER: A permanent guyed, monopole, or self-supporting free  standing mount, or in association with a building, other permanent designed  to accommodate one or more antennas intended for transmitting and/or receiving television, AM/FM radio, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, or similar forms of electronic telecommunication.

16  PERMITS

No permit shall issue to an applicant for the construction,  alteration, modification, installation or operation of any telecommunication facility prior to a completed application being received by the Township;  site plan approval from the Planning Commission; the granting of a special exception from the Zoning Board when applicable; a letter of intent to allow co-location of telecommunications facilities being received by the Township,  the  removal bond (or other financial security) being received by the Township; proof of telecommunications facility insurance; the deposit of escrow funds  and payment of all fees due to the Township.

An applicant for a telecommunications facility shall be a telecommunications provider, or must have a letter of intent or an executed contract to provide land or facilities to such an entity. A permit shall not be granted for a facility built on speculation of a future letter  of intent or contract with a telecommunications provider. A permit shall be granted only for a telecommunications facility with a user that has a current FCC license.
 
•'


I6.1    TELECOMMUNICATIONS    USE   .

Telecommunications use shall be considered a principal use of the  property and, notwithstanding the provision of Section 400 of the Zoning Ordinance, is also permitted as an additional use on the property so long as the existing principal use on the property is a permitted use or in the district or a lawful nonconforming use. The existing principal use need not be affiliated with the telecommunications  provider.

16.2	USE PERMITTED BY RIGHT

A new telecommunications facility attached to  an existing telecommunication facility is a permitted use by right and may be located in any zoning district.

16.3	USE PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION

Telecommunications facilities may be a permitted use  by  special  exception upon compliance with the provisions of this section on parcels of land located on Bucks County Tax Map Parcel Nos. 14-7-196 and 14-7-65 and within the land corridors located within 500 feet of the center line of Old Bethlehem Pike and Route 563, which are owned by a government agency. If such parcel is not available or cannot meet the needs of desired transmission, then a telecommunications facility may be located within the land  corridors  as indicated above which are owned by a non-profit agency. If such a parcel is not available or cannot meet the needs of desired transmission, then a telecommunications facility may be located within the  land  corridors  as indicated above on parcels having a total acreage of five or more acres. Regardless of the parcel, the telecommunication facility must be constructed on the given parcel so that the greatest possible distance exists from the facility to the center line of the referenced roadways.

16.4	APPLICATION

All applicants for telecommunications facilities  permits  shall  include  the following information, as it applies to the specific type of telecommunications facility applied for, in addition to requirements of the Zoning Ordinance for uses by special exception:

A. The legal name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, tower or structure owner (if other than applicant), and landowner(s) of record. If the applicant, tower or structure owner or landowner is not a natural person, the name and ciddress of the company, the type of business entity, the state in which the company is incorporated and has its principal office. Written permission of the tower or structure owner and landowner(s) to apply for the special	exception use permit shall be submitted along with written permission from the tower or structure owner and landowner(s) allowing the Township's independent consultant(s) to conduct any necessary site visit(s).
 
,.



B.	The name, address and telephone number of the person to be contacted with regard to the application. Notice, orders, and other papers may  be served upon the person so named, and such service shall be deemed to be service upon the applicant's registered agent.                ·

C.	The name, address, and telephone number of someone who is available on a 24-hour basis that is authorized to act  in the event of an emergency regarding the structure or safety of the telecommunications facility.

D.	A copy of the applicant's letter of intent or executed contract with the telecommunication service provider if the applicant is not the provider.   ·

E.	The names and addresses of the landowners of record  of  all  abutting property.

F.	A report from qualified and Pennsylvania-licensed professional engineer(s) that:

1.	Describes the telecommunications facility height, design, elevation, width, support system and reasons and design implications for use or non­ use of guy wires.

2.	Documents the height above grade for all proposed  mounting positions for antennas to be co-located on a tower or structure and the minimum separation distances between antennas.

3.	Describes the tower or structure's proposed capacity, including the number, height, and type(s) of antennas that the applicant expects the tower or structure to accommodate.

4.	Provides evidence of need, as described in Section I7.herein.

5.	Describes the output frequency, number of channels and power output per channel for each proposed antenna.

6.	For each antenna, describes the antenna gain (projected and maximum), polarization and radiation pattern (composite pattern for an antenna array), the power input to antenna(s), including power input in normal use and at maximum output for each antenna and all antennas as an aggregate if tower is fully utilized.

7.	Describes the output frequency of the transmitter(s).

8.	For a telecommunications facility with multiple emitters, describes the results of an intermodulation study to predict the interaction of the additional equipment with existing equipment.
 
"	''


9.	Demonstrates the tower or structure's compliance with accepted structural engineering standards and if an existing tower or structure, that it is structurally able to receive the proposed addition. Any tower or structure shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the most current Telecommunications Industries Association (TIA) - Electronic Industries Association (EIA) Standard 222-F "Structural Standards for  Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures" and all applicable requirements of the Haycock Township Building Code. The proposed tower or structure must be designed and constructed so as to be able to withstand wind gusts of at least one hundred (100) miles per hour with no ice and 78 mile per hour basic wind speed with .5-inch radial ice.

10.	Provides proof that at the proposed site the applicant will be in at least minimum compliance with all federal, state, aod local regulations, standards and requirements, the basis for such representation and a statement that the applicant commits to continue to maintain  such compliance with both radio frequency interference (RFI) and radio frequency
. radiation (RFR) standards (including all Environmental  Assessments and Historic Preservation requirements) and that such compliance is within the limitations	of the latest standards set by the following oversight organizations:

The	American	National	Standards	Institute	(ANSl-C95-1,	as amended);

The Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE-C95.1, as amended);

The  National  Council  on  Radiation  Protection  and  Measurements (CRP);

The  International  Radiation  Protection  Association  (IRPA)  and  the FCC.

11.	Describes any foundations to be built  upon  which telecommunications facilities are located. Identifies any blasting and earth movement that may be required, and provides plans and elevations of the area to be blasted or affected and describes the steps to be taken to reduce or eliminate potential effects of the blasting including vibrations and impacts to foundations, wells and other structures in the area. Provides a plan to identify abutters prior to blasting. The Zoning Board may, in its discretion, require the Applicant to notify additional property owners prior to  blasting that may be sufficiently close to the proposed location and may reasonably require additional information related to such site preparation.

12.	Provides a soil report for the site, which provides verification that the areas  of land, where  the  foundation  of the  tower,  any  buildings  and  any
 
·'	"


anchors for guy wires will be located, are appropriate for constructing those structures thereon.

13.	Includes other information required by the Zoning Board that is necessary to evaluate the request and its impact upon the health and safety of the residents of Haycock Township.                     ·

G.	For a tower or structure, a letter of intent committing the tower or structure owner and future tenant(s) to permit shared use of the tower or structure by other telecommunications providers, without discrimination, if the additional users agree to meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use, induding	compliance with all applicable FCC regulations, standards, and requirements and provisions provided herein.

H.	For a telecommunications facility to be installed on an existing tower or structure, a copy of the applicant's letter of intent or executed contract with the owner of the existing tower or structure.

I.	To the extent required by the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and as administered by the FCC, a complete Environmental Assessment (EA) draft or final report describing the expected impacts of the proposed telecommunications facility. To the extent the applicant. claims that an EA is not required, it should provide an explanation as to why an EA is  not required in the form of an opinion, ruling, or other certification from the FCC.

J. Proof of compliance with Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act, as amended, and with the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation's regulations under the Act.

K.	Detailed plans for emergency power generation, including:

1.	Demonstration of percent of electrical demand being proposed in event of loss of commercial power.


2.	Type of fuel, storage method, and expected means and frequency of fuel delivery to the site for power generation.

3.	Amount of generator time, based on historical power reliability for the area of the telecommunications facility, proposed frequency and duration of tests, and description of muffler system and methods for noise abatement.

4.	Feasibility of wind and/or solar power in conjunction with storage batteries.

L.	Two cross-sections of proposed telecommunications facility, drawn at right angles to each other, showing any guy wires or supports. This shall show the proposed height of the tower or structure. above the average grade at the  base.  This  shall  also  show  all  proposed  antennas,  including  their
 
"


location on the tower or structure as well as all electrical wires, cables, and support equipment.

M.	A professional structural engineer's written description of the  proposed tower or structure and its capacity to support additional antennas or equipment at different heights and the ability of the tower or structure to be shortened if future telecommunications facilities no longer require  the original height.

N.	An Existing Conditions Plan and Proposed Site Plan as defined in Section
I6.5.C. and D. herein.

0. All pertinent submittals and showings pertaining  to:  FCC  permitting/ licensing;	Environmental Assessments and Environmental Impact Statements; FAA Notice of Construction or Alteration; aeronautical studies; all	pertinent data, assumptions, and calculations relating to service coverage; and all pertinent calculations and/or measurement data related to non-ionizing radiation emissions and exposure, regardless of whether categorical exemption from routine environmental evaluation under the FCC rules is claimed.

P.	An emergency plan to be implemented in the  event that the tower or structure is deemed unsafe after inspection as described in section I9.E. and F. herein. The plan shall include measures to warn abutting landowners of an unsafe situation, to evacuate a zone where injury or property damage may occur, and to notify local authorities.

Q.	Details of proposed method of financial surety as required in section I12. (Abandoned, Unused, Obsolete, Damaged, or Dangerous Telecommunications	Facility or Portions of Telecommunications Facility) herein.

16.5.  SITE PLAN REVIEW


Site  plan  applications  for  telecommunications  facilities  shall  include  the following information:

A.	Location Map: a copy of a portion of the most  recent USGS Quadrangle map showing the area within at least a two-mile radius of the proposed telecommunications fadlity site, including the exact latitude and  longitude (degrees, minutes, seconds to the nearest tenth).

8. Vicinity Map at a scale of no smaller than 1 inch = 416 feet (or metric equivalent 1:5,000) with contour intervals no  greater than 10 feet (or 3 meters) showing the entire vicinity within a 2,500-foot radius of the telecommunications facility site,  topography, public and private  roads and driveways,  buildings  and  structures,  water   bodies,  wetlands,  landscape
 
..	..


features, historic sites, and habitats for endangered species. It shall indicate the property lines of the proposed  telecommunications  facility  site  parcel and all access easements or rights of way needed for access from a public way to the site, and the names of all abutters or property owners along the access easement or who have deeded rights to the easement.


C.	Existing Conditions Plan: A recent survey of the area within 500 feet of the telecommunications  facility site at a scale no smaller than 1 inch = 40 feet
(1:480 or metric equivalent 1:500) with topography drawn with a minimum of
5  feet  (1.5  meters)  contour  intervals,  showing  existing  utilities,  property
lines, existing  buildings  or structures,  wooded  areas, existing water  wells and springs.  It shall show the boundary of any wetlands  or flood  plains or watercourses,  and  of  any  bodies  of water  included  in the  Official  Flood Hazard  Area  within  500  feet  from  the  tower  or  any related  facilities  or
. access	ways	or	appurtenances.	The	survey	plan	shall	have	been completed,  on the ground,  by a Pennsylvania-registered  land surveyor  no
more than two years prior to the application date.

D.	Proposed Site Plans of the entire telecommunications facility site, indicating all improvements at the same scale as or larger than the Existing Conditions Plan showing the following:

1.	Proposed tower or structure location and  any  appurtenances, including supports and guy wires,  if any, and any accessory building(s). It shall indicate property boundaries and setback distances to the base(s) of the tower or structure and the nearest corners of each of the appurtenant structures to those boundaries, and dimensions of all  proposed improvements. Where protective fencing is proposed, it shall  indicate setback distances from the edge of the fencing.

2.	Proposed spot elevations at the base of the proposed tower or structure and at the base of any guy wires, and the corners of all appurtenant structures.

3.	Proposed utilities, including distance from source of power, sizes of service available and required, locations of any proposed utility or telecommunications  lines.

4.	Any direct or indirect wetlands alteration proposed.

5.	Detailed plans for drainage of surface and sub-surface water, to control erosion and sedimentation both during construction and as a permanent measure.

6.	Plans indicating locations and specifics of proposed screening, landscaping, grading, ground cover, fencing, and additional information that may be required; any exterior light(s) or sign(s).
 
..	'    ..


7.	Plans of proposed access driveway or roadway and parking area at the telecommunication facility site. This shall include grading, drainage, and traveled width. This shall also include a cross-section of the access drive indicating the width, depth of gravel, paving or surface materials.

8.	Plans showing any changes to be made to an existing telecommunications facility's landscaping, screening, fencing, lighting, drainage, wetlands, grading, driveways or roadways, parking or other infrastructure as a result of a proposed modification of said facility.

9.	Horizontal and radial distances of proposed antenna(s) to  nearest point on property line, and to the nearest primary or secondary residence, school, hospital, senior center, child care facility, religious structure, or any other public building.

E.	Proposed details of the telecommunications facility including the following:

1.	Ground attachments, specifications for anchor bolts and other anchoring hardware for tower or structure.

2.	Proposed exterior finish and color of the  tower  or  structure, building(s) and other portions of the telecommunications facility.

3.	The relative height of the tower or structure to the tops of surrounding trees, as they presently exist and the height to which they are expected to grow in 10 years.

F.	Proposed   plans   of  telecommunications	facility   building(s)   showing  the following:

1.	Floor plans and cross sections at a scale of no smaller than 3 inch =
1 foot (1:48) of any proposed appurtenant structure.

2.	Elevation views, indicating exterior appearance and materials.


G.	Proposed  equipment  plan elevations,  sections  and  details  at  a  scale  no smaller than 1 inch = 10 feet showing the following:

1.	Number of antennas and repeaters, as well as the exact locations of
·	antenna(s) and of all repeaters (if any) located on a map, as well as by
degrees, minutes, and seconds to the nearest tenth of  latitude  and longitude.


2.	Mounting locations on tower or structure, including height above ground.

3.	Identification of all mounting frames, arms, brackets or other devices or equipment used to hold antennas and other equipment in place.
 
..	'    . '




4.	Identification of all equipment or devices either attached to the structure or on the ground.

H. Visibility Maps and Visual Analysis: The  applicant  shall  provide photographs with a simulation of the proposed telecommunication facility. Photographs shall show views towards the proposed site, from a two-mile radius around the site, at forty-five-degree intervals. A minimum of  eight views should be presented.

The applicant shall also develop and submit to the Planning Commission a written analysis of the visual impact of the proposed tower by a registered landscape architect. This analysis shall include photographs of the balloon test, as described in section I6.I., taken from at least 10 different perspectives within Haycock Township and any other visual analysis it may have developed or processed.

I.		Balloon Test: Within thirty-five days of submitting an application, applicant shall arrange to fly, or raise upon a temporary mast, a three-foot-diameter, brightly colored balloon at the maximum height of the proposed tower and within fifty horizontal feet of the center of the proposed tower. The  date, time, and location of this balloon test shall be advertised by the applicant at 7 and 14 days in advance of the test date in the local newspaper. The applicant shall inform the Zoning Board, the Planning Commission, and abutting property owners in writing of the dates and  times of the test,  at least 14 days in advance. The balloon shall be flown for at least six consecutive hours, between 7 a.m. and 5 p.m. (and/or at least two hours before sunset as posted for the test dates by the National Weather Service) on the dates chosen. In the event of application for co-location at an existing telecommunications facility, the applicant shall be exempt from this balloon test. The applicant shall record the weather during the balloon test including the wind velocity and direction.

J. Construction sequence and time schedule for completion  of each phase of the entire project.

17.	EVIDENCE OF NEED

A.	Existing  Coverage:  Applicant  shall  provide  written  documentation  to  the Zoning  Board demonstrating  that  existing  telecommunications  facility  sites within a 30-mile radius of the proposed site cannot reasonably be made to provide  adequate  coverage  and/or  adequate  capacity  to  areas  within  the Haycock	Township	which	lack	such	coverage	and/or	capacity.	The documentation  shall include, for each telecommunications  facility  site listed which is owned or operated by the applicant, the exact location (in longitude and latitude, to degrees, minutes and seconds to the nearest tenth), ground elevation,  height  of  tower  or  structure,  type  of  antennas,  antenna  gain,
 
! I	rl  'I



height of antennas on tower or structure, output frequency, number of channels, power input and maximum power output per channel. Potential adjustments to these existing telecommunications facility sites, including changes in antenna type, orientation, gain, height or power output shall be specified. Tiled coverage plots showing each of these telecommunications facility sites, as they exist, and with adjustments as above, shall be provided as part of the application.

B.	Repeaters: The applicant shall demonstrate that it is not reasonably able to create adequate coverage in Haycock Township from wireless base stations located in other townships or to fill holes within the area of otherwise adequate coverage by use of repeaters. Applicants shall detail the number, location, power output, and coverage of any proposed repeaters in their systems and provide engineering data to justify their use.

C.	Towers: The applicant for new telecommunications facility utilizing a tower shall demonstrate that it has made a good faith effort to obtain permission to mount communications antenna(s) on an existing building, structure  or tower. A good faith effort shall require that the applicant contact all owners of potentially suitable structures (such as, but not limited to, smoke stacks, water towers/tanks, tall buildings, other towers or poles, church steeples, or other natural or manufactured tall structures or features) within a minimum one-half (1/2) mile radius of the proposed tower site and that one or more of the following reasons, supported by engineering and other related support data, for not selecting such structure apply:

1.	The proposed antenna(s) and related equipment  would exceed the structural capacity of the existing structure and its reinforcement cannot be accomplished at a reasonable cost.

2.	The proposed antenna(s) and related equipment would cause radio frequency interference with other existing equipment for that existing structure and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.

3.	Such existing structures do not have adequate location, space, access or height to accommodate the proposed equipment or to allow it to perform its intended function.

4.	Addition of the proposed antenna(s) and related equipment would result in electromagnetic radiation from such structure exceeding applicable standards established by the FCC and/or other  industry  standards governing human exposure to electromagnetic radiation.

5.	A commercially reasonable agreement could not be reached with the owner(s) of such existing structure(s).

D.	Five-Year Plan:  All applications shall be accompanied by a written five-year
·	plan for the utilization of the proposed facilities.	This  plan should  include
 
'	r'	'



justification for capacity in excess of immediate needs, as well as plans for any further development within the Township.

18  GENERAL PROJECT REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS

A.	Access Roads and Utilities: Where  new  telecommunications  facilities require construction of, or improvement to, access roads, roads shall follow the contour of the land, be constructed or improved at the edge of fields and/or forests, and where feasible, access shall be over existing driveways and easements. Applicant  shall maintain the access and shall ensure that no mud or dirt is conveyed onto public roads. Utility or service lines shall be underground, and designed and located so as to minimize disruption  to wildlife habitat, agricultural lands, and scenic areas.

B. Landscaping/Screening: Natural or planted evergreen screening shall be located at the perimeter of the site to ensure that ground equipment and structures associated with the telecommunications facility are hidden from adjacent public roadways. The evergreen screening shall consist of either a hedge, planted 3 feet on center maximum, or a row of evergreen  trees planted 10 feet on center maximum. Existing on-site vegetation outside the immediate site for  the telecommunications facility shall be preserved. Disturbance	to existing topography shall be minimized, unless the disturbance	is demonstrated to result in less visual impact on the telecommunications facility from surrounding properties  and other vantage points.

C. Fencing: The area around the telecommunications facility site shall be completely fenced and gated for security.to a height of eight feet by means of chain link fencing. Use of razor wire is not permitted. In addition,  all towers and support structures  shall be fitted with anti-climbing devices, as approved by industry standards.

D. Signs: A sign no greater than two (2) square feet indicating the name of the telecommunications facility owner(s) and a 24-hour emergency telephone number, either local or toll-free, shall be posted adjacent to the entry gate. In addition,  radio frequency radiation (RFR) warning signs, and the federal tower registration plate, where applicable, shall be posted on the fence or as required to meet federal requirements. "No Trespassing" signs may  be posted at the discretion of the telecommunications facility owner(s). No commercial signs shall be placed on any telecommunications  facility.

E.	Building Design:

1.	Telecommunications facilities buildings shall not exceed 250 square feet, shall be designed to be architecturally similar and compatible  with  each other, and shall be no more than 12 feet  high. The buildings shall be used only for the housing of equipment  related to this particular site. Whenever
 
'.	'' ''


possible, the buildings shall be joined or clustered so as to appear as one building.

2.	Except as provided herein, the only lighting on the exterior of the telecommunications facility may be a fixture on the communications equipment building not greater than 100 watts and activated by a monitor sensor. Manually operated emergency lights are  permitted  for  use  only when telecommunications  facility operating personnel are on site.

Towers shall not be illuminated by artificial means and  shall  not display lights unless such lighting is specifically required by the FAA, FCC or other federal or state authority. In the event that any lighting is required solely as a result of tower height, the tower owner(s) shall submit for review by the Planning Commission (under Site Plan Review or Site Plan Amendment, as applicable). The Planning Commission may 1) require that the tower height be reduced to eliminate the need for lighting, 2) require another suitable location be utilized, or 3) make selection among lighting alternatives.

3.	The owner(s) of the facilities shall take reasonable measures to minimize noise from the operation of any machinery or equipment, as detected at the site perimeter. The noise level of the machinery shall be no louder than 40 decibels.

F.	Height of Towers and  Telecommunications  Facilities  Combined  with Existing Structure: New towers shall not exceed the minimum height necessary to provide adequate coverage for the telecommunications use proposed for the tower and shall not exceed  200 feet in height measured from the ground. Roof and/or  building  mount telecommunications  facility shall be permitted to exceed the height limitations of the applicable zoning district by no more than forty-five (45) feet.

Antennas:	Omni directional or whip communications antennas shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height and seven (7) inches in diameter. Directional or panel communications antennas shall not exceed five (5) feet in height and three (3) feet in width. No microwave dish antennas shall be attached to a telecommunications  tower.

G.	Guy Wires: All guy wires associated with guyed towers shall be clearly marked so as to be visible at all times and shall be located within the fenced enclosure.

H.	Co-location:	Co-location  of  telecommunications   facilities  is  encouraged.
Owners of new towers shall agree to and allow for co_-location consistent with the provisions of section I6.4.G., and at usual and customary rates for co-locators.

·f. Visual Impact: Towers, antennas,  and any  necessary  support  structures shall be designed to  blend  into the  surrounding  environment.  New towers
 
'	' '  ..


shall have a galvanized finish unless otherwise required. The Zoning Board may require the tower(s) to  be painted or otherwise camouflaged to minimize the adverse visual impact except in cases in which the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or other state or federal authorities have dictated color.

Proposed facilities shall not unreasonably interfere with the view from any public park, conservation area, natural scenic vista, historic building or district, or major view corridor. Narrow structures with guyed supports may be preferred for aesthetic purposes.

J. Staff: The telecommunications facility shall be fully automated, unstaffed and visited only for periodic maintenance, and there shall be no water or sewage facilities connected to the compound.

K.	Building Permit: Applicant shall make application for and have evidence of a Haycock Township building  permit prior to construction or installation of any portion of the telecommunications  facility.

L.	Zoning Compliance: All telecommunications  facilities  shall  be located on lots which meet the minimum size requirement and other regulations for the zoning district in which they are to be located, in addition to the setback requirements as provided in hereiri.

M.	Setback and Height Requirements: No telecommunications facility or tower, including guy-wire anchors and protective fencing, if any, shall be located:

1.	Closer than 200 feet horizontally to any property boundary of the site on which the tower is located, or the height of the tower,  whichever  is greater.

2.	Closer than 200 feet horizontally to any structure existing at the time of application which is used as a primary or secondary residence, school property (both public and private), a hospital, senior center, child  care facility, building used for religious worship, or to any other building used regularly by the public. Primary or secondary residences are those dwelling units that include toilet facilities and facilities for food preparation and sleeping.

3.	Within the habitat of any state-listed rare or endangered wildlife or plant species.

4.	Within 200 feet horizontally of any Pennsylvania  or  federally regulated wetland.

5.	Within the 200 feet horizontally of the outer riparian zone, measured horizontally from any river or perennial stream.
 
. '


6.	Within the Township, state or federal setback requirements of an archeological site or historic structure. No telecommunications  facility shall be located on a building or structure that is listed on an historic register or is in an historic district.

N. Parking: One (1) off-street parking space shall be provided within or outside the fenced telecommunications facility site.

O. At the completion of building, and/or installation, the owner shall provide the Township	with a certification issued by a Pennsylvania-registered professional structural engineer that the telecommunications  facility· has been built in accordance with the plans submitted to the Township.

19.	MONITORING  PROTOCOL

A.	Monitoring Protocol: The Zoning Board may, as the technology changes, amend this section to require the use of  testing protocols other  than the approved monitoring protocol. A copy of the currently approved monitoring protocol shall be on file with the Township Secretary.

B.	Pre-transmission Testing: After the granting of a permit and before applicant's telecommunications facilities begin transmission, the  applicant shall submit a report, prepared by a qualified telecommunications or radio frequency engineer, on the cumulative background levels  of  non-ionizing radio frequency radiation around the proposed telecommunications  facility site	and/or any repeater locations to be utilized for applicant's telecommunications	facilities. The engineer shall use the monitoring protocol, or one substantially similar. This report shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer, who may verify the results using an independent consultant.

C.	Post-transmission Testing: After transmission begins, the owner of the telecommunications  facility shall provide testing of the site as follows:

There shall be routine annual monitoring of emissions/exposure by a qualified engineer using actual field measurement of radiation, utilizing the Monitoring Protocol. This monitoring shall measure levels  of  non-ionizing radio frequency radiation (RFR) exposure at the telecommunications facility site and any repeaters. Each permittee shall provide a list of the most recent RFR readings at or near the site, their distances from the facility, dates of the readings, and the name of the person and company who took the readings and verify the operational levels of each telecommunications transmitter at the time of testing. In addition, each permittee shall provide additional RFR readings taken at sensitive areas within 3 miles  of  the facility. A report should indicate whether other permittees at the facility were notified prior to testing that RFR monitoring would occur. The notification should be attached to the report.
 
A report of the monitoring results shall be prepared by the engineer  and submitted to the Zoning Officer, who may verify the results using an independent consultant. In the case of co-located  telecommunications facility, permittee may bill all telecommunications providers and the telecommunications facilities owner(s) equally or according to a predetermined proportionality.

In the event of any major modification of existing telecommunications facility, or the activation of any additional channels, the telecommunications facility owner(s) shall immediately perform new monitoring, as described in this section. Minor changes, such as slight changes in frequency,  shall not require additional monitoring.

Permittees shall have the opportunity to demonstrate reasons for inability to comply with these provisions.

D.	Excessive Exposure: Should the monitoring of a telecommunications facility site reveal that the site exceeds the current FCC standard and guidelines in existence at the time of the violation, the owner(s) of all telecommunications facilities utilizing that site shall be so notified. In accordance with FCC requirements, the telecommunications facility owner(s) shall immediately reduce power or cease operation as necessary to protect persons having access	to the site, tower, and/or antennas. Additionally, the telecommunications facility owner(s) shall submit to the Township a plan for the correction of the situation that resulted in excessive exposure. Failure to act as described above shall be a violation of this Zoning Ordinance and subject to fines and other sanctions consistent with this. Ordinance.

E.	Structural Inspection: Tower owner(s) shall arrange for an  qualified consultant	(a licensed professional structural engineer) to conduct inspections of the tower's structural integrity and safety. Guyed towers shall be inspected every three years unless there is cause to conduct an inspection more frequently. Monopoles and non-guyed  lattice towers  shall be inspected every five years unless there is cause to conduct an inspection more frequently. A report of the inspection results shall be prepared by the consultant, and a copy shall be sent to the Zoning Officer within 10 business days. In the event  of any major modification of the existing tower, which includes changes to tower dimensions, increase in number or types of antennas or other devices or structural modifications, the  tower  owner(s) shall immediately perform a new structural inspection. The Township  has the right to enter onto the property and conduct inspections during the construction phase and at all times thereafter.

F.	Unsafe Towers: Should the inspection required in section 19.E. reveal any structural defect(s) which, in the opinion of the qualified consultant (a licensed professional structural engineer), render(s) that tower unsafe, the tower owner(s) shall undertake the following actions:
 
 



1.	Immediately	upon   notification	of   any   structural	defect(s)   which render(s)  a tower  unsafe, post warnings  of same  at access  points to the tower;  notify  appropriate  emergency  authorities;  notify the  Zoning  Officer, and notify the  landowner  and owners  of  record of the  abutting  properties within the unsafe area (minimally a 360-degree area the radius of the height of the tower); when appropriate,  in consultation with emergency authorities, restrict access to the unsafe area and/or encourage evacuation of residents.

2.	Within 10 business days of notification of any structural  defect(s) which render(s) a tower unsafe, submit to the Zoning Officer a  plan to correct the structural defect(s) as soon as reasonably possible.  The Township shall review and make any changes if needed to the remediation plan within 10 days. The tower owner(s) shall implement the  remediation plan upon Township approval.

110.	AMENDMENTS TO EXISTING TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY PERMIT

In the event of an alteration or addition to a  previously  approved telecommunications facility, the facility owner(s)  shall submit to the Zoning  Board an application for a permit amendment when any of the following are proposed:

A.	Change in the number of buildings or other telecommunications facilities permitted on the site;

8.  Material change in technology  used by the telecommunications facility; or

C. Addition or change of any equipment resulting in greater visibility  or structural wind-loading, or additional height of the tower, including profile of additional antennas, not specified in the original application.



111.	TEMPORARY WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS  FACILITIES

Temporary wireless telecommunications  facilities are subject to the following:

A.	Use of a temporary wireless telecommunications facility requires a special exception use permit from the Zoning Board.

8. Temporary wireless telecommunications facilities are allowed for no longer than five days use during a special event.

C.	The maximum height of a temporary telecommunications facility is 50 feet from grade.

D.	Temporary wireless telecommunications facilities shall comply with all applicable sections herein.
 
I.     ' '


112.	ABANDONED, UNUSED, OBSOLETE, DAMAGED, OR DANGEROUS TELECOMMUNICATIONS	FACILITY OR PORTIONS OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS  FACILITY

Abandoned	or	unused	telecommunications	facilities	or	portions	of telecommunications  facilities shall be removed as follows:

A..The owner of a telecommunications facility  shall annually, on January  15, file a declaration with the Zoning Officer certifying the continuing safe operation of every telecommunications facility installed subject  to  this Zoning	Ordinance. Failure to file a declaration shall mean that the telecommunications  facility is no longer in use and considered abandoned.

B. Abandoned or unused facilities shall be removed ,within 180 days of cessation of operations at the site, unless a time extension is approved by the Zoning Board within the 180-day period. In the event the facility is not renioved within  180 days of the cessation of operations at a site, the Zoning Officer shall send the  owner(s) of the facility a Notice of Zoning  Violation and, following the expiration of the period for remediation of the violation, shall request Haycocl< Township to remove the facilities. Costs of removal shall be assessed against the facility owner, including any regulatory costs, disposal costs, clean up, and final landscaping costs.

C. Unused portions of facility shall be removed by facility owner( s) within 180 days of the time that such portion is no longer used for antennas. The replacement of portions of a facility previously removed shall require the issuance of a new telecommunications  facility permit by the Zoning Board.

D. An owner who has failed to file an annual declaration with the Zoning Officer by January 15 may, by February 15, file a declaration of use or intended use and may request the ability to continue use of  the  telecommunications facility.

E. At the time of filing an application for a building permit for the construction of the telecommunications facility, a bond or other financial security, in the amount of $20,000.00 wherein a tower is proposed as part of the facility and
$5,000 otherwise, in the form approved by the Township Solicitor shall be deposited with the  Township to assure the removal of the facility when it ceases to be used as a telecommunications facility or is found in violation of the Township's code or ordinance as provided herein. At the time of filing an application for a building permit, applicant shall also enter into a written agreement with the Township, in a form approved by the Township Solicitor, to ensure that the Removal Bond remains continuously in effect.
 
...  1	'  '  "



113.	TELECOMMUNICATIONS  FACILITY  INSURANCE

The owner of a telecommunications facility shall provide evidence to the Township of liability, property damage and personal injury insurance in the minimum amount of One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and Three Million Dollars ($3,000,000.00) in the aggregate covering all portions of the telecommunications facility, naming Haycock Township as an Additional Insured thereon. The owner(s) shall arrange with the insurance carrier(s) for original certificates  of insurance for all renewals or cancellations of said insurance coverage to be delivered to the Zoning Officer. At a minimum the following insurance requirements shall be satisfied:

A.	The required insurance must be obtained and maintained for the  entire period the telecommunications facility is in existence from pre-construction through	final decommissioning and rehabilitation. If the operator, its contractors or subcontractors do not have the req4ired insurance, the Township will order such entities to cease operation of the facility until such insurance is obtained.

B. Certificate(s) of insurance verifying such insurance shall be filed with the Zoning Officer at the time of application. For entities that are entering the market, the certificate(s) shall be filed prior to the commencement of construction and once a year thereafter, and as provided below in the event of a lapse of coverage. Such certificate(s) should provide the name, address and phone number of the insurance carrier and identify an agent in case of inquiries.

C. The certificate(s) of insurance shall contain a provision that coverages afforded under such policies shall not be canceled until at least thirty (30) days prior written notice had been given to the Township. All insurance policies shall be issued by companies authorized to do business under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

114.	INDEMNIFICATION AND HOLD HARMLESS

The telecommunications facility shall, at its sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Township,  its officers, public officials, boards and commissions, agents and employees from and against any and all lawsuits, claims, causes of action, actions, liability and judgments for injury or damage (including but not limited to expenses for reasonable attorney fees and disbursements of the Township in connection therewith) arising out of the construction or operation of the cell tower or arising in any way  out  of  any failure by any locator to comply with the provisions of any federal, state or local laws, rules or regulations.
 
_.  t  I 0



Section 02:  Partial Repealer

All other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, as amended, shall remain in full force and effect. All other ordinances or provisions of the Zoning Ordinance  inconsistent herewith or in conflict  with any of the terms hereof are, to the extent of said inconsistencies or conflicts, hereby specifically repealed.

Section 03:  Savings Clause

In the event any portion of this Ordinance is determined by a court of jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or unenforceable, it shall not affect any of the other provision of. this Ordinance or of the Zoning Ordinance. All other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and this Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.

Section 04:  Effective Date

All provisions of this Ordinance shall be in force and effect five days after approval and adoption.

 


ORDAINED AND ENACTED this



ATTEST:
 
.s	f	fl
/	day of Al.?U	, 2003.

HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS

-i: 47./. t? df­
jliathleen M. Babb, Chair
 



 

















U:\TWC Clients\HAYCOCK\Ordinance\Cell   Tower Telecomn1unications.dir\Telecommunications   Facility Ordinance.11·l0.03.final.doc
 
ORDINANCE  NO. 9{;




AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AMENDING ARTICLE IV SECTION 404, SECTION IOF THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, REGARDING TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES WITHIN HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP



WHEREAS, Section 1516 (53 P.S. §66516) of the Pennsylvania Second Class Township Code provides that the corporate powers of the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township (the "Board of Supervisors") include the ability to plan for the development of the township through zoning, subdivision and land development regulations under the act of July 13, 1968 (P.L. 805, No. 247), known as the "Pennsylvania Municipalities Plan.ning Code."

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors on or about September, 26, 1994, duly adopted Ordinance No. 71, revising and restating the Haycock Zoning Ordinance as adopted in 1975;

WHEREAS, Section 1601 of the Second Class Township Code provides that the Board of Supervisors may adopt ordinances in which general or specific powers of the tqwnship may be exercised, and, by the enactment of subsequent ordinances, the Board of Supervisors may amend, repeal or revise existing ordinances (53 P.S. Section 66601 );

WHEREAS, since its adoption, the Zoning Ordinance has from time to time beer. amended;

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors on or about December 1, 2003, duly adopted Ordinance No. 95, amending the Zoning Ordinance to make provisions for the establishment of standards and regulations for telecommunications facilities within the Township;

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors finds it is in the interests of the Township and of its citizens to amend the Zoning Ordinance standards and regulations for telecommunications facilities within the Township to clarify the location on which a new telecommunication facility may be permitted after the enactment date of Ordinance 95 and to specifically exempt those applicants for telecommunications facilities permits that received Zoning Hearing Board approval prior to the date of the enactment of Ordinance 95;

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors finds and determines that this Zoning Ordinance amendment is consistent with the Township Comprehensive Plan and the Community Development Objective stated therein and in the Zoning Ordinance.
 

NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing, be it ENACTED and ORDAINED by the Board  of Supervisors of Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, as follows:

Section 01:  Article IV, section 404, section I4 of the Zoning Ordinance is amended to read as follows:

14  EXEMPTIONS

The following telecommunications facilities and uses are exempt from the requirements of this section: police, fire, ambulance, and other emergency dispatch; amateur (ham) radio, citizens-band radio, single-use local business radio dispatch, television antennas for home use, or temporary mobile facilities for television or radio broadcasts ("Exempt Facilities").

No FCC-licensed telecommunications facility or use, except applicants for telecommunications facilities permits that received Zoning Hearing Board approval prior to the date of the enactment of Ordinance 95, shall be considered exempt from this section for any reason, whether or not said facility or use is proposed to share a tower or other structure with Exempt Facilities.


Section 02:  Article 'IV, section 404, section I6.3 of the Zoning Ordinance is amended to read as follows:

16.3	USE PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION

Telecommunications facilities are a use permitted by special exception upon compliance with the provisions of this section on parcels of land located on land owned by a government agency and located within 500 feet of the centerline of Old Bethlehem Road and Route 563. If it is demonstrated by an applicant that the telecommunication service needs of Haycock Township cannot be met by locating on land as referred to above, then a telecommunications facility may be located on land owned by a nonprofit entity located within 500 feet of the centerline of Old Bethlehem Road and Route 563. If it is demonstrated by an applicant that the telecommunication service needs of Haycock Township cannot be met by locating on land as referred to above, then a telecommunications facility may be located on land having a total acreage of five or more acres located within 500 feet of the centBrline of Old Bethlehem Road and Route 563. Regardless of the parcel of land, the telecommunication facility must be located and constructed so that the greatest possible distance exists from the facility to the centerline of thareferenced roadways.
 



Section 03:  Partial Repealer

All other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, as amended, shall remain in full force and effect. All other ordinances or provisions of the Zoning Ordinance inconsistent herewith or in conflict with any of the terms hereof are, to the extent of said inconsistencies or conflicts, hereby specifically repealed.

Section 04:  Savings Clause

In the event any portion of this Ordinance is determined by a court of jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or unenforceable, it shall not affect any of the other provision of this Ordinance or of the Zoning Ordinance. All other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and this Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.

J
Section 05:  Effective Date

All provisions of this Ordinance shall be in force and effect five days after approval and adoption.


•	,_f
ORDAINED AND ENACTED this lJ ''''day of _ // { a..-u-=,·---' 2004,



ATTEST:

 
Nancy M."Yodis,ySecretary





















U:\TWC	Clients\HAYCOCK\Ordinance\Cell	Tower	Telecomrnunicatians.dir\Te!e.	Fae.	Ord.	Amend\Te!e.Fac.Ord.
Amend.03.10.04.doc
 
ORDINANCE NO.	tf 7

AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY,
·PENNSYLVANIA	ADOPTING THE PENNSYLVANIA UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (ACT 45 OF 1999, 35 P.S. §§7210.101 ET SEQ.) AND THE REGULATIONS PROMULGATED THEREUNDER (34 PA. CODE §401.1 ET SEQ.) AS THE HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BUILDING CODE; ESTABLISHING MINIMUM REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION,		ALTERATION, ENLARGEMENT, REPAIR, DEMOLITION, REMOVAL, CONVERSION, USE AND MAINTENANCE OF ALL BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND PROPERTIES IN HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP; PRESERVING AND SAYING FROM REPEAL HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP ORDINANCES IN EFFECT ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 1999 RELATING	TO BUILDING CONSTRUCTION THAT EXCEED THE MINIMUM	REQUIREMENTS OF THE PENNSYLVANIA UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION	CODE; PROVIDING FOR THE ISSUANCE OF PERMITS, . EXEMPTIONS, COLLECTION OF FEES, MAKING OF INSPECTIONS AND PRESCRIBING PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS OF THE	BUILDING CODE;  AND ELECTING TO ADMINISTER AND ENFORCE THE PROVISIONS OF THE PENNSYLVANIA UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE IN HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA

BACKGROUND:

A.	The Haycock Township Board of Supervisors ("Board") has, by Ordinance No. 93, enacted on March 3, 2003 and effective on March 8, 2003, as amended, adopted by reference the 1999 BOCA National Building Code as the building code of Haycock Township pursuant to its  statutory  authority,  the Pennsylvania  Second  Class Township  Code,  as  amended  (53 P.S.
§65101 et seq.);

B.       The standards referenced in paragraphs A and B above are collectively referred to in this Ordinance as the "Local Building Code."

C.	By Act 45 of 1999 ("Act 45"), the Pennsylvania General Assembly enacted the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act to provide uniform statewide construction standards; and to require that all municipalities in Pennsylvania timely adopt the uniform construction standards once the standards were promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry ("L&I").

D.	L&I promulgated the uniform construction standards (the "Code") on January 10, 2004, and Act 45 requires municipalities to adopt the Code by ordinance as the municipality's building code no later than July 8, 2004, and  to elect whether the municipality will  enforce and/or administer the Code within the municipality;
 
E.	Act 45 and the Code preempts and rescinds the Local Building Code, unless provisions of the Local Building Code exceeding the minimum requirements of the Code were in effect on or before July 1, 1999. Haycock Township has no such "grandfathered" provisions of the Local Building Code or other ordinances;

F.        The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Haycock Township and to conform to the requirements of Act 45 and the Code; and to reflect Haycock Township's election to enforce and administer the provisions of the Code and the Act within Haycock Township; and

G. Act 45 and the Code require the enactment  of  this  Ordinance  by  Haycock Township electing to administer and enforce the building code provisions of the Code.

NOW,  THEREFORE,   BE  IT  ENACTED   AND   ORDAINED,   and  it  is  hereby
ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of  Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, as follows:

Section 01:	Administration  and  Enforcement  of  Code.	Subject to the prov1s1ons of this Ordinance and applicable law, Haycock Township hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §§7210.101- 7210.1103, as amended from time to time (the "Act"), and the regulations promulgated thereunder.

Section 02: Adoption of Building Code. The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401-405, as amended from time to time (the "Code"), is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as the municipal building code of Haycock Township.

Section 03:	Approved Means of Administrating and Enforcing the Code. Administration and enforcement of the Code within Haycock Township shall be undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors from time to time by Resolution:

a.	By designating an employee of Haycock Township to serve as the municipal code official to act on behalf of Haycock Township;

b.	By retaining of one or more construction code officials or third party agencies to act on behalf of Haycock Township;

c.	By  agreeing  with  one  or more  municipalities  for the joint  administration  and enforcement of the Act and the Code through an inter-municipal agreement; or

d.	By entering into a contract with another municipality for the administration  and enforcement of the Act and the Code on behalf of Haycock Township.

 
Section 04:
 
·B-oard of Appeals.
 
A.	Creation of Appeals Board. A Building  Code Board of Appeals (the "Board of Appeals") is established in conformity with the requirements of the Act  and  the  Code.  The Board of Appeals shall hear and rule on appeals, requests for variances and requests for extensions oftime arising under the Code.

B.	Appointment of Members. The Board of Appeals shall consist of no fewer than three (3) and no more than five (5) members appointed by the Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors shall appoint the initial Board of Appeals members to terms of varying length to establish staggered terms.  After the initial appointments, each new member shall serve for five
(5) years or until a successor has been appointed.

C.	Qualifications of Members. The members of the Board of Appeals shall, in the discretion of the Haycock Township Board  of Supervisors, be qualified by training  and experience to pass on matters pertaining to building construction. Training and experience may consist of licensure as an architect or engineer, experience in the  construction  industry,  or training or experience as an inspector or plan reviewer. No member of the Board of Supervisors nor any code inspector employed by Haycock Township may serve on the Board of Appeals. If the Board of Supervisors is unable to find a  sufficient  munber  of  qualified  individuals  who reside within Haycock Township, it may appoint a qualified person(s) who resides outside of Haycock Township to fill a position.

D.	Alternate Members. The Board of Supervisors may appoint up to two (2) alternate members who may be called by the Chair of the Board of Appeals to hear appeals in the event of the absence or disqualification of a member. Alternate members shall possess the qualifications required for membership, and shall be appointed for five (5) years or until a successor has been appointed.

E.	Intergovernmental Cooperation. If at any time enforcement and ac!J:ninistration is undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, the Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized to enter into an intergovernmental cooperation agreement with one or more municipalities to create a Board of Appeals.

F.	Chairperson and Secretary. The Board of Appeals shall annually select one of its members to serve as Chair and Secretary. The Secretary of the Board of Appeals shall file a detailed record of all proceedings with the Township.

G.	Disqualification of Member. No member of the Board of Appeals may hear an appeal in which that member has any personal, professional or financial interest.

H.	Operation of Board of Appeals. The procedure for conducting hearings and notices of hearings shall be established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors and shall be consistent with Act, the Code and all other applicable laws and regulations.

Section 05:	Preservation of Existing Ordinances. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances w:@ch were adopted by Haycock Township on or before July 1, 1999, and which equal or exceed the requirements of the Code shall continue in full force and effect until such
 
time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the minimum requirements of the Code, as amended from time to time.  Haycock Township has no such ordinances.

Section 06:	Repeal of Certain Prior Ordinances. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances, including without limitation ordinance no. 93, which either (a) exceed the minimum requirements of the Code but were enacted after July 1, 1999; or (b) are in effect as of the effective date of this Ordinance and whose requirements are less than the minimum requirements of the Code, are hereby amended and/or repealed to conform to the comparable provisions of the Code and the Act.

Section 07:	Changes to Amendable Sections of Code. In accordance with §403.102(1) of the Code, Haycock Township, by virtue of its election to enforce an administer the provisions of the Code and the Act within Haycock Township, hereby amends the provisions of the Code identified below  as set forth in Schedule "A" attached hereto. The provisions of Schedule "A" attached to this Ordinance shall control over the corresponding provisions of the Code. Section 403.102(1) of the Code allows the following provisions of the Code to be amended:

a.	Section	403.42(b)	and	(c)	(relating	to	permit	requirements	and exemptions);
b.	Section 403.42a(a)-(e) and (g)-(n) (relating to permit application);
c.	Section 403.43(b), (c), (g), (h) and (k) (relating to grant, denial and effect of permits);
d.	Section 403.44 (relating to alternative construction material and methods).
e.	Section 403.45 (relating to inspections);
f.	Section 403.46 (relating to certificate of occupancy);
g.	Section 403.47 (relating to public utility connections);
h.	Section 403.62(a)-(e) (relating to permit requirements and exemptions);
L	Section 403.64 (relating to inspections);
J.	Section 403.65 (relating to certificates of occupancy);
k.	Section 403.66 (relating to public utility connections);
I.	Section 403.8l(a) and (b) (relating to stop work order);
m.	Section 403.82 (relating to notice of violations);
n.	Section 403.83 (relating to order to show cause/ order to vacate);
o.	Section 403.84(a)-(e) (relating to unsafe building structure or equipment); and
p.	Section  403.85(a)-(c)	(relating  to  release,  retention  and  sharing  of commercial construction records).

Section 08:	Modifications to the Code. Haycock Township may enact construction standards that exceed the minimum requirements of the Code in accordance with the provisions and procedures set forth in the Act and the Code.

Section 09:	Fees. The Haycock Township Board of Supervisors may by resolution adopted fro)ll time to time prescribe reasonable fees for the administration and enforcement of the Code undertaken pw:suant to this Ordinance and the Code.
 
Section 10: The Haycock Township Secretary and Haycock Township Building Code Official are hereby directed to forward a certified copy of this Ordinance along with the Municipal Election Form to the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry properly completed within the time period provided by applicable law.

Section 11: In addition, all inconsistent provisions of other ordinances or resolutions are repealed to the extent of the inconsistency. All other provisions of the ordinances of Haycock Township not governed by this Ordinance, the Code or the Act shall remain in full force and effect.

Section 12: The provisions of this Ordinance are declared to be severable.  If any provision of this Ordinance is declared to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall have no effect on the remaining provisions of this Ordinance.

Section 13: This Ordinance shall be effective five (5) days after the date it is adopted at a public hearing by the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors.
#i
 
ADOPTED this		f'
 
day of
 
.._JtL/]£,
 
, 2004.
 

 


Attest:
 
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS HAYCOCK  TOWNSHIP
,
 


NancyMOdi Township Secretary


















U:\TWC  Clients\HA YCOCK\Unifonn   Construction  Code\Ordinance.05-18-2004.doc
 
SCHEDULE "A"

UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE - MODIFIABLE PROVISIONS

§402.42      Permit Requirements and Exemptions - Commercial Construction

§402.42(b)  Emergency repairs or replacement of equipment may be made without first applying for a permit if a permit application is submitted to the building code official within seventy-two (2) hours of the discovery of the even or occurrence necessitating the emergency repairs and/or replacement.

§402.42(c)      A permit is required for the exceptions listed in § 403.1 (b) (relating to scope).  A permit is not required for the following construction as long as the work does not violate a law or ordinance:

(1)	Building construction for the following:
(i)	Fences that  are  not over four  (4) feet  high,  provided,  however,  that  a fence permit is required under other applicable Haycock Township ordinances.
(ii) through (v) - DELETED
(vi)	Painting,  papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets,  counter tops and similar finishing work.
(vii)	Temporary motion picture, television, and theater stage sets and scenery.
(viii) - DELETED
(ix)	Shade cloth structures  constructed for  nursery or agricultural  purposes that do
not include service systems.
(x)	Swings   and  other   playground   equipment   accessory   to   one-   or  two-family dwellings that do not require a footer.
(xi)	Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not project more than 54 inches from the exterior wall and do not require additional support of group R-3
as applicable in the "International Building Code," and Group U occupancies.
(xii)	Movable cases and counters.
(xiii)	Window replacement without structural change; provided, however, that all other applicable   permits   required   under  Haycock  Township   ordinances   must  be obtained.

(2)	Electrical work for the following:
(i)	Minor repair and maintenance work that includes the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles.
(ii)	Interior electrical equipment used for radio and television transmissions. The provisions of the Uniform Construction Code apply to and a permit must be acquired for equipment and wiring for power supply and the installation of towers and antennas.
(iii)	The  installation  of a temporary  system  for the testing or servicing  of electrical equipment or apparatus.

(3)	The following gas work:
(i)	A portable heating appliance.
(ii)		Replacement of a minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make the equipment unsafe.

(4)	The following mechanical work or equipment:
(i)	A portable heating appliance.
(ii)	Portable ventilation equipment.
(iii)	A portable cooling unit.
(iv) - DELETED
(v)	Replacement of any part that does not alter its approval or make it unsafe.
(vi)	A portable evaporative cooler.
 
(vii)	A self-contained refrigeration system containing 10 pounds or less of refrigerant and placed into action by motors that are not more than 1 horsepower.

(5)	The following plumbing repairs:
(i)	Stopping leaks in a drain. The Uniform Construction Code applies if a concealed
or visible trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and is
removed and replaced with new material.
(ii) Clearing stoppages or repairing leaks  in  pipes,  valves  or  fixtures,  and  the removal and installation of water closets, faucets and lavatories if the valves or pipes are not replaced or rearranged.

§402.42a            Permit Application

§402.42a(a) Applications for a permit required under § 403.42 (relating to permit requirements and exemptions) shall be submitted to the building code official in accordance with this section.

§402.42a(b) A permit applicant shall submit an application to the building code official and attach construction documents, including plans and specifications, and information concerning special inspection and structural observation programs, Department of Transportation highway access  permits  and other data required by the building code official with the permit application. The applicant shall submit THREE
(3)	copies of all required documents and pay all required fees prior to or before the application will be considered complete and submitted by Haycock Township. The applicant shall submit three sets of documents when the Department conducts the review.

§402.42a(c) A licensed architect or licensed professional engineer shall prepare the construction documents under the Architects Licensure Law (63 P. S. §§ 34.1--34.22), or the Engineer, Land Surveyor and Geologist Registration Law (63 P. S. §§ 148--158.2).

§402.42a(d) A building code official may require submission of additional construction  documents  in special circumstances.

§402.42a(e) The permit applicant shall submit construction d'ocuments in a format approved by  the building code official. Construction documents shall be clear, indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed, and show in detail that the work will conform to the Uniform Construction Code.

§402.42a(g) Construction documents shall contain the following information related to the exterior wall envelope:

(1)	Description   of  the  exterior  wall   envelope   indicating   compliance   with   the   Uniform Construction Code.
(2)	Flashing details.
(3)	Details relating to intersections with dissimilar materials, corners, end  details,  control joints, intersections at roof, eaves, or parapets, means of drainage, water-resistive membrane and details around openings.

§402.42a(h) Construction documents shall contain a site plan that is drawn to scale. The building code official may waive or modify the following site plan requirements if the permit application does not impact or touch upon these requirements. Site plan requirements include but are not limited to  all  of  the following:

(1)	The size and location of new construction and existing structures on the site.
(2)	Accurate boundary lines.
(3)	Distances from lot lines.
(4)	·The established street grades and the proposed finished grades.
 
(5)	If the construction involves demolition, the site plan shall indicate construction that is to be demolished and the size and location of existing structures  and construction that will remain on the site or plot.
(6)	Location of parking spaces, accessible routes, public transportation  stops and other
required accessibility features.

§402.42a(i) A permit applicant shall submit certifications required in the "International Building Code" for construction in a flood hazard area to the building code official.

§402.42aU) A permit applicant shall identify, on the application, the name and address of the licensed architect or engineer in responsible charge. The permit applicant shall notify the building code official in writing if another licensed architect or engineer assumes responsible charge.

§402.42a(k) The permit applicant shall describe an inspection program, identify a person or firm who will perform special inspections and structural observations if section 1704 or 1709 of the "International Building Code" requires special inspections or structural observations for the construction or if the building code official, in his or her discretion, believes such special inspections and/or structural observations for the construction are required.  All such proposed programs must satisfy the building code official.

§402.42a(I) A building code official may waive or modify the submission of construction documents, that are not required to be prepared by a licensed architect or engineer, or other data if the nature of the work applied for does not require review of construction documents or other data to obtain compliance with the Uniform Construction Code. The building code official may not waive the submission of site plans that relate to accessibility requirements.

§402.42a(m) An applicant for an annual permit under § 403.42(f) shall complete an application and provide information regarding the system that may be altered and the date that approval was previously provided for the approved electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing installation.

§402.42a(n) A permit applicant shall comply with the permit, certification or licensure requirements of the following laws applicable to the construction:

 
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
 
The Boiler and Unfired Pressure Vessel Law (35 P. S. §§ 1331.1--1331.19). The Propane and Liquefied Petroleum Gas Act (35 P. S. §§ 1329.1--1329.19). The Health Care Facilities Act.
The Older Adult Daily Living Centers Licensing Act (62 P. S. §§ 1511.1--1511.22).
 

§403.43              Grant, Denial and Effect of Permits

§403.43(b) A building code official shall examine the construction  documents  and  shall  determine whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the Uniform Construction Code and other pertinent Jaws or ordinances as part of the application process.

§403.43(c) A building code official shall stamp or place a notation on each page of the set of reviewed construction documents that the documents were reviewed and approved for Uniform Construction Code compliance before the permit is issued. The building code official shall clearly mark any required nondesign changes on the construction documents. The building code official shall return a set of the construction documents with this notation and any required changes to the applicant. The permit holder shall keep a copy of the construction documents at the work site open to inspection by the construction code official or an authorized representative.

§403.43(g) A permit issued under the Uniform Construction Code becomes invalid unless the authorized construction work begins within 180 days after the permit's issuance or if the authorized construction work permit is suspe[lded or abandoned for 180 days after the work has commenced. A permit holder may submit a written request along with the required fee of 10% of the original permit fee to the building code official  for  an extension  of time to  commence  or to  suspend  construction  for just  cause for  up to  an
 
additional twelve (12) months. The building code official may grant extensions of time to commence or suspend construction in writing. A permit is valid for no more than 1 year from its issue date, and all construction must be completed within twelve (12) months from issue, unless extended as set forth in this section.

§403.43(h) The permit shall be kept on the work site until a final inspection is completed by the building code official and all work passes such final inspection.

§403.43(k) A building code official may allow deferred submittals of portions of the design of the building and structure from the time of the application until a specified time set by the building code official. All of the following apply to deferred submittals:

(1)	The  building code  official  shall  provide  prior  approval  of  the  deferral  of  any  submittal items.
(2)	A licensed architect or professional engineer in responsible charge shall list the deferred
submittals on the construction documents for review by the building code official.
(3)	A licensed architect or  professional  engineer  shall first  review submittal  documents  for deferred  submittal  items  and  place a notation  on the  documents  that  the  architect  or
engineer  reviewed the  documents  and that the documents  are in general  conformance with' the design of the building or structure.
(4)	Deferred submittal items may not be installed until the building code official approves the design and submittal documents for the deferred submittal items.


§403.44. Alternative construction materials and methods.


§403.44(a) Materials, products and methods of construction that were evaluated as meeting codes enumerated in§ 403.21 (relating to Uniform Construction Code) by the ICC Evaluation Service, Inc. or an evaluation service accredited under the "General Requirements for  Bodies  Operating  Product Certification Systems" issued by the ISO (ISO Guide 65) are approved for use. The use shall conform with the evaluation.

§403.44(b) Materials, equipment and devices bearing the label or listed by a testing laboratory or quality assurance agency  accredited by the International Accreditation Service,  Inc.  or  another  agency accredited under the "Calibration and Testing  Laboratory Accreditation  Systems-General  Requirements for Operation and Recognition" issued by ISO (ISO Guide 58) are approved for use if:

(1)	The  testing  laboratory  or  quality  assurance  agency  deemed  the  material  as  meeting Uniform Construction  Code-required  standards.
(2)	The   scope   of   accreditation   is   applicable   to   Uniform   Construction   Code-required standards.

§403.44(c) A new building or remodeling, alteration, addition or change of use and occupancy of an existing building which complies with the International Performance Code shall also be in compliance with the Uniform Construction Code.

§403.45              Inspections.

§403.45(a) A construction code official shall perform inspections to insure that the construction complies with the approved permit and the Uniform Construction Code. Required inspections are those set forth in Section 403.64{d).

§403.45(b) Before issuing a permit, a building code official may examine, or cause to be examined, buildings, structures, facilities or sites related to the permit application.
 
§403.45(c) The permit holder or an authorized agent shall notify the construction code official when work is ready for inspection and provide access for the inspection. The work shall remain accessible  and exposed for inspection. A construction code official may inspect the construction and equipment  only during normal hours at the construction site unless the permit holder or agent requests or agrees to another time. Inspections may be conducted under § 403.86 (relating to right of entry to inspect). The failure of a permit holder to request timely inspections and provide access for the inspections constitutes a violation of the Uniform Construction Code and this Ordinance.

§403.45(d) A construction code official shall notify a permit holder if construction  complies  with  the Uniform Construction Code or fails to comply with the Uniform Construction Code.

§403.45(e) A construction code official shall conduct a final inspection of the completed construction work and file a final inspection report, which indicates that all of the following areas met Uniform Construction Code requirements after a final inspection of the completed construction work:

 











§403.46
 
(1)

(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
 
General  building  under  §  401.7(6)  (relating  to  certification  category  specification  for building inspector).
Electrical under§ 401. 7(7).
Plumbing under§ 401.7(9).
Accessibility under§ 401.7(11). Fire protection under§ 401.7(13). Mechanical under§ 401.7(8).
Energy conservation under§ 401.7(10).

Certificate of Occupancy
 

§403.46(a) A building, structure or facility, or any portion thereof, may not be used or occupied without a certificate of occupancy  issued by a building code official certifying compliance with all requirements of the Uniform Construction Code and this Ordinance.

§403.46(b) A building code official shall issue a final certificate of occupancy within fifteen {15) business days after receipt of a final inspection report that indicates  compliance  with  the  Uniform  Construction Code and that there are no outstanding fees, fines and/or violations against the permit holder or the building, structure or facility at issue. The final certificate of occupancy shall contain the following information:

(1)	The permit number and address of the building, structure or facility.
(2)	The permit holder's name and mailing address.
(3)	A description of the portion of the building, structure or facility covered by the occupancy permit.
(4)	The name of the building code official who issued the occupancy permit.
(5)	The applicable construction code edition applicable to the occupancy permit.
(6)	The   use   and   occupancy   classification   under   Chapter   3   (Use   and   Occupancy Classification) of the "International Building Code," when designated.
(7)	The type of construction defined in Chapter 6 (Types of Construction) of the "International Building Code," when designated.
(8)	Special stipulations and conditions relating to the permit and board of appeals' decisions and variances for accessibility requirements granted by the Secretary.
(9)	The date of the final inspection.

§403.46(c) A building code official may issue a temporary or partial final certificate of occupancy for a portion of a building, structure or facility if the portion independently meets  the  Uniform  Construction Code. A temporary or partial final certificate of occupancy  issued for  an  entire  building,  structure  or facility shall be-ll_alid for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days.
 
§403.46(d) A building code official may suspend or revoke a temporary, partial final or final certificate of occupancy when the certificate was issued in error, on the basis of incorrect or incomplete information supplied by the permit applicant or their agent or in violation of the Uniform Construction Code or this Ordinance; and may revoke a temporary certificate of occupancy where a final certificate of occupancy is not timely obtained. Before a final certificate of occupancy is revoked, a building owner may request a hearing before the board of appeals under § 403.122 (relating to appeals, variances and extensions of time) and this Ordinance.

§403.47            Public Utility Connections

§403.47(a) A building code official may authorize the temporary connection of a building or system under construction to a utility source of energy, fuel or power.

§403.47(b) Connection to a public electric or gas utility for the completed construction may not occur unless the permit holder provides written proof to the utility company that the building or structure passed inspections under this chapter.

§403.62    Permits and Exemptions - Residential Construction

§403.62(a) An owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish or change the occupancy of a residential building or erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace an electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system regulated by the Uniform Construction Code shall first apply to the building code official and obtain the required permit under § 403.62a (relating to permit application).

§403.62(b) An emergency repair or replacement of equipment may be made without first applying for a permit if a permit application is submitted to the building code official within seventy-two (2) hours of the discovery of the even or occurrence necessitating the emergency repairs and/or replacement.

§403.62(c) A permit not required for the exceptions listed in§ 403.1 (b) (relating to scope). A permit is not required for the following construction if the work does not violate a law or ordinance:

(1)	The following building construction, replacement or repairs:
(i)	Fences that are no more than four (4) feet high; provided, however, that a fence permit is required under other applicable Haycock Township  ordinances.
(ii) through (iv) • DELETED
(v)     Exterior or interior painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, flooring, cabinets, counter tops and similar finishing work.
(vi) • DELETED
(vii)	Swings and other playground equipment accessory to a one- or two-family dwelling that do not require a footer.
(viii)	Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not project more than 54 inches from the exterior wall and do not require additional support.
(ix)	Replacement of glass in any window or door. The replacement glass  shall comply with the minimum requirements of the International Residential Code.
(x)	Installation and replacement of a window, door, garage door, storm window and storm door in the same opening if the dimensions or framing of the original opening are not altered. The installation of means of egress and  emergency escape windows may be made in the same opening, without altering the dimensions or framing of the original opening if the required height, width or net clear opening of the previous window or door assembly is not reduced. All other applicable  permits  and approvals  required  under  Haycock Township  ordinances
must be obtained.
ixi)    Replacement of existing roof material that does not exceed 25% of the total roof area performed within any 12-month period, provided the  required change does not inolve any structural elements.
 
[NO SECTION (xii) in REGULATIONS]
(xiii) - DELETED
(xiv)	Repair or replacement of any part of a porch or stoop which does not structurally support a roof located above the porch or stoop.
(xv)	Installation  of  additional  roll or  bait  insulation  to  the  extent  permitted  by this Ordinance and the Uniform Construction Code.
(xvi)	Replacement of exterior rain water gutters and leaders.

(2)	Minor electrical work for the following:
(i)	Replacement   of   lamps   or   the   connection   of   approved   portable   electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles
(ii)	Replacement of a receptacle, switch or lighting fixture rated at 20 amps or less and operating at less than 150 volts to ground with a like or similar item. This does not include replacement of receptacles in locations where  ground-fault circuit interrupter protection is required.
(iii)		Replacement  of  installed  electrically  operated  equipment  such  as  doorbells, communication systems and any motor operated device.
(iv)	Installation, alteration or rearrangement of communications wiring.
(v)	Replacement of dishwashers; provided, however, that all plumbing work requires a permit.
(vi)	Replacement of kitchen range hoods.
(vii)	Installation of battery-powered smoke detectors.

(3)	The following gas work:
(i)	Portable heating, cooking or clothes drying appliances.
(ii)	Replacement of a minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make this equipment unsafe.
(iii)	A portable fuel cell appliance that is not connected to a fixed piping system and is not interconnected to a power grid.

(4)	The following mechanical work or equipment:
(i)	A portable heating appliance.
(ii)	Portable ventilation appliances.
(iii)	A portable cooling unit.
(iv)	Steam, hot or chilled water  piping within  any  heating  or  cooling equipment governed under the Uniform Construction Code.
(v)	Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make the equipment unsafe.
(vi)	Self-contained refrigeration systems containing 10 pounds or less of refrigerant or that are put into action by motors 1 horsepower.
(vii)	Portable evaporative cooler.
(viii)	A portable fuel cell appliance that is not connected to a fixed piping system and is not interconnected to a power grid.

(5)	The following plumbing work:
(i)	Replacement of bib valves if the replacement hose bib valves are provided with an approved atmospheric vacuum breaker.
(ii)	Refinishing of existing fixtures.
(iii)	Replacement of ball cocks.
(iv)	Repair of leaks.
(v)	Clearance of stoppages.
(vi)	Replacement of faucets or working parts of faucets.
(vii)	Replacement of valves other than shower or combination shower/bath valves.
(viii)	Replacement of traps.
(ix)	Replacement of a water closet, lavatory or kitchen sink.
 
(x)	Replacement of domestic clothes washers and dishwashers; provided, however, that all plumbing work requires a permit.

(6)	The following heating, ventilation and air conditioning work:
(i)	Replacement of motors, pumps and fans of the same capacity.
(ii)	Repair  and  replacement  of  heating,  supply  and  return  piping  and  radiation elements which do not require rearrangement of the piping system.
(iii)	Repair and replacement of duct work.
(iv)	Repair and replacement of portable (not central) air conditioning  equipment and
systems.
(v)	Repair  and  replacement  of  control  devices  for  heating  and  air  conditioning
equipment.
(vii)	Replacement  of  clothes  dryers  if there  is  no change  in fuel  type,  location  or
electrical  requirements.
(viii)	Replacement of stoves and ovens if there is no change  in fuel type, location or electrical  characteristics.

§403.62(d) An ordinary repair does not require a permit. The following are not ordinary repairs:

(1)	Cutting away a wall, partition or portion of a wall.
(2)	The removal or cutting of any structural beam or load-bearing support.
(3)	The removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a
structure affecting the egress requirements.
(4)	The addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain  leader, gas, soil, waste,  vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical.

§403.62(e) A permit is not required for the installation, alteration or repair of generation, transmission, distribution, metering or other related equipment that is, by established right, under the ownership and control of a public utility as the term "public utility" is defined in 66 Pa.C.S. § 102 (relating  to  the definitions).

§403.64             Inspections.

§403.64(a) A construction code official shall inspect all construction for which a permit was issued. The permit holder shall insure that the construction is accessible for inspection. An inspection does not bar prosecution or other legal action for violation of the Uniform Construction Code.

§403.64(b) The permit holder or an authorized agent shall notify the construction code official when work is ready for inspection and provide access for the inspection. The failure of a permit holder to request timely inspections and provide access for the inspections constitutes a violation of the Uniform Construction Code and this Ordinance.

§403.64(c) The construction code official shall notify a permit holder if construction complies with the Uniform Construction Code or fails to comply with the Uniform Construction Code.

§403.64(d) A construction code official shall make the following inspections and file inspection reports relating to Uniform Construction Code compliance in all of the following areas:

(1)	Foundation and/or footer inspection.
(2)	Plumbing, mechanical and electrical rough and final inspections.
(3)	Frame and masonry inspection.
(4)	Wallboard  inspection.
(5)	Wall Form inspection.
(6)	-  Backfill  inspection.
(7)	Slab and/or Deck inspection.
 
(8)	Insulation inspection.
(9)	Fire Suppression rough and final inspections.

§403.64(e) The construction code official may conduct other inspections to ascertain compliance with the Uniform Construction Code or municipal ordinances.

§403.64(f) A construction code official shall conduct a final inspection of the completed construction work and file a final inspection report that indicates compliance with the Uniform Construction Code.

§403.65              Certificate of Occupancy.

§403.65(a) Prior to it first being used, a single family residential building may not be used or occupied without a certificate of occupancy issued by a building code official. A certificate  of occupancy is not required upon re-sale or other transfer of such dwelling unit. Residential units in a multi-family or other group assembly use groups require a certificate of occupancy upon every change of occupancy.

§403.65(b) A building code official shall issue a certificate of occupancy after receipt of a final inspection report that indicates compliance with the Uniform Construction Code within fifteen (15) business  days. The certificate of occupancy shall contain all of the following information:

(1)	The permit number and address of the residential building.
(2)	The name and mailing address of the owner of the residential building.
(3)	A description of the portion of the residential building covered by the occupancy permit.
(4)	A statement that the described  portion of the residential building was  inspected for compliance with the Uniform Construction Code.
(5)	The name of the building code official who issued the occupancy permit.
(6)	The construction code edition applicable to the occupancy permit.
(7)	If an automatic sprinkler system is provided.
(8)	Any special stipulations and conditions relating to the building permit.

§403.65(c) A building code official may issue a certificate of occupancy for a portion of  a residential building if the portion independently meets the Uniform Construction Code.

§403.65(d) A building code official may suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy when the certificate was issued in error, on the basis of incorrect information supplied by the permit applicant, or in violation of the Uniform Construction Code. Before a certificate of occupancy is revoked,  a  building  owner  may request a hearing before the board of appeals in accordance with § 403.122 (relating  to  appeals, variances and extensions of time).

§403.66              Public Utility Connections

§403.66(a) A building code official may authorize the temporary connection of a building or system under construction to a utility source of energy, fuel or power.

§403.66(b) Connection to  a public electric or gas utility for the completed construction may not occur unless the permit holder provides written proof to the utility company that the building or structure passed inspections under this chapter.

§403.81              Stop Work Order
§403.81(a) A building code official may issue a written stop work order when the official determines that construction violates the Uniform Construction Code or is being performed in a dangerous or unsafe manner. The stop work order is to contain the reasons for the order and list the required conditions for construction to resume.
 
§403.81(b) The building code official shall serve the stop work order on the permit owner or the owner's agent by certified mail, regular mail and by posting at the property. Personal service shall be attempted where  possible.

§403.82              Notice of Violations

A building code official shall follow the following procedures if an inspection reveals a violation of the Uniform Construction Code:

(1)	A construction code official shall discuss the inspection results with the permit holder at the completion of the inspection.

(2)	The building code official may issue a written notice of violations to the permit holder. The notice is to contain a description of the violations and an order requiring correction of the violations within a reasonable period determined by the building code official. When a violation relates to an unsafe building, structure or equipment, a building code official shall act in accordance with § 403.84 (relating to unsafe building, structure or equipment).

(3)	After the compliance date contained in the order, the building code official shall inspect the building, structure or equipment to determine whether the violation was corrected. The building code official shall close the order if the violation was corrected. The building code official may issue an order to show cause under§ 403.83 (relating to order to show cause/order to vacate) to the owner for a violation that was not corrected.

§403.83              Order to Show Cause/Order to Vacate

§403.83(a) A building code official may initiate action to vacate or close a building, structure or equipment for violations of the Uniform Construction Code by issuing an order to show cause to the owner or owner's agent of a building or structure.

§403.83(b) The order to show cause shall contain a statement of the grounds for the action, the alleged violations of the Uniform Construction Code and notification that the building, structure or equipment may be closed or vacated. The order to show cause shall contain notification that the owner or owner's agent shall submit a written answer within twenty (20) days. The building code official shall serve the order to show cause upon the owner or owner's agent by certified mail, regular mail and by  posting  at  the property.  Personal service shall be attempted where possible.

§403.83(c) The owner or owner's agent may file a written answer to the order to show cause with the building code official within twenty (20) days following service of the order to show cause. The answer shall contain specific admissions or denials of the allegations contained in the order to show cause and set forth the specific facts, matters of law or Uniform Construction Code interpretation relied upon by the owner. The answer  may contain a request for a variance or an extension  of time for compliance. The building code official shall forward all requests for variances, extensions of time or appeals regarding interpretations of the Uniform Construction Code to the board of appeals within ten (10) business days. The building code official shall send a request for variance, extension of time or appeals regarding interpretation of the Uniform Construction  Code's accessibility requirements to the Department within ten
(10)	business days.

§403.83(d) If the owner or owner's agent files an appeal, the board of appeals or Department will assume jurisdiction and consolidate the answer with any pending request for variance, extension of time or appeal filed by the owner with the board of appeals. The Board of Appeals shall thereafter schedule a hearing in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Construction Code and this Ordinance.

§403.83(e) The_building code official shall consider the pending request for variance or extension of time or appeal as a stay to an enforcement action.
 
§403.83(f) After receipt of the answer, the building code official may take the following actions  if the owner or owner's agent did not previously file an appeal or request for variance or extension of time:

(1)	Issue a stop work order.
(2)	Vacate or close the building or structure or place equipment out of operation.
(3)	Abate or modify the alleged violation.
(4)	Order other action to protect persons or property.

§403.83(g) A construction code official shall inspect the construction at the expiration of an extension of time or other time period granted for compliance under this section. If the building, structure or equipment violates the Uniform Construction Code following inspection, the building code official may issue an order vacating or closing the building or structure or placing equipment out of operation. The building code official shall serve this order upon the owner or owner's agent by certified mail or personal service.

§403.83(h) Where an unsafe condition exists, a building code official shall act in accordance with §
403.84 (relating to unsafe building, structure or equipment).

§403.84            Unsafe Building, Structure or Equipment

§403.84(a) A buildirig code official may determine that a building, structure or equipment  is  unsafe because of inadequate means of egress, inadequate light and ventilation, fire hazard, other dangers to human life or the public welfare, illegal or improper occupancy or inadequate maintenance or for  any other applicable reason under the Uniform Construction Code that threatens the health, safety or welfare of the building, any adjoining or nearby building or property, or any individual. A  vacant  building  or structure that is not secured against entry is unsafe under this section.

§403.84(b) When a building code official determines the existence of an unsafe condition, the building code official shall order the vacating of the building or structure.

§403.84(c) A building code official shall serve a written notice on the owner or owner's agent  of the building, structure or equipment that is unsafe under this section. The notice shall contain the order to vacate the building, structure or seal the equipment out of service and  state  the  unsafe  conditions, required repairs or improvements. The order shall be served by certified mail and regular mailto the owner or to the owner's agent's last known address or on the owner, agent or person in control of the building, structure or equipment. A building code official shall post the written notice at the entrance of the structure or on the equipment.   Personal service shall also be attempted.

§403.84(d) When a building or structure is ordered vacated under this section, the building code official shall post a notice at each entrance stating that the structure is unsafe and its occupancy is prohibited.

§403.84(e) A building code official may not rescind the order to vacate until the owner abates or corrects the unsafe condition.

§403.85                Release, retention and sharing of commercial construction records.

§403.85(a)  A  building  code  official  shall  and  Haycock  Township  may  keep  records  of  all  applications. received,  permits  issued, reviewed building plans and specifications,  certificates  issued, fees  collected, reports of inspections,  notices and orders  issued for  all commercial  buildings  and structures  under the Uniform Construction Code. These records shall be retained as long as the related building, structure or equipment remains in existence.

§403.85(b) A building code official may reproduce records kept in an electronic format to a hard-copy format upon request. A building code official or Haycock Township, but not both, may charge for the reproduction cos.ts.
 
§40.85(c) A municipality that discontinues enforcing the Uniform Construction Code shall keep records of previous Uniform Construction Code enforcement. A municipality shall make these records available to the Department.

U:\TWC Clients\Haycock\Uniform  Construction Code\Modifiable Provisions.05-18-2004.doc
 
ORDINANCE  NO. </f7




AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP  OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AMENDING  ORDINANCE  83 OF THE TOWNSHIP  OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, BY REDUCING THE MAXIMUM SPEED LIMIT ON DOGWOOD LANE IN HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP  FROM THIRTY-FIVE  (35) M.P.H.
TO TWENTY-FIVE  (25) M.P.H.




WHEREAS, the maximum speed limit in a residential district of a non-numbered traffic route functionally classified as a local highway is twenty-five (25) miles per hour pursuant to the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. Section 3362(a)(1.2));


WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township has the authority to enact maximum speed limits on local roads pursuant to the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. Section 6109). Further, the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code provides that the Board may do so without the requirement of having ar;i engineering  and traffic investigation performed where it is establishing a speed limit under Section 3362(a)(1.2)) (75 Pa.C.S.A. Section 6109(e));


WHEREAS, Dogwood Lane is in a Haycock Township residential district and is a non-numbered traffic route functionally classified as a local highway.  Further, the Board of Supervisors finds it is in the interests of the Township and of its citizens to amend Ordinance 83 to reduce the maximum speed limit on Dogwood Lane from thirty-five (35) miles per hour to twenty-five (25) miles per hour;


NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing, be it ENACTED and ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, as follows:


1.	The speed limit on Dogwood Lane in Haycock Township shall be reduced from thirty-five (35) miles per hour to twenty-five (25) miles per hour;
 
2.	Enforcement of this Ordinance shall be pursuant to the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code and all fines levied for violations thereunder shall be payable to the Township of Haycock.


3.	This Ordinance shall become effective five (5) days following its enactment.




ORDAINED AND ENACTED this d 3 day of






 


ATTEST:


-1.a"'" /b.
Nancy	odis,
 
HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
 

































U:\TWC Oients\HAYCOCK\Ordin.:'lnce\Traffic   Speed  Limitations\Oogwcod Lane Reduction in Speed 07.27.04.doc







2
 
ORDINANCE  NO.	tz'C/

AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA AMENDING  HAYCOCK  TOWNSHIP  ORDINANCE  NO. 97 ADOPTING THE PENNSYLVANIA UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION  CODE AS THE HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BU:JLDING CODE TO APPLY THE CONSTRUCTION CODE TO UTILITY AND MISCELLANEOUS USE STRUCTURES GREATER THAN OR EQUAL TO 1,000 SQUARE FEET IN BUILDING AREA; TO CORRECT A TYPOGRAPHCIAL ERROR IN THE PROVISIONS RELATING TO  THE  CODE'S  APPLICABLITY  TO CERTAIN RESIDENTIAL  CONSTRUCTION  ACTIVITY

BACKGROUND:

A.	The Haycock Township Board of Supervisors  ("Board")  has, by Ordinance No. 97, enacted on June 28, 2004 and effective on July 2, 2004, adopted by reference the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code [34 Pa. Code §401.1 et seq.] (the "Code") as the building code of Haycock Township;

B.	On July 15, 2004, the Pennsylvania General Assembly enacted Act 93 of 2004 ("Act 93"), which amended the Code to re-define "utility and miscellaneous use structures" as specific accessory structures having a building area of less than 1,000 square feet.  Such structures were previously defined as having a building area ofless than 500 square feet;

C. Act 93 allows municipalities  that enact ordinances electing to administer and enforce the Code in their jurisdiction to adopt stricter Code standards and regulations pertaining to "utility and miscellaneous use structures" regardless of size;

D. Ordinance No. 97 exempted utility and miscellaneous use struchires from the Code and from the requirement of obtaining a building permit only ifthe structure had a building area of less than 500 square feet. The Board wishes to set the square foot exemption limitation for utility and miscellaneous use structures at less than 1,000 square feet;

E. The Board also wishes to amend Schedule A to Ordinance No. 97 to conect a typographical enor to accurately reflect that certain activity is exempt  from the  Code's scope; and

F. This ordinance is enacted pursuant to the legislative authority set forth in the Pennsylvania Second Class Township Code [53 P.S. §53101 et seq.] and the Pem1sylvania Construction Code Act, as amended (the "Act").

Section 01:	Section 08 of Ordinance 97, relating to Modifications to the Code, is amended to add the following subsection a:

"a.	In accordance with §503.C of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, as amended, the provisions of the Code, this Ordinance and Schedule "A" as adopted
 
by Haycock Township do not apply to utility and miscellaneous use structures that have a building area ofless than 1,000 square feet. Utility and miscellaneous use structures equaling or exceeding 1,000 square feet in building area must comply with the provisions of the Code, this Ordinance and Schedule "A."

Section 02: The introductory sentences of Section 403 .62(c), Permits and Exemption - Residential Construction, of Schedule A, Modifiable Provisions, to Ordinance No. 97 are amended in full to read as follows:

"Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Ordinance, this Schedule "A" or the Code, a permit is not required for the exceptions listed in §403.1(b) (relating to scope). A permit is not required for the following construction if the work does not violate a law or ordinance:"

Section 03: The Haycock Township Secretary and Haycock Township Building Code Official are hereby directed to forward a certified copy of this Ordinance to the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry.

Section 04: In addition, all inconsistent provisions of other ordinances or resolutions are repealed to the extent of the inconsistency. All other provisions of the ordinances of Haycock Township not governed by this Ordinance, the Code or the Act shall remain in full force and effect.

Section OS: The provisions of this Ordinance are declared to be severable. If any provision of this Ordinance is declared to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall have no effect on the remaining provisions of this Ordinance.

Section 06: This Ordinance shall be effective five (5) days after the date it is adopted at a public hearing by the Haycock Township Board of .'?,upervisors.

 





Attest:
 

ADOPTED this
 
1#i
 

dayof
/
 

, 2004.

BOARD OF SUPERVISORS HAYCOCK  TOWNSHIP
 


 

U:\TWC Clients\HAYCOCK\Uniform  Consn·uction  Code\Amendment  Ordinance.ivliscUse  Structures.typo.advertised   version.07-28-2004.doc
 
ORDINANCE NO._ 	


AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, MERGING AND RESTATING IN FULL ORDINANCE NO 95 AND ITS AMENDMENT, ORDINANCE NO. 96, WHICH AMENDED ARTICLE IV SECTION 404 OF THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, ESTABLISHING STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS FOR TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES WITHIN HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP



WHEREAS, Section 1516 (53 P.S. §66516) of the Pennsylvania Second Class Township Code provides that the corporate powers of the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township (the “Board of Supervisors”) include the ability to plan for the development of the township through zoning, subdivision and land development regulations under the act of July 13, 1968 (P.L. 805, No. 247), known as the “Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.”

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors on or about September, 26, 1994, duly adopted Ordinance No. 71, revising and restating the Haycock Zoning Ordinance as adopted in 1975;

WHEREAS, Section 1601 of the Second Class Township Code provides that the Board of Supervisors may adopt ordinances in which general or specific powers of the township may be exercised, and, by the enactment of subsequent ordinances, the Board of Supervisors may amend, repeal or revise existing ordinances (53 P.S. Section 66601);

WHEREAS, the since its adoption, the Zoning Ordinance has from time to time been amended;

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors on or about December 1, 2003, duly adopted Ordinance No. 95, amending the Zoning Ordinance to make provisions for the establishment of standards and regulations for telecommunications facilities within the Township and on or about May 3, 2004, duly adopted Ordinance No. 96, amending Ordinance No. 95 regarding exemptions to the Ordinance and regarding the location on which a telecommunications facility may be located in Haycock Township;

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors finds and determines that Ordinance No. 95 and its Amendment, Ordinance No. 96 should be merged and restated in full for ease and better efficiency of use.

NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing, be it ENACTED and ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, as follows:

Section 01: Article IV section 404 of the Zoning Ordinance is amended by merging Ordinance 95 and its Amendment, Ordinance No. 96 and the same is restated in full as follow:
 




I.	TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES

I1  PURPOSE

The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Haycock Township and of those who visit this community, while accommodating the telecommunication needs of residents, visitors, community services and businesses. This section shall:

A.	Preserve the character and appearance of Haycock Township, while allowing adequate telecommunications services to be developed;

B.	Protect the scenic, historic, environmental, and natural resources of Haycock Township, and property values therein;

C.	Provide standards and requirements for the operation, siting, design, appearance, construction, monitoring, modification, and removal of telecommunications facilities;

D.	Minimize tower and antenna proliferation by encouraging the sharing of existing telecommunications facility sites where possible and appropriate;

E.	Facilitate the provision of telecommunications services to the residences and businesses of Haycock Township;

F.	Require, through performance standards, the location of telecommunication facilities in nonresidential areas and away from other sensitive areas such as schools, hospitals, senior centers, and child care facilities.

I2  AUTHORITY TO HIRE INDEPENDENT CONSULTANTS

A.	Upon review of an application for use by special exception and/or Site Plan Review for a telecommunications facility, the Haycock Township Zoning Hearing Board (hereinafter “Zoning Board”) and/or the Haycock Township Planning Commission (hereinafter “Planning Commission”) may determine that it needs the assistance of an independent consultant or consultants to evaluate the application. Upon making such a determination, it may hire independent consultants, the reasonable costs of whose services shall be paid for by the applicant from escrow funds held with the Township pursuant to the fee schedule set by the Board of Supervisors via Resolution. These consultants shall be qualified professionals with an appropriate combination of training, record of service, and/or certification in one or more of the following areas of expertise: 1) telecommunications/radio frequency engineering; 2) structural engineering; 3) assessment of electromagnetic fields; 4) legal issues; 5) other
 
areas, if determined necessary by the Zoning Board or the Planning Commission.
B.	The Zoning Board and Planning Commission may provide the full application to any independent consultant(s) hired pursuant to this section for their analysis and review. Consultants shall report directly to the Zoning Board and/or the Planning Commission.

I3  CONSISTENCY WITH FEDERAL LAW

The Zoning Board’s decision regarding an application is intended to be in agreement with federal law, particularly the Telecommunications Act of 1996 as it may be amended. This section is not intended to:

A.	Prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services;

B.	Unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services; or

C.	Regulate personal wireless services on the basis of the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions, to the extent that the regulated services and facilities comply with the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulations concerning such emissions.

I4  EXEMPTIONS

The following telecommunications facilities and uses are exempt from the requirements of this section: police, fire, ambulance, and other emergency dispatch; amateur (ham) radio, citizens-band radio, single-use local business radio dispatch, television antennas for home use, or temporary mobile facilities for television or radio broadcasts (“Exempt Facilities”).

No FCC-licensed telecommunications facility or use, except applicants for telecommunications facilities permits that received Zoning Hearing Board approval prior to the date of the enactment of Ordinance 95, shall be considered exempt from this section for any reason, whether or not said facility or use is proposed to share a tower or other structure with Exempt Facilities

I5  DEFINITIONS

Definitions contained in this section shall be applicable to this section only, and do not pertain to the remainder of the Haycock Township Zoning Ordinance. Definitions in the Haycock Township Zoning Ordinance will pertain to this section unless the term is specifically defined herein.

ANTENNA:  A device for transmitting and/or receiving electromagnetic signals.
 
APPLICANT: A person who applies for a telecommunications facility siting. An applicant can be the landowner of record, or the telecommunications service provider or agent of record, with the landowner’s (or other legally designated representative) written permission.

BASE STATION: The primary sending and receiving site in a telecommunications facility. More than one base station and/or more than one variety of telecommunications provider can be located on a single tower or structure.

CELLULAR TELECOMMUNICATIONS: A commercial Low Power Mobile Radio Service bandwidth licensed by the FCC to providers in a specific geographical area in which the radio frequency spectrum is divided into discrete channels which are assigned in groups to geographic cells within a service area and which are capable of being reused in different cells within the service area.

CHANNEL: The segment of the radiation spectrum to or from an antenna which carries one signal. An antenna may radiate on many channels simultaneously.

CO-LOCATION: Locating wireless telecommunications equipment from more than one provider at a single site or structure.

FCC: Federal Communications Commission. The government agency responsible for regulating telecommunications in the United States.

LOCATION: References to site location shall be the exact longitude and latitude, to the nearest tenth of a second. Bearing or orientation should be referenced to true north.

MODIFICATION  OF  AN  EXISTING  TELECOMMUNICATIONS  FACILITY:
Any change, or proposed change, in power input or output, number of antennas, change in antenna type(s) or model(s), repositioning of antenna(s), or change in number of channels per antenna above the maximum number approved under an existing permit.

MODIFICATION OF AN EXISTING TOWER OR STRUCTURE:  Any change,
or proposed change, in dimensions of an existing and permitted tower or other structure designed to support telecommunications transmission, receiving and/or relaying antennas and/or equipment.

MONITORING: The measurement, by the use of instruments in the field, of non-ionizing radiation exposure at a telecommunications facility site as a whole, or from the towers, antennas or repeaters.

MONITORING PROTOCOL: The testing protocol, such as the Cobbs Protocol or the FCC Regulations (Title 47, Part 1, Section 1.1307 referenced as IEEE C95.3 1991), or one substantially similar, including compliance determined in
 
accordance with the National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements, which is to be used to monitor the emissions and determine exposure risk from existing and new telecommunications facilities.

MONOPOLE: A single self-supporting vertical pole with no guy wire anchors, usually consisting of a galvanized or other unpainted metal or a wooden pole with below-grade foundations.

PERMIT: An official action which sets forth the rights and obligations extended by Haycock Township to an operator to own, construct, maintain, and operate its telecommunications facility within the boundaries of the township.

PERMITTEE: An applicant who is granted a permit for a telecommunications facility by Haycock Township.

RADIAL PLOTS: Radial plots are the result of drawing equally spaced lines (radials) from the point of the antenna, calculating the expected signal and indicating this graphically on a map. The relative signal strength may be indicated by varying the size or color at each point being studied along the radial. A threshold plot uses a mark to indicate whether that point would be strong enough to provide adequate coverage i.e., the points meeting the threshold of adequate coverage. The draw back is the concentration of points close to the antenna and the divergence of points far from the site near the ends of the radials.

REPEATER: A small receiver/relay transmitter and antenna of relatively low power output designed to provide service to areas which are not able to receive adequate coverage directly from a base or primary station.

ROOF AND/OR BUILDING MOUNT TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY:  A
telecommunications facility where antennas are mounted to an existing structure on the roof (including rooftop appurtenances) or a building face.

STRUCTURALLY ABLE: The determination that a tower or structure is capable of safely carrying the load imposed by the proposed new antenna(s) under all reasonably predictable conditions as determined by professional structural engineering analysis including the wind load or any other structural requirements.

STRUCTURE: Any pole, telescoping mast, tripod or the like which supports a device used in the transmitting and/or receiving of electromagnetic signals.

TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING: A structure located at a base station designed principally to enclose equipment used in connection with telecommunications transmissions including any foundation that may be required.
 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY: All equipment, including any tower, structure, building, antenna, repeater and other related device which a telecommunications provider needs to broadcasts and receives radio frequency signals which carry their services.

TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY SITE: A property, or any part thereof, which is owned or leased by one or more telecommunications providers and upon which one or more telecommunications facility(ies) and any required landscaping are located.

TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: An entity licensed by the FCC to provide telecommunications services to individuals or institutions.

TEMPORARY  WIRELESS   TELECOMMUNICATIONS   FACILITIES:      Any
telecommunications facility designed for use while a permanent wireless telecommunications facility is under construction, rehabilitation or restoration.

TILED COVERAGE PLOTS: Tiled plots result from calculating the signal at uniformly spaced locations on a rectangular grid, or tile, of the area of concern. Tiled plots (in comparison to radial plots) 1) provide a uniform distribution of points over the area of interest, 2) usually allow the same grid to be used as different sites are examined, and 3) do not necessitate the transmitter site be within the grid or area of interest. As with radial plots, the graphic display or plot can be either signal strength or adequate threshold. Tile plotting require more topographic data and longer (computer) execution time than radial plotting, but is preferable for comparative analysis.

TOWER: A permanent guyed, monopole, or self-supporting free standing mount, or in association with a building, other permanent designed to accommodate one or more antennas intended for transmitting and/or receiving television, AM/FM radio, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, or similar forms of electronic telecommunication.

I6  PERMITS

No permit shall issue to an applicant for the construction, alteration, modification, installation or operation of any telecommunication facility prior to a completed application being received by the Township; site plan approval from the Planning Commission; the granting of a special exception from the Zoning Board when applicable; a letter of intent to allow co-location of telecommunications facilities being received by the Township, the  removal bond (or other financial security) being received by the Township; proof of telecommunications facility insurance; the deposit of escrow funds and payment of all fees due to the Township.

An applicant for a telecommunications facility shall be a telecommunications provider, or must have a letter of intent or an executed contract to provide land or facilities to such an entity. A permit shall not be granted for a facility built on
 
speculation of a future letter of intent or contract with a telecommunications provider. A permit shall be granted only for a telecommunications facility with a user that has a current FCC license.



I6.1  TELECOMMUNICATIONS USE

Telecommunications use shall be considered a principal use of the property and, notwithstanding the provision of Section 400 of the Zoning Ordinance, is also permitted as an additional use on the property so long as the existing principal use on the property is a permitted use or in the district or a lawful nonconforming use. The existing principal use need not be affiliated with the telecommunications provider.

I6.2  USE PERMITTED BY RIGHT

A new telecommunications facility attached to an existing telecommunication facility is a permitted use by right and may be located in any zoning district.

I6.3  USE PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION

Telecommunications facilities are a use permitted by special exception upon compliance with the provisions of this section on parcels of land located on land owned by a government agency and located within 500 feet of the centerline of Old Bethlehem Road and Route 563. If it is demonstrated by an applicant that the telecommunication service needs of Haycock Township cannot be met by locating on land as referred to above, then a telecommunications facility may be located on land owned by a nonprofit entity located within 500 feet of the centerline of Old Bethlehem Road and Route 563. If it is demonstrated by an applicant that the telecommunication service needs of Haycock Township cannot be met by locating on land as referred to above, then a telecommunications facility may be located on land having a total acreage of five or more acres located within 500 feet of the centerline of Old Bethlehem Road and Route 563. Regardless of the parcel of land, the telecommunication facility must be located and constructed so that the greatest possible distance exists from the facility to the centerline of the referenced roadways.

I6.4  APPLICATION

All applicants for telecommunications facilities permits shall include the following information, as it applies to the specific type of telecommunications facility applied for, in addition to requirements of the Zoning Ordinance for uses by special exception:

A.	The legal name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, tower or structure owner (if other than applicant), and landowner(s) of record. If the applicant, tower or structure owner or landowner is not a natural person, the
 
name and address of the company, the type of business entity, the state in which the company is incorporated and has its principal office. Written permission of the tower or structure owner and landowner(s) to apply for the special exception use permit shall be submitted along with written permission from the tower or structure owner and landowner(s) allowing the Township’s independent consultant(s) to conduct any necessary site visit(s).
B.	The name, address and telephone number of the person to be contacted with regard to the application. Notice, orders, and other papers may be served upon the person so named, and such service shall be deemed to be service upon the applicant’s registered agent.

C.	The name, address, and telephone number of someone who is available on a 24-hour basis that is authorized to act in the event of an emergency regarding the structure or safety of the telecommunications facility.

D.	A copy of the applicant’s letter of intent or executed contract with the telecommunication service provider if the applicant is not the provider.

E.	The names and addresses of the landowners of record of all abutting property.

F.	A report from qualified and Pennsylvania-licensed professional engineer(s) that:

1.	Describes the telecommunications facility height, design, elevation, width, support system and reasons and design implications for use or non- use of guy wires.

2.	Documents the height above grade for all proposed mounting positions for antennas to be co-located on a tower or structure and the minimum separation distances between antennas.

3.	Describes the tower or structure’s proposed capacity, including the number, height, and type(s) of antennas that the applicant expects the tower or structure to accommodate.

4.	Provides evidence of need, as described in Section I7.herein.

5.	Describes the output frequency, number of channels and power output per channel for each proposed antenna.

6.	For each antenna, describes the antenna gain (projected and maximum), polarization and radiation pattern (composite pattern for an antenna array), the power input to antenna(s), including power input in normal use and at maximum output for each antenna and all antennas as an aggregate if tower is fully utilized.

7.	Describes the output frequency of the transmitter(s).
 

8.	For a telecommunications facility with multiple emitters, describes the results of an intermodulation study to predict the interaction of the additional equipment with existing equipment.

9.	Demonstrates the tower or structure’s compliance with accepted structural engineering standards and if an existing tower or structure, that it is structurally able to receive the proposed addition. Any tower or structure shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the most current Telecommunications Industries Association (TIA) – Electronic Industries Association (EIA) Standard 222-F “Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures” and all applicable requirements of the Haycock Township Building Code. The proposed tower or structure must be designed and constructed so as to be able to withstand wind gusts of at least one hundred (100) miles per hour with no ice and 78 mile per hour basic wind speed with .5-inch radial ice.

10.	Provides proof that at the proposed site the applicant will be in at least minimum compliance with all federal, state, and local regulations, standards and requirements, the basis for such representation and a statement that the applicant commits to continue to maintain such compliance with both radio frequency interference (RFI) and radio frequency radiation (RFR) standards (including all Environmental Assessments and Historic Preservation requirements) and that such compliance is within the limitations of the latest standards set by the following oversight organizations:

The	American	National	Standards	Institute	(ANSI-C95-1,	as amended);

The Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE-C95.1, as amended);

The  National Council on  Radiation  Protection  and  Measurements (CRP);

The International Radiation Protection Association (IRPA) and the FCC.

11.	Describes any foundations to be built upon which telecommunications facilities are located. Identifies any blasting and earth movement that may be required, and provides plans and elevations of the area to be blasted or affected and describes the steps to be taken to reduce or eliminate potential effects of the blasting including vibrations and impacts to foundations, wells and other structures in the area. Provides a plan to identify abutters prior to blasting. The Zoning Board may, in its discretion, require the Applicant to notify additional property owners prior to blasting
 
that may be sufficiently close to the proposed location and may reasonably require additional information related to such site preparation.

12.	Provides a soil report for the site, which provides verification that the areas of land, where the foundation of the tower, any buildings and any anchors for guy wires will be located, are appropriate for constructing those structures thereon.

13.	Includes other information required by the Zoning Board that is necessary to evaluate the request and its impact upon the health and safety of the residents of Haycock Township.

G.	For a tower or structure, a letter of intent committing the tower or structure owner and future tenant(s) to permit shared use of the tower or structure by other telecommunications providers, without discrimination, if the additional users agree to meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use, including compliance with all applicable FCC regulations, standards, and requirements and provisions provided herein.

H.	For a telecommunications facility to be installed on an existing tower or structure, a copy of the applicant’s letter of intent or executed contract with the owner of the existing tower or structure.

I.	To the extent required by the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and as administered by the FCC, a complete Environmental Assessment (EA) draft or final report describing the expected impacts of the proposed telecommunications facility. To the extent the applicant claims that an EA is not required, it should provide an explanation as to why an EA is not required in the form of an opinion, ruling, or other certification from the FCC.

J.	Proof of compliance with Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act, as amended, and with the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation’s regulations under the Act.

K.	Detailed plans for emergency power generation, including:

1.	Demonstration of percent of electrical demand being proposed in event of loss of commercial power.

2.	Type of fuel, storage method, and expected means and frequency of fuel delivery to the site for power generation.

3.	Amount of generator time, based on historical power reliability for the area of the telecommunications facility, proposed frequency and duration of tests, and description of muffler system and methods for noise abatement.

4.	Feasibility of wind and/or solar power in conjunction with storage batteries.
 

L.	Two cross-sections of proposed telecommunications facility, drawn at right angles to each other, showing any guy wires or supports. This shall show the proposed height of the tower or structure above the average grade at the base. This shall also show all proposed antennas, including their location on the tower or structure as well as all electrical wires, cables, and support equipment.

M.	A professional structural engineer’s written description of the proposed tower or structure and its capacity to support additional antennas or equipment at different heights and the ability of the tower or structure to be shortened if future telecommunications facilities no longer require the original height.

N.	An Existing Conditions Plan and Proposed Site Plan as defined in Section
I 6.5.C. and D. herein.

O.	All pertinent submittals and showings pertaining to: FCC permitting/ licensing; Environmental Assessments and Environmental Impact Statements; FAA Notice of Construction or Alteration; aeronautical studies; all pertinent data, assumptions, and calculations relating to service coverage; and all pertinent calculations and/or measurement data related to non-ionizing radiation emissions and exposure, regardless of whether categorical exemption from routine environmental evaluation under the FCC rules is claimed.

P.	An emergency plan to be implemented in the event that the tower or structure is deemed unsafe after inspection as described in section I 9.E. and F. herein. The plan shall include measures to warn abutting landowners of an unsafe situation, to evacuate a zone where injury or property damage may occur, and to notify local authorities.

Q.	Details of proposed method of financial surety as required in section I 12. (Abandoned, Unused, Obsolete, Damaged, or Dangerous Telecommunications Facility or Portions of Telecommunications Facility) herein.

I6.5. SITE PLAN REVIEW

Site  plan  applications  for  telecommunications  facilities  shall  include  the following information:

A.	Location Map: a copy of a portion of the most recent USGS Quadrangle map showing the area within at least a two-mile radius of the proposed telecommunications facility site, including the exact latitude and longitude (degrees, minutes, seconds to the nearest tenth).
 
B.	Vicinity Map at a scale of no smaller than 1 inch = 416 feet (or metric equivalent 1:5,000) with contour intervals no greater than 10 feet (or 3 meters) showing the entire vicinity within a 2,500-foot radius of the telecommunications facility site, topography, public and private roads and driveways, buildings and structures, water bodies, wetlands, landscape features, historic sites, and habitats for endangered species. It shall indicate the property lines of the proposed telecommunications facility site parcel and all access easements or rights of way needed for access from a public way to the site, and the names of all abutters or property owners along the access easement or who have deeded rights to the easement.

C.	Existing Conditions Plan: A recent survey of the area within 500 feet of the telecommunications facility site at a scale no smaller than 1 inch = 40 feet (1:480 or metric equivalent 1:500) with topography drawn with a minimum of
5 feet (1.5 meters) contour intervals, showing existing utilities, property lines, existing buildings or structures, wooded areas, existing water wells and springs. It shall show the boundary of any wetlands or flood plains or watercourses, and of any bodies of water included in the Official Flood Hazard Area within 500 feet from the tower  or any related facilities or access ways or appurtenances. The survey plan shall have been completed, on the ground, by a Pennsylvania-registered land surveyor no more than two years prior to the application date.

D.	Proposed Site Plans of the entire telecommunications facility site, indicating all improvements at the same scale as or larger than the Existing Conditions Plan showing the following:

1.	Proposed tower or structure location and any appurtenances, including supports and guy wires, if any, and any accessory building(s). It shall indicate property boundaries and setback distances to the base(s) of the tower or structure and the nearest corners of each of the appurtenant structures to those boundaries, and dimensions of all proposed improvements. Where protective fencing is proposed, it shall indicate setback distances from the edge of the fencing.

2.	Proposed spot elevations at the base of the proposed tower or structure and at the base of any guy wires, and the corners of all appurtenant structures.

3.	Proposed utilities, including distance from source of power, sizes of service available and required, locations of any proposed utility or telecommunications lines.

4.	Any direct or indirect wetlands alteration proposed.

5.	Detailed plans for drainage of surface and sub-surface water, to control erosion and sedimentation both during construction and as a permanent measure.
 

6.	Plans indicating locations and specifics of proposed screening, landscaping, grading, ground cover, fencing, and additional information that may be required; any exterior light(s) or sign(s).

7.	Plans of proposed access driveway or roadway and parking area at the telecommunication facility site. This shall include grading, drainage, and traveled width. This shall also include a cross-section of the access drive indicating the width, depth of gravel, paving or surface materials.

8.	Plans showing any changes to be made to an existing telecommunications facility’s landscaping, screening, fencing, lighting, drainage, wetlands, grading, driveways or roadways, parking or other infrastructure as a result of a proposed modification of said facility.

9.	Horizontal and radial distances of proposed antenna(s) to nearest point on property line, and to the nearest primary or secondary residence, school, hospital, senior center, child care facility, religious structure, or any other public building.

E.	Proposed details of the telecommunications facility including the following:

1.	Ground attachments, specifications for anchor bolts and other anchoring hardware for tower or structure.

2.	Proposed exterior finish and color of the tower or structure, building(s) and other portions of the telecommunications facility.

3.	The relative height of the tower or structure to the tops of surrounding trees, as they presently exist and the height to which they are expected to grow in 10 years.

F.	Proposed  plans  of  telecommunications  facility  building(s)  showing  the following:

1.	Floor plans and cross sections at a scale of no smaller than 3 inch = 1 foot (1:48) of any proposed appurtenant structure.

2.	Elevation views, indicating exterior appearance and materials.

G.	Proposed equipment plan elevations, sections and details at a scale no smaller than 1 inch = 10 feet showing the following:

1.	Number of antennas and repeaters, as well as the exact locations of antenna(s) and of all repeaters (if any) located on a map, as well as by degrees, minutes, and seconds to the nearest tenth of latitude and longitude.
 
2.	Mounting locations on tower or structure, including height above ground.

3.	Identification of all mounting frames, arms, brackets or other devices or equipment used to hold antennas and other equipment in place.

4.	Identification of all equipment or devices either attached to the structure or on the ground.

H.	Visibility Maps and Visual Analysis: The applicant shall provide photographs with a simulation of the proposed telecommunication facility. Photographs shall show views towards the proposed site, from a two-mile radius around the site, at forty-five-degree intervals. A minimum of eight views should be presented.

The applicant shall also develop and submit to the Planning Commission a written analysis of the visual impact of the proposed tower by a registered landscape architect. This analysis shall include photographs of the balloon test, as described in section I6.I., taken from at least 10 different perspectives within Haycock Township and any other visual analysis it may have developed or processed.

I.	Balloon Test: Within thirty-five days of submitting an application, applicant shall arrange to fly, or raise upon a temporary mast, a three-foot-diameter, brightly colored balloon at the maximum height of the proposed tower and within fifty horizontal feet of the center of the proposed tower. The date, time, and location of this balloon test shall be advertised by the applicant at 7 and 14 days in advance of the test date in the local newspaper. The applicant shall inform the Zoning Board, the Planning Commission, and abutting property owners in writing of the dates and times of the test, at least 14 days in advance. The balloon shall be flown for at least six consecutive hours, between 7 a.m. and 5 p.m. (and/or at least two hours before sunset as posted for the test dates by the National Weather Service) on the dates chosen. In the event of application for co-location at an existing telecommunications facility, the applicant shall be exempt from this balloon test. The applicant shall record the weather during the balloon test including the wind velocity and direction.

J.	Construction sequence and time schedule for completion of each phase of the entire project.

I7. EVIDENCE OF NEED

A.	Existing Coverage:  Applicant shall provide written documentation to the Zoning Board demonstrating that existing telecommunications facility sites within a 30-mile radius of the proposed site cannot reasonably be made to provide adequate coverage and/or adequate capacity to areas within the
 
Haycock Township which lack such coverage and/or capacity. The documentation shall include, for each telecommunications facility site listed which is owned or operated by the applicant, the exact location (in longitude and latitude, to degrees, minutes and seconds to the nearest tenth), ground elevation, height of  tower or structure, type of antennas, antenna gain, height of antennas on tower or structure, output frequency, number of channels, power input and maximum power output per channel. Potential adjustments to these existing telecommunications facility sites, including changes in antenna type, orientation, gain, height or power output shall be specified. Tiled coverage plots showing each of these telecommunications facility sites, as they exist, and with adjustments as above, shall be provided as part of the application.

B.	Repeaters: The applicant shall demonstrate that it is not reasonably able to create adequate coverage in Haycock Township from wireless base stations located in other townships or to fill holes within the area of otherwise adequate coverage by use of repeaters. Applicants shall detail the number, location, power output, and coverage of any proposed repeaters in their systems and provide engineering data to justify their use.

C.	Towers: The applicant for new telecommunications facility utilizing a tower shall demonstrate that it has made a good faith effort to obtain permission to mount communications antenna(s) on an existing building, structure or tower. A good faith effort shall require that the applicant contact all owners of potentially suitable structures (such as, but not limited to, smoke stacks, water towers/tanks, tall buildings, other towers or poles, church steeples, or other natural or manufactured tall structures or features) within a minimum one-half (1/2) mile radius of the proposed tower site and that one or more of the following reasons, supported by engineering and other related support data, for not selecting such structure apply:

1.	The proposed antenna(s) and related equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing structure and its reinforcement cannot be accomplished at a reasonable cost.

2.	The proposed antenna(s) and related equipment would cause radio frequency interference with other existing equipment for that existing structure and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.

3.	Such existing structures do not have adequate location, space, access or height to accommodate the proposed equipment or to allow it to perform its intended function.

4.	Addition of the proposed antenna(s) and related equipment would result in electromagnetic radiation from such structure exceeding applicable standards established by the FCC and/or other industry  standards governing human exposure to electromagnetic radiation.
 
5.	A commercially reasonable agreement could not be reached with the owner(s) of such existing structure(s).

D.	Five-Year Plan: All applications shall be accompanied by a written five-year plan for the utilization of the proposed facilities. This plan should include justification for capacity in excess of immediate needs, as well as plans for any further development within the Township.

I8  GENERAL PROJECT REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS

A.	Access Roads and Utilities: Where new telecommunications facilities require construction of, or improvement to, access roads, roads shall follow the contour of the land, be constructed or improved at the edge of fields and/or forests, and where feasible, access shall be over existing driveways and easements. Applicant shall maintain the access and shall ensure that no mud or dirt is conveyed onto public roads. Utility or service lines shall be underground, and designed and located so as to minimize disruption to wildlife habitat, agricultural lands, and scenic areas.

B.	Landscaping/Screening: Natural or planted evergreen screening shall be located at the perimeter of the site to ensure that ground equipment and structures associated with the telecommunications facility are hidden from adjacent public roadways. The evergreen screening shall consist of either a hedge, planted 3 feet on center maximum, or a row of evergreen trees planted 10 feet on center maximum. Existing on-site vegetation outside the immediate site for the telecommunications facility shall be preserved. Disturbance to existing topography shall be minimized, unless the disturbance is demonstrated to result in less visual impact on the telecommunications facility from surrounding properties and other vantage points.

C.	Fencing: The area around the telecommunications facility site shall be completely fenced and gated for security to a height of eight feet by means of chain link fencing. Use of razor wire is not permitted. In addition, all towers and support structures shall be fitted with anti-climbing devices, as approved by industry standards.

D.	Signs: A sign no greater than two (2) square feet indicating the name of the telecommunications facility owner(s) and a 24-hour emergency telephone number, either local or toll-free, shall be posted adjacent to the entry gate. In addition, radio frequency radiation (RFR) warning signs, and the federal tower registration plate, where applicable, shall be posted on the fence or as required to meet federal requirements. “No Trespassing” signs may be posted at the discretion of the telecommunications facility owner(s). No commercial signs shall be placed on any telecommunications facility.
 
E.	Building Design:

1.	Telecommunications facilities buildings shall not exceed 250 square feet, shall be designed to be architecturally similar and compatible with each other, and shall be no more than 12 feet high. The buildings shall be used only for the housing of equipment related to this particular site. Whenever possible, the buildings shall be joined or clustered so as to appear as one building.

2.	Except as provided herein, the only lighting on the exterior of the telecommunications facility may be a fixture on the communications equipment building not greater than 100 watts and activated by a monitor sensor. Manually operated emergency lights are permitted for use only when telecommunications facility operating personnel are on site.

Towers shall not be illuminated by artificial means and shall not display lights unless such lighting is specifically required by the FAA, FCC or other federal or state authority. In the event that any lighting is required solely as a result of tower height, the tower owner(s) shall submit for review by the Planning Commission (under Site Plan Review or Site Plan Amendment, as applicable). The Planning Commission may 1) require that the tower height be reduced to eliminate the need for lighting, 2) require another suitable location be utilized, or 3) make selection among lighting alternatives.

3.	The owner(s) of the facilities shall take reasonable measures to minimize noise from the operation of any machinery or equipment, as detected at the site perimeter. The noise level of the machinery shall be no louder than 40 decibels.

F.	Height of Towers and Telecommunications Facilities Combined with Existing Structure: New towers shall not exceed the minimum height necessary to provide adequate coverage for the telecommunications use proposed for the tower and shall not exceed 200 feet in height measured from the ground. Roof and/or building mount telecommunications facility shall be permitted to exceed the height limitations of the applicable zoning district by no more than forty-five (45) feet.

Antennas: Omni directional or whip communications antennas shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height and seven (7) inches in diameter. Directional or panel communications antennas shall not exceed five (5) feet in height and three (3) feet in width. No microwave dish antennas shall be attached to a telecommunications tower.

G.	Guy Wires: All guy wires associated with guyed towers shall be clearly marked so as to be visible at all times and shall be located within the fenced enclosure.
 
H.	Co-location:	Co-location of  telecommunications facilities is encouraged.
Owners of new towers shall agree to and allow for co-location consistent with the provisions of section I6.4.G., and at usual and customary rates for co-locators.

I.	Visual Impact: Towers, antennas, and any necessary support structures shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment. New towers shall have a galvanized finish unless otherwise required. The Zoning Board may require the tower(s) to be painted or otherwise camouflaged to minimize the adverse visual impact except in cases in which the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or other state or federal authorities have dictated color.

Proposed facilities shall not unreasonably interfere with the view from any public park, conservation area, natural scenic vista, historic building or district, or major view corridor. Narrow structures with guyed supports may be preferred for aesthetic purposes.

J.	Staff: The telecommunications facility shall be fully automated, unstaffed and visited only for periodic maintenance, and there shall be no water or sewage facilities connected to the compound.

K.	Building Permit: Applicant shall make application for and have evidence of a Haycock Township building permit prior to construction or installation of any portion of the telecommunications facility.

L.	Zoning Compliance: All telecommunications facilities shall be located on lots which meet the minimum size requirement and other regulations for the zoning district in which they are to be located, in addition to the setback requirements as provided in herein.

M.	Setback and Height Requirements: No telecommunications facility or tower, including guy-wire anchors and protective fencing, if any, shall be located:

1.	Closer than 200 feet horizontally to any property boundary of the site on which the tower is located, or the height of the tower, whichever is greater.

2.	Closer than 200 feet horizontally to any structure existing at the time of application which is used as a primary or secondary residence, school property (both public and private), a hospital, senior center, child care facility, building used for religious worship, or to any other building used regularly by the public. Primary or secondary residences are those dwelling units that include toilet facilities and facilities for food preparation and sleeping.

3.	Within the habitat of any state-listed rare or endangered wildlife or plant species.
 

4.	Within 200 feet horizontally of any Pennsylvania or federally regulated wetland.

5.	Within the 200 feet horizontally of the outer riparian zone, measured horizontally from any river or perennial stream.

6.	Within the Township, state or federal setback requirements of an archeological site or historic structure. No telecommunications facility shall be located on a building or structure that is listed on an historic register or is in an historic district.

N.	Parking: One (1) off-street parking space shall be provided within or outside the fenced telecommunications facility site.

O.	At the completion of building, and/or installation, the owner shall provide the Township with a certification issued by a Pennsylvania-registered professional structural engineer that the telecommunications facility has been built in accordance with the plans submitted to the Township.

I9. MONITORING PROTOCOL

A.	Monitoring Protocol: The Zoning Board may, as the technology changes, amend this section to require the use of testing protocols other than the approved monitoring protocol. A copy of the currently approved monitoring protocol shall be on file with the Township Secretary.

B.	Pre-transmission Testing: After the granting of a permit and before applicant’s telecommunications facilities begin transmission, the applicant shall submit a report, prepared by a qualified telecommunications or radio frequency engineer, on the cumulative background levels of non-ionizing radio frequency radiation around the proposed telecommunications facility site	and/or any repeater locations to be utilized for applicant’s telecommunications facilities. The engineer shall use the monitoring protocol, or one substantially similar. This report shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer, who may verify the results using an independent consultant.

C.	Post-transmission Testing: After transmission begins, the owner of the telecommunications facility shall provide testing of the site as follows:

There shall be routine annual monitoring of emissions/exposure by a qualified engineer using actual field measurement of radiation, utilizing the Monitoring Protocol. This monitoring shall measure levels of non-ionizing radio frequency radiation (RFR) exposure at the telecommunications facility site and any repeaters. Each permittee shall provide a list of the most recent RFR readings at or near the site, their distances from the facility, dates of the readings, and the name of the person and company who took the readings  and  verify  the  operational  levels  of  each  telecommunications
 
transmitter at the time of testing. In addition, each permittee shall provide additional RFR readings taken at sensitive areas within 3 miles of  the facility. A report should indicate whether other permittees at the facility were notified prior to testing that RFR monitoring would occur. The notification should be attached to the report.

A report of the monitoring results shall be prepared by the engineer and submitted to the Zoning Officer, who may verify the results using an independent consultant. In the case of co-located telecommunications facility, permittee may bill all telecommunications providers and the telecommunications facilities owner(s) equally or according to a predetermined proportionality.

In the event of any major modification of existing telecommunications facility, or the activation of any additional channels, the telecommunications facility owner(s) shall immediately perform new monitoring, as described in this section. Minor changes, such as slight changes in frequency, shall not require additional monitoring.

Permittees shall have the opportunity to demonstrate reasons for inability to comply with these provisions.

D.	Excessive Exposure: Should the monitoring of a telecommunications facility site reveal that the site exceeds the current FCC standard and guidelines in existence at the time of the violation, the owner(s) of all telecommunications facilities utilizing that site shall be so notified. In accordance with FCC requirements, the telecommunications facility owner(s) shall immediately reduce power or cease operation as necessary to protect persons having access to the site, tower, and/or antennas. Additionally, the telecommunications facility owner(s) shall submit to the Township a plan for the correction of the situation that resulted in excessive exposure. Failure to act as described above shall be a violation of this Zoning Ordinance and subject to fines and other sanctions consistent with this Ordinance.

E.	Structural Inspection: Tower owner(s) shall arrange for an qualified consultant (a licensed professional structural engineer) to conduct inspections of the tower’s structural integrity and safety. Guyed towers shall be inspected every three years unless there is cause to conduct an inspection more frequently. Monopoles and non-guyed lattice towers shall be inspected every five years unless there is cause to conduct an inspection more frequently. A report of the inspection results shall be prepared by the consultant, and a copy shall be sent to the Zoning Officer within 10 business days. In the event of any major modification of the existing tower, which includes changes  to tower dimensions, increase in number or types of antennas or other devices or structural modifications, the tower owner(s) shall immediately perform a new structural inspection. The Township has the right to enter onto the property and conduct inspections during the construction phase and at all times thereafter.
 

F.	Unsafe Towers: Should the inspection required in section I9.E. reveal any structural defect(s) which, in the opinion of the qualified consultant (a licensed professional structural engineer), render(s) that tower unsafe, the tower owner(s) shall undertake the following actions:

1.	Immediately upon notification of any structural defect(s) which render(s) a tower unsafe, post warnings of same at access points to the tower; notify appropriate emergency authorities; notify the Zoning Officer, and notify the landowner and owners of record of the abutting properties within the unsafe area (minimally a 360-degree area the radius of the height of the tower); when appropriate, in consultation with emergency authorities, restrict access to the unsafe area and/or encourage evacuation of residents.

2.	Within 10 business days of notification of any structural defect(s) which render(s) a tower unsafe, submit to the Zoning Officer a plan to correct the structural defect(s) as soon as reasonably possible. The Township shall review and make any changes if needed to the remediation plan within 10 days. The tower owner(s) shall implement the remediation plan upon Township approval.

I10. AMENDMENTS TO EXISTING TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY PERMIT

In the event of an alteration or addition to a previously approved telecommunications facility, the facility owner(s) shall submit to the Zoning Board an application for a permit amendment when any of the following are proposed:

A.	Change in the number of buildings or other telecommunications facilities permitted on the site;

B.	Material change in technology used by the telecommunications facility; or

C.	Addition or change of any equipment resulting in greater visibility or structural wind-loading, or additional height of the tower, including profile of additional antennas, not specified in the original application.



I11. TEMPORARY WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES

Temporary wireless telecommunications facilities are subject to the following:

A.	Use of a temporary wireless telecommunications facility requires a special exception use permit from the Zoning Board.

B.	Temporary wireless telecommunications facilities are allowed for no longer than five days use during a special event.
 

C.	The maximum height of a temporary telecommunications facility is 50 feet from grade.

D.	Temporary wireless telecommunications facilities shall comply with all applicable sections herein.
I12. ABANDONED, UNUSED, OBSOLETE, DAMAGED, OR DANGEROUS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY OR PORTIONS OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY

Abandoned	or	unused	telecommunications	facilities	or	portions	of telecommunications facilities shall be removed as follows:

A.	The owner of a telecommunications facility shall annually, on January 15, file a declaration with the Zoning Officer certifying the continuing safe operation of every telecommunications facility installed subject to this Zoning Ordinance. Failure to file a declaration shall mean that the telecommunications facility is no longer in use and considered abandoned.

B.	Abandoned or unused facilities shall be removed within 180 days of cessation of operations at the site, unless a time extension is approved by the Zoning Board within the 180-day period. In the event the facility is not removed within 180 days of the cessation of operations at a site, the Zoning Officer shall send the owner(s) of the facility a Notice of Zoning Violation and, following the expiration of the period for remediation of the violation, shall request Haycock Township to remove the facilities. Costs of removal shall be assessed against the facility owner, including any regulatory costs, disposal costs, clean up, and final landscaping costs.

C.	Unused portions of facility shall be removed by facility owner(s) within 180 days of the time that such portion is no longer used for antennas. The replacement of portions of a facility previously removed shall require the issuance of a new telecommunications facility permit by the Zoning Board.

D.	An owner who has failed to file an annual declaration with the Zoning Officer by January 15 may, by February 15, file a declaration of use or intended use and may request the ability to continue use of the telecommunications facility.

E.	At the time of filing an application for a building permit for the construction of the telecommunications facility, a bond or other financial security, in the amount of $20,000.00 wherein a tower is proposed as part of the facility and
$5,000 otherwise, in the form approved by the Township Solicitor shall be deposited with the Township to assure the removal of the facility when it ceases to be used as a telecommunications facility or is found in violation of the Township’s code or ordinance as provided herein. At the time of filing an application for a building permit, applicant shall also enter into a written
 
agreement with the Township, in a form approved by the Township Solicitor, to ensure that the Removal Bond remains continuously in effect.

I13. TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY INSURANCE

The owner of a telecommunications facility shall provide evidence to the Township of liability, property damage and personal injury insurance in the minimum amount of One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and Three Million Dollars ($3,000,000.00) in the aggregate covering all portions of the telecommunications facility, naming Haycock Township as an Additional Insured thereon. The owner(s) shall arrange with the insurance carrier(s) for original certificates of insurance for all renewals or cancellations of said insurance coverage to be delivered to the Zoning Officer. At a minimum the following insurance requirements shall be satisfied:

A.	The required insurance must be obtained and maintained for the entire period the telecommunications facility is in existence from pre-construction through final decommissioning and rehabilitation. If the operator, its contractors or subcontractors do not have the required insurance, the Township will order such entities to cease operation of the facility until such insurance is obtained.

B.	Certificate(s) of insurance verifying such insurance shall be filed with the Zoning Officer at the time of application. For entities that are entering the market, the certificate(s) shall be filed prior to the commencement of construction and once a year thereafter, and as provided below in the event of a lapse of coverage. Such certificate(s) should provide the name, address and phone number of the insurance carrier and identify an agent in case of inquiries.

C.	The certificate(s) of insurance shall contain a provision that coverages afforded under such policies shall not be canceled until at least thirty (30) days prior written notice had been given to the Township. All insurance policies shall be issued by companies authorized to do business under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

I14. INDEMNIFICATION AND HOLD HARMLESS

The telecommunications facility shall, at its sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Township, its officers, public officials, boards and commissions, agents and employees from and against any and all lawsuits, claims, causes of action, actions, liability and judgments for injury or damage (including but not limited to expenses for reasonable attorney fees and disbursements of the Township in connection therewith) arising out of the construction or operation of the cell tower or arising in any way out of any failure by any locator to comply with the provisions of any federal, state or local laws, rules or regulations.
 
Section 02:  Partial Repealer

All other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, as amended, shall remain in full force and effect. All other ordinances or provisions of the Zoning Ordinance inconsistent herewith or in conflict with any of the terms hereof are, to the extent of said inconsistencies or conflicts, hereby specifically repealed.

Section 03:  Savings Clause

In the event any portion of this Ordinance is determined by a court of jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or unenforceable, it shall not affect any of the other provision of this Ordinance or of the Zoning Ordinance. All other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and this Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.

Section 04:  Effective Date

All provisions of this Ordinance shall be in force and effect five days after approval and adoption.



ORDAINED AND ENACTED this	day of	, 2004.



HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP
ATTEST:	BOARD OF SUPERVISORS


Nancy M. Yodis, Secretary	Kathleen M. Babb, Chair


Michael Lennard, Vice Chair


Henry Depue















U:\TWC  Clients\HAYCOCK\Ordinance\Cell  Tower  Telecommunications.dir\Tele.  Fac.  Ord.  Amend\Tele.Fac.Merged and Restated Ordinance.12.15.04.doc
 

ORDINANCE   NO. _,
 
,/   0""""\.
 

AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 71, THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP TO PERMIT NO-IMPACT HOME­ BASED BUSINESSES IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS; AND TO REVISE THE TIME PERIODS FOR PRESENTATION OF AND DECISIONS ON ZONING APPLICATIONS  BEFORE  THE  HAYCOCK  TOWNSHIP  ZONING HEARING BOARD AND THE HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS

B A C K G R 0 U N D:

A.	On or about September 26, 1994, by Ordinance No. 71, as amended, Haycock Township Board of Supervisors ("Board") enacted a zoning ordinance ("Zoning Ordinance") pursuant to its statutory authority, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code ("MPG"), Act 247 of 1968, as amended (53 P.S. §10101 et seq.);

B.	Act 43 of 2002 ("Act 43"), the Pennsylvania General Assembly amended the MPG requiring that a municipality's zoning ordinance permit no-impact home-based business in all residential zones as a use permitted by right (53 P.S. §10603);

C. Act 43 also amended the time periods for presentation and conclusions of applications and hearings before the municipal zoning hearing board and governing body (53 P.S. §10908(1.2); 10908(9) and 10913(2)(b)(1));

D.	Through careful study, the Board, with the assistance of its committees, has recognized that certain provisions of the Zoning Ordinance should be amended to comply with Act 43 and to permit no-impact home-based business in all zones as a use permitted by right; and

E.	The proposed amendments  have been advertised, considered and reviewed in accordance with MPG Section 609 (53 P.S. §10609).

NOW,  THEREFORE,  BE  IT  ENACTED  AND  ORDAINED,  and  it  is  hereby
ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, as follows:

Section 01:  A  new subsection  H1b.(8)  is  added  to  Section  H-1 Accessory  Home Occupation, and shall read in full as follows:

"Use H1h No-Impact Home-Based Business. A business or commercial activity administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client or patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the premises, in excess of those
 
normally associated with residential use. Where the prov1s1ons of this subsection conflict with the general standards pertaining to home occupations (Section H1) of this ordinance, the provisions of this subsection shall control.

(a)	The no-impact home-based business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the property and the surrounding uses, residential and non-residential.

(b)	A no-impact home-based business is only permitted on the same Jot with and must be clearly incidental and accessory to a permitted residential dwelling that is the bona fide residence of the principal practitioner of the business activity.

(c)	A no-impact home-based  business must be conducted  within a single-family detached dwelling which is the bona fide residence of the principal practitioner or in an accessory building thereto which is normally associated with the residential use. The no-impact home-based business shall be carried on wholly indoors.


(d)	The  maximum  amount  of  floor  area  devoted  to  a  no-impact   home-(§j based  business  shall  not exceed twenty-five  percent (25%) of the  gFOtmd    f:h:b1t/lil!l. 1'kri@r    area   of   the   principal   residential. dwelling   structure   (excluding   the	ft{J.,
ground  area  covered  by  an  attached  garage  or  such  other  similar
building), or six hundred (600) square feet, which ver is less.

(e)	The no-impact home-based business shall employ no employees, contractors, agents or representatives other than family members of the principal practitioner, who also must reside in the dwelling unit.

(f)	Any display or sale of retail goods or stockpiling of inventory .of a substantial nature is prohibited.

(g)	There shall be no outside appearance of a business use or activity, including but not limited to signs, parking, lights, and waste disposal.

(h)	The no-impact home-based business activity may not use any equipment or process that creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic interference, including interference with radio or television reception, which is detectable in the neighborhood.

(i)	The no-impact home-based business may not involve any illegal activity.
 
U) The no-impact home-based business may not generate any solid waste or sewage discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with a residential use.

(k)	A no-impact home-based business use is not permitted where prohibited by a deed restriction, covenant or agreement restricting the use of land, master deed, bylaw or other document applicable to a common interest ownership community.

(I)	A zoning permit shall be required for all no-impact home-based business uses."

Section 02: Subsection 403, the Table of Use Regulations, is hereby amended to insert use H1h, No-Impact Home-Based Business, under Accessory Uses. Columns headed by the following are amended to insert a "P" in the corresponding boxes with the H1h No-Impact Home-Based Business use as a use permitted by right:

"RP" - Resource Protection "RA" - Rural-Agricultural "RD" - Rural Development "FC" - Future Commercial "VC-1" - Village Center - 1
"SRC" - Suburban Residential Conservation "SRL" - Suburban Residential Low
"SRM" - Suburban Residential Medium
"SRH" - Suburban Residential High "VC-2" - Village Center - 2
"URL" - Urban Residential Low
"PC" - Planned Commercial "CC" - Central Commercial "SC" - Select Commercial
"Pl" - Planned Industrial "Ext" - Extraction.

Section 03: Subsection c. of Section 1109, Hearings, of the Zoning Ordinance is amended in full to read as follows:

"c.	The first hearing before the Board or hearing officer shall be commenced  wifhin  sixty  (60)  days  from  the  date  of receipt  of the applicant's completed application, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time.	Each subsequent hearing before the Board or hearing officer shall be held within forty-five (45) days of the prior hearing, unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant in writing or on the record. An applicant shall complete the presentation of his case-in-chief within one hundred (100) days of the first hearing.	Upon the request of the applicant, the Board or hearing officer shall assure that the applicant
 
receives at least seven (7) hours of hearings within the one hundred (100) days, including the first hearing. Persons opposed to the application shall complete the presentation of their opposition to the application within one hundred (100) days of the first hearing held after the completion of the applicant's case-in-chief. An applicant may, upon request, be granted additional hearings to complete his case-in-chief provided the persons opposed to the application are granted an equal number of additional hearings. Persons opposed to the application may, upon the written consent or consent on the record by the applicant and Haycock Township, be granted additional hearings to complete their opposition to the application provided the applicant is granted an equal number of additional hearings for rebuttal."

Section 4:	Subsection  k. of Section  1109, Hearings, of the  Zoning  Ordinance  is amended in full to read as follows:

"k. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing before the Board or hearing officer. Where the application is contested or denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon together with the reasons therefore. Conclusions based on any provisions of this section, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, or any other applicable rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the facts found. If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer and there has been no stipulation that his decision or findings are final, the Board shall make his report and recommendations available to the parties within forty-five (45) days and the parties shall be entitled to make written representations thereon to the Board prior to final decision or entry of findings, and the Board's decision shall be entered no later than thirty (30) days after the report of the hearing officer.

Except for challenges filed under section 916.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code or Section 1112 of the Zoning Ordinance, where the Board fails to render the decision within the period required by this subsection k. or fails to commence, conduct or complete the required hearing as provided in subsection c. hereof, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time.· When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of the failure of the Board to meet or render a decision as hereinabove provided, the Board shall give public notice of said decision within ten (10) days from the last day it could have met to render a decision in the same manner as provided in subsection a. If the Board shall fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing in this subsection k. shall prejudice the right
 
of any party opposing the application to appeal the decision to a court of competent  jurisdiction."

Section 5:	Subsection i. of Section 1108, ·Governing Body: Powers and Duties - Conditional Uses, of the Zoning Ordinance is amended in full to read:

"Administration. The Board of Supervisors shall commence, conduct and complete the required hearing in the manner provided in Section 1109 of this Ordinance and Section 908(1.2) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. The Board of Supervisors shall render a written decision on the application and communicate it to the applicant in the manner provided in Section 1109.k. of this Ordinance and Section 913.2(b)(1) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. Where the Board of Supervisors fails to render the decision within the period required by this subsection or fails to commence, conduct or complete the required hearing as provided in this subsection, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time. When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of the failure of the Board of Supervisors to meet or render a decision as hereinabove provided, the Board of Supervisors shall give public notice of the decision within ten (10) days from the last day it could have met to render a decision in the same manner as required by Section 1109.a. of this Ordinance. If the Board of Supervisors shall fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do so."

Section 6: In addition, all inconsistent provisions of other ordinances or resolutions are repealed to the extent of the inconsistency. All other provisions of the ordinances of Haycock Township shall remain in full force and effect.

Section 7: The provisions of this ordinance are declared to be severable. If any provision of this ordinance is declared to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall have no effect on the remaining provisions of this ordinance.

Section 8: This ordinance shall be effective five (5) days after adoption by the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors.
 



ORDAINED and ENACTED this	, A.D., 2005.



ATTEST:	 













































U:\TWC Clients\HAYCOCK\Ordinance\Zoning-No Impact Home Based Business\No-lmpact Homes Based Businesses(all
dislricts).11.22.04.doc
 
ORDINANCE NO. 102


AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, ESTABLISHING THE OFFICIAL MAP OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP



WHEREAS, Article IV, Section 401 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code ("MPC") authorizes governing bodies of a municipality to make an official map of all or a portion of the Township, showing, among other things, public streets.

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors intends to establish an Official Map of Haycock Township and attaches hereto as "Exhibit A", a map identified as the "Official Map
- Haycock Township", which identifies the roadways and within Haycock Township which
the Board of Supervisors, by this enactment, designates as its Official Map.


WHEREAS, the proposed Official Map and Ordinance was referred to the Haycock Township Planning Commission and the Bucks Planning Commission on March 14, 2005.

WHEREAS, a duly advertised Hearing was held to consider enactment of the Official Map of Haycock Township on May 2, 2005.

WHEREAS, the proposed Official Map and Ordinance have been duly advertised for adoption.

NOW THEREFORE, be it RESOLVED and ENACTED, by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township as follows:                  ·

Section 01:  The map attached hereto as Exhibit "A" and identified as "Official Map of
·	Haycock Township" is hereby adopted as the Official Map of Haycock Township.

Section 02: This map shall constitute the Official Map of Haycock Township and shall be subject to all of the terms and provisions contained in Article IV of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.

Section 03.  All provisions of this Ordinance shall be in force and effect five days after approval and adoption.
 



ENACTED and ORDAINED  this znd   day of May, A.O. 2005.





 


ATTEST:
 
HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS

) '  ,: cd?- 	
Kathleen M. Babb, Chair




Michael Lennard, Vice Chair

 








































2
 
HAYCOCK  TOWNSHIP
 
BUCKS COUNTY
 
PENNSYLVANIA
 
OFFICIAL MAP
MAY200S


 
-STATEROAD
TOWNSHIP ROAD
-PRIVATE ROAD










I /.-IS"'	WESl'Tl11'TCH    R!IOAD
J
.@"
¥
 











LAKE TOWHEE
COUNTY PARK










Ml fONR1
 























''\e
 







/'	i




HAYCOCK  MOUNTAIN STATE GAME LANDS
 









z




'i1
 


APPLEBACHSVlLLE ROAD- T398 BOULDER LANE------ T423 CAMPTRAIL ROAD----- T459 CEDAR LANE--------- T425
CHURCH ROAD-------- T475 CHURCHVIEW DRIVE----- T479 CIDER PRESS LANE------ T465 COBBLER ROAD--------- T463
CREAMERY ROAD----- T390 DOGWOOD LANE------- T420 EDGEHILL CIRCLE------ T477 FOX RUN ROAD------ T4SO HARRISBURG SCHOOL ROAD- T406 HAYCOCK RUN ROAD----- T424 INDIAN PATH COURT------ TBA KINZLER LANE------- T421 LAKEWOOD DRIVE--- T476 MAGNOLIA DRIVE------- T460 MISSION ROAD----- T404 OAK LANE------------ T418 OLD BETHLEHEM ROAD-- T430
 










()l<S1 '1<-?  \C
"Q(.'11' 11'


<JJ>f'"'
 
INDI )),
I










'i-o"'°"'"''.
 








PHIYISMlT RUNRCMl
 






1,•,





£
i
§
 
OLD SCHOOL ROAD------ T426
PHEASANT RUN ROAD----- T478
ROUDENBUSH ROAD---- T467 ROUNDHOUSE ROAD------ T427 TOPROCKTRAIL----- T422
WESTSAWMILLROAD----T473
WEST THATCHER R,.._ . ...,. ---- T429 WOODBINE LANE            ----T419
WOODCOCK LAN       --- T416
 
OFFICIAL HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP  MAP WAS REFERRED TO THE HAYCOCKTOWNSHIP PLANNING COMMISSION  AND THE  BUCKS COUNTY  PLANNING COMMISSION.

OFFICIAL HAYCOCKTOWNSHIP  MAP WAS ADOPTED  BYTHE HAYCOCKTOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVl>O S  ON MAY2,200S AFTER THE OFFICIAL MAP WAS DULY ADVERTISED AND,	LIC HEARING WAS HELD REGARDING THE SAME.
 
li
l
 	 I?
 

CERTIFICATION OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP OFFICIAL MAP



I, Nancy Yodis, Haycock Township Secretary, do hereby certify  that  on May 2"d, 2005, the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township duly and properly enacted Haycock Township Ordinance 102, adopting the Official Map of Haycock Township, and do further certify that a true and correct copy of said Official Map
is attached hereto as Exhibit "A" of Ordinance 102.
 


Date:	S:- /6 -o Y-	A-
 
/.?),, dca"_,)
 
Nancy:Yodis
Haycock Towns:Secretary











































U:\lWC Clients\HAYCOCK\Ordinance\Official Map\Cert.of Offc.Map.05.10.05.doc
 



ORDINANCE NO. I() 3

·AN ORDINANC.E OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS AMENDING ITS SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE NO. 86, ADOPTED ON AUGUST 7, 2000 AS AMENDED, RELATIVE TO PROVISIONS OF WELL INSTALLATION AND TESTING PROCEDURES.

BE IT ENACTED and ORDAINED by Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, and it is hereby enacted and ordained by the authority of same as follows:

ARTICLE I.

Section 519.3 is revised to amend Subsection 519.3C, as follows:

Section 519.3.C. Well Construction. Installation/Modification of wells shall be in accordance with "Bucks County Department of Health Individual Water Supply Well Construction Specifications", dated November 3, 2004, as amended. Written verification from the Bucks County Department of Health, in the form of a "Certification to Operate", shall be submitted to the Township prior to final plan approval.

ARTICLE II.

Section 519.3 is revised to amend Subsection 519.3.D, as follows:

Section 519.3.D. Prior to  commencement of well drilling operation, owner shall be required to make application to, and receive approval from, Bucks County Department of Health. Written verification of approval for well installation from the Bucks County Department of Health.shall be submitted to the Township prior to well installation.

ARTICLE Ill.

Section 519.3 is amended to add Subsection 519.3.E, as follows:

Section 519.3.E. Proposed wells shall be shown on the plan, which verifies wells are located to comply with minimum isolation distances specified in "Bucks County Health Department Individual Water Supply Well Construction Specifications", dated November 3, 2004, as amended. Upon installation, wells shall be field located by a professional surveyor licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and as-built location of each well drilled as part of subdivision/land development plan application shall be shown in plan view, prior to approval of the final plan.

ARTICLE IV.

Section 519.3 is amended to add Subsection 519.3.F, as follows:

Section 519.3.F. Abandonment. Existing wells to be dosed/abandoned shall be closed/abandoned in accordance with "Bucks County Department of Health Rules and Regulations Governing Individual Water Supply Systems" and "Bucks County Department of Health Individual Water Supply Well Construction Specifications", dated November 3, 2004, as amended.
 
ARTICLE V. - REPEALER

All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.

ARTICLE VI. - SEVERABILITY

If any sentence, clause, section, or part of this Ordinance is for any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid; such infirmity shall not affect nor impair the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, or parts of this Ordinance. It is hereby declared as the intent of the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, that this Ordinance would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included therein.

ARTICLE VII. -  EFFECTIVE DATE

This Ordinance shall be effective immediately upon enactment.

ENACTED AND ORDAINED this.i;t''day of Auci/1£>{, 2005.

HAYCOCK  TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS




athleen M. Babb, Chairwoman


/
MiCJ1el Lennard, Vice Chairman
H;e/nry e;Me

Attest:




Nancy M. Yodis, Secretary
 

ORDINANCE NO.  IO'f

AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 54 OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, BY ESTABLISHING INTEREST ON DELINQUENT PAYMENTS OF REALTY TRANSFER TAX.



WHEREAS, Section 1506 (53 P.S. §66506) of the Pennsylvania Second Class Township Code provides that the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township (the "Board of Supervisors") may adopt ordinances necessary for the proper management, care and control of the township and its finances;

WHEREAS, Section 6902 of the Local Tax Enabling Act provides the Board of Supervisors with the authority to levy, assess, and provide for the collection of a tax,on the transfer of an interest in real estate (53 P.S. §6902);

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors on or about December 18, 1986, duly adopted Ordinance No. 54, providing for the payment of realty transfer tax;

WHEREAS, Section 1601 of the Second Class Township Code provides that the Board of Supervisors may adopt ordinances in which general or specific powers of the township may be exercised, and, by the enactment of subsequent ordinances, the Board of Supervisors may amend, repeal or revise existing ordinances (53 P.S. §66601);

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors finds it is in the interest of the Township and its citizens to revise and update the regulations concerning realty transfer tax to establish interest on the delinquent payment of realty transfer taxes; and

NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing, be it ENACTED and ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, as follows:

SECTION 01: Section Two of Ordinance No. 54 of the Haycock Township Code titled "IMPOSITION OF TAX; INTEREST." IS AMENDED TO OMIT SUBSECTION (d) AND TO ADD A NEW SUBSECTION (d) STATING AS FOLLOWS:

"Any tax imposed under Section 104 that is not paid by the date the tax is due shall bear interest as prescribed for interest on delinquent municipal claims under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No. 153) (53 P.S. §§ 7101, et seq.), as amended, known as "The Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act." The interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate imposed upon delinquent Commonwealth taxes as provided in Section 806 of the Act of April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176) (72 P.S. §806), as amended, known as
 
"The Fiscal Code", or the maximum interest rate permitted under the Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act for tax claims."

SECTION 02:   PARTIAL REPEALER

All other provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the Township of Haycock, as amended, shall remain in full force and effect. All other ordinances or provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the Township of Haycock inconsistent herewith or in conflict with any of the terms hereof are, to the extent of said inconsistencies or conflicts, hereby specifically repealed.

SECTION 03: SAVINGS CLAUSE

In the event any portion of this Ordinance is determined by a court of jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or unenforceable, it shall not affect any of the other provision of this Ordinance or of the Code of Ordinances of the Township of Haycock. All other provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the Township of Haycock and this Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.

SECTION 04: EFFECTIVE DATE

All provisions of this Ordinance shall be in force and effect five days after approval and adoption.
ORDAINED AND ENACTED this ;?, 11 ,Lday of  (j,r:t;:,,   ,!h, .	,  2006.

HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS






ATTEST:


)tr_,,y'-'&, 1ri .01'!- ;f,
Nancy M?Yodis,&Secretary









U:llWC Clients\HAYCOCK\Ordinance\Realty Transfer Tax\Amendment to Ordinance 54 Regarding Interest.doc
 




ORDINANCE  NO.  iD .3

AN	ORDINANCE OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS	AMENDING ITS SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE NO. 86, ADOPTED  ON AUGUST 7, 2000 AS AMENDED, RELATIVE TO PROVISIONS OF WELL INSTALLATION AND TESTING PROCEDURES.

BE IT ENACTED and ORDAINED by Haycock Township,  Bucks County, Pennsylvania, and it is hereby enacted and ordained by the authority of same as follows:

ARTICLE I.

Section 519.3 is revised to amend Subsection 519.3C, as follows:

Section 519.3.C. Well Construction. Installation/Modification of  wells  shall  be  in accordance with "Bucks County Department of Health Individual Water Supply Well Construction Specifications'', dated November 3, 2004, as amended. Written verification from the Bucks County Department of Health, in the form of a "Certification to Operate", shall be submitted to the Township prior to final plan approval.

ARTICLE II.

Section 519.3 is revised to amend Subsection 519.3.D, as follows:

Section 519.3.D. Prior to commencement of well drilling operation, owner  shall  be required to make application to, and receive approval from, Bucks County Department of Health. Written verification of approval for well installation from the Bucks County Department of Health.shall be submitted to the Township prior to well installation.

ARTICLE Ill.

Section 519.3 is amended to add Subsection 519.3.E, as follows:

Section 519.3.E. Proposed wells shall be shown on the plan, which verifies wells  are located to comply with minimum isolation distances specified in "Bucks County Health Department Individual Water Supply Well Construction Specifications", dated November 3, 2004, as amended. Upon installation, wells shall be field located by a professional surveyor licensed in the Commonwealth of  Pennsylvania,  and  as-built  location  of each well drilled as part of subdivision/land development plan application shall be shown in plan view, prior to approval of the final plan.

ARTICLE IV.

Section 519.3 is amended to add Subsection 519.3.F, as follows:

Section 519.3.F. Abandonment. Existing wells to be closed/abandoned shall be closed/abandoned in accordance with "Bucks County Department of Health Rules and Regulations Governing Individual Water Supply Systems" and "Bucks County Department of Health Individual Water Supply Well Construction Specifications", dated November 3, 2004, as amended
 
ARTICLE V. - REPEALER

All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.

ARTICLE VI. - SEVERABILITY

If any sentence, clause, section, or part of this Ordinance is for any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid; such infirmity shall not affect nor impair the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, or parts of this Ordinance. It is hereby declared as the intent of the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, that this Ordinance would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included therein.

ARTICLE VII. - EFFECTIVE DATE

This Ordinance shall be effective immediately upon enactment.

ENACTED AND ORDAINED this).X"' ay of Aui:iu;,(, 2005.

HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS

)
 	,,/- 	
athleen M. Babb, Chairwoman



 








Attest:

//f.l.,-'J'(_c_"?    /7") ,Ll;t· v

Nancy M. Yodis, Secretary
 
MicheITennarcJ:VJCeetlffan

;HeLnryWe:Me
 

ORDINANCE NO.  104

AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 54 OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, BY ESTABLISHING INTEREST ON DELINQUENT PAYMENTS OF REALTY TRANSFER TAX.



WHEREAS, Section 1506 (53 P.S. §66506) of the Pennsylvania Second Class Township Code provides that the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township (the “Board of Supervisors”) may adopt ordinances necessary for the proper management, care and control of the township and its finances;

WHEREAS, Section 6902 of the Local Tax Enabling Act provides the Board of Supervisors with the authority to levy, assess, and provide for the collection of a tax on the transfer of an interest in real estate (53 P.S. §6902);

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors on or about December 18, 1986, duly adopted Ordinance No. 54, providing for the payment of realty transfer tax;

WHEREAS, Section 1601 of the Second Class Township Code provides that the Board of Supervisors may adopt ordinances in which general or specific powers of the township may be exercised, and, by the enactment of subsequent ordinances, the Board of Supervisors may amend, repeal or revise existing ordinances (53 P.S. §66601);

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors finds it is in the interest of the Township and its citizens to revise and update the regulations concerning realty transfer tax to establish interest on the delinquent payment of realty transfer taxes; and

NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing, be it ENACTED and ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, as follows:

SECTION 01: Section Two of Ordinance No. 54 of the Haycock Township Code titled “IMPOSITION OF TAX; INTEREST.” IS AMENDED TO OMIT SUBSECTION (d) AND TO ADD A NEW SUBSECTION (d) STATING AS FOLLOWS:

“Any tax imposed under Section 104 that is not paid by the date the tax is due shall bear interest as prescribed for interest on delinquent municipal claims under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No. 153) (53 P.S. §§ 7101, et seq.), as amended, known as “The Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act.” The interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate imposed upon delinquent Commonwealth taxes as provided in Section 806 of the Act of April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176) (72 P.S. §806), as amended, known as
 
“The Fiscal Code”, or the maximum interest rate permitted under the Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act for tax claims.”

SECTION 02: PARTIAL REPEALER

All other provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the Township of Haycock, as amended, shall remain in full force and effect. All other ordinances or provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the Township of Haycock inconsistent herewith or in conflict with any of the terms hereof are, to the extent of said inconsistencies or conflicts, hereby specifically repealed.

SECTION 03: SAVINGS CLAUSE

In the event any portion of this Ordinance is determined by a court of jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or unenforceable, it shall not affect any of the other provision of this Ordinance or of the Code of Ordinances of the Township of Haycock. All other provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the Township of Haycock and this Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.

SECTION 04: EFFECTIVE DATE

All provisions of this Ordinance shall be in force and effect five days after approval and adoption.

ORDAINED AND ENACTED this	day of	, 2006.

HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS


 



ATTEST:




Nancy M. Yodis, Secretary
 
By:  	 Kathleen M. Babb, Chair



By:  	 Michael Lennard, Vice Chair



By:  	 Henry Depue
 





U:\TWC Clients\HAYCOCK\ Ordinance\Realty Transfer Tax\Amendment to Ordinance 54 Regarding Interest.doc
 
THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK OF BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA

Ordinance No. 105

AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK OF THE COUNTY OF BUCKS, PENNSYLVANIA, ESTABLISHING AN ORDINANCE OF ALL PERSONS THAT COLLECT AND TRANSPORT MUNICIPAL WASTE AND SOURCE- SEPARATED RECYCLABLES GENERATED WITHIN THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK and THE REPORTING OF THE QUANTITIES OF SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLES COLLECTED, AND DELIVERED TO A RECYCLING FACILITY and PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF THIS ORDINANCE.

WHEREAS, the County Commissioners of Bucks County approved and adopted the Bucks County Municipal Waste Management Plan (December 1989), in accordance with the requirements of Section 501 of the Pennsylvania Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act of 1988 (Act 101), and said Plan was ratified by the municipalities in Bucks County and approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP) on March 28, 1991; and

WHEREAS, pursuant to the request of the County Board of Commissioners, the Bucks County Planning Commission, working with the Bucks County Solid Waste Advisory Committee has prepared, as a revision to the 1991 Plan, the Bucks County Municipal Waste Management Plan Revision of 2004 (“Revised County Plan”), which was approved by PADEP on January 17, 2006; and

WHEREAS, the County Board of Commissioners, by adopting the Revised County Plan on May 10, 2006, believes that the Revised County Plan is appropriate and necessary to protect the health and welfare of the residents of the County; and,

WHEREAS, each municipality in Bucks County has the power and duty to adopt any such ordinances deemed necessary to implement required elements of said Revised County Plan by the authority vested to it pursuant to Section 304 of Act 101, including the oversight of all persons that collect and transport municipal waste in their respective municipalities.

NOW, THEREFORE, the Board of Supervisors of The Township of Haycock do hereby enact and ordain as follows:

SECTION 1: SHORT TITLE

This Ordinance shall be known and referred to as the “Municipal Waste Collection and Transportation Ordinance of Haycock Township”
 
SECTION 2: DEFINITIONS

The following words and phrases as used in this Ordinance shall have the meaning ascribed to them herein, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning.

“Act 90” – The Pennsylvania Waste Transportation Safety Act of 2002 (P.L. 596, No. 90, June 29, 2002).

“Act 97” – The Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act of 1980 (P.L. 380, No. 97, July 7, 1980).

“Act 101” – The Pennsylvania Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act of 1988 (Act 1988-101, July 28, 1988).

“Collector or Waste Hauler” – shall mean any person, firm, partnership, corporation or public agency who is engaged in the collection and/or transportation of municipal waste and/or source-separated recyclable materials.

“Commercial Establishment” – means any establishment engaged in a nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including, but not limited to, stores, markets, offices, restaurants, shopping centers and theaters.

“County” – means the County of Bucks, Pennsylvania.

“Disposal” – means the deposition, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of solid waste into or on the land or water in a manner that the solid waste or a constituent of the solid waste enters the environment, is emitted into the air or is discharged to the waters of this Commonwealth. Disposal facilities include, but are not limited to, municipal waste landfills and construction/demolition waste landfills as defined by Act 101, Act 97, and/or PADEP rules and regulations (25 Pa. Code Chapters 75 and 271).

“Industrial Establishment” – means any establishment engaged in manufacturing or production activities, including, but not limited to, factories, foundries, mills, processing plants, refineries, mines, and slaughterhouses.

“Institutional Establishment” – shall mean any establishment or facility engaged in services, including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes, schools and universities.

“Leaf Waste” – shall mean leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree trimmings, and similar materials, but not including grass clippings.

“Licensed Collector or Licensed Waste Hauler” – shall mean a person who has written authorization from the PADEP under Act 90 to collect, haul, transport and dispose of municipal waste.
 
“Municipality” – shall mean any of the 54 minor civil divisions in Bucks County, Pennsylvania.

“Municipal Waste” – means any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office waste and other material including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential, municipal, commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities, and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste under Act 97 from a municipal, commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant, or air pollution control facility. The term does not include any source-separated recyclable materials.
“PADEP” – shall mean the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. “Person” – means any individual, partnership, corporation, association, institution,
cooperative enterprise, municipality, municipal authority, Federal government or agency, State institution or agency, or any other legal entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. In any provisions of this Ordinance prescribing a fine, imprisonment, or penalty or any combination of the foregoing, the term “person” shall include the officers and directors of any corporation or other legal entity having officers and directors.

“Processing” – means any technology used for the purpose of reducing the volume or bulk of municipal or residual waste or any technology used to convert part or all of such materials for off-site reuse. Processing facilities include, but are not limited to transfer facilities, recycling facilities, composting facilities, and resource recovery facilities.

“Recycling” – means the collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and other materials which would otherwise be disposed or processed as municipal waste or the mechanized separation and treatment of municipal waste (other than through combustion) and creation and recovery of reusable materials other than a fuel for the generation of energy.

“Scavenging” – shall mean the unauthorized and uncontrolled removal of any material stored or placed at a point for subsequent collection or from a processing or disposal facility.

“Source-Separated Recyclable Materials” – means materials, including leaf waste, that are separated from municipal waste at the point of origin or generation for the purpose of recycling.

“Transportation” – means the off-site removal of any municipal waste at any time after generation.
 
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.

SECTION 3: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES

It shall be unlawful for any person to collect and/or transport municipal waste from any residential, public, commercial, industrial or institutional establishment within The Township of Haycock without first securing written authorization from the PADEP in accordance with the provisions of Act 90.

It shall be unlawful for any person to store, collect and/or transport municipal waste or source-separated recyclable materials from any sources within The Township of Haycock in a manner not in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, any applicable municipal ordinance, the Revised County Plan, Act 90, Act 101, the minimum standards and requirements established in Chapter 285 of the PADEP Municipal Waste Management Regulations, any applicable Bucks County Department of Health regulations, and/or any other federal, state, or local regulations.

It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge any material from any municipal waste or source-separated recyclable materials that are stored or placed for subsequent collection within The Township of Haycock without prior approval from the municipality.

SECTION 4: STANDARDS FOR COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTATION

All Collectors or Waste Haulers operating within the Township of Haycock must comply with the following minimum standards and regulations:

All trucks or other vehicles used for collection and transportation of municipal waste and/or source-separated recyclable materials must comply with the applicable requirements of Act 90, Act 97, Act 101, and PADEP regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and Act 101, including the Title 25 PA. Code Chapter 285, Subchapter B, regulations for the collection and transportation of municipal waste.

All collection vehicles conveying municipal waste and/or source-separated recyclable materials shall be operated and maintained in a manner that will prevent creation of a nuisance or a hazard to public health, safety and welfare.

All collection vehicles conveying putrescible municipal waste shall be watertight and suitably enclosed to prevent leakage, roadside littering, attraction of vectors and the creation of odors and other nuisances.

All collection vehicles conveying nonputrescible municipal waste and/or source- separated recyclable materials shall be capable of being enclosed or covered to prevent litter and other nuisances.
 
All collection vehicles conveying municipal waste and/or source-separated recyclable materials shall bear signs identifying the name and business address of the person or municipality which owns the vehicle and the specific type of material transported by the vehicle. All such signs shall have lettering which is at least six inches in height as required by Act 101.

All collection vehicles and equipment used by Collectors or Waste Haulers shall be subject to inspection by the Township of Haycock or its authorized agents at any reasonable hour without prior notification.

SECTION 5: LICENSING and REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS

No person shall collect, or remove any municipal waste from within The Township of Haycock without first obtaining written authorization from PADEP in accordance with the provisions of Act 90 and providing a copy of such written authorization to The Township of Haycock. This section shall not apply to private individuals (e.g. homeowners) who wish to transport their own household waste to PADEP approved facilities or recyclables to appropriate recycling centers, nor to farmers, landscapers or nurserymen, who collect, remove, haul or otherwise, transport agricultural or other organic waste associated with their respective business activities.

For a Collector or Waste Hauler to collect and transport municipal waste within The Township of Haycock a Collector or Waste Hauler shall submit a registration form to The Township of Haycock which shall include a copy of their state issued written authorization, and a copy of their Municipal and Residual Waste Transporter Authorization Application (DEP form 2500-PM-BWM0015) along with any of the following information that may be deemed appropriate by the municipality:

A.	A list of collection vehicles covered under the written authorization including, as a minimum, the following information for each vehicle: identification information for each vehicle (such as vehicle license number, vehicle registration number, or company identification number); date and location of most recent vehicle inspection; and hauling capacity of the vehicle.

B.	The type of municipal waste to be collected and transported.

C.	Certificate(s) of Insurance evidencing that the waste hauler or collector has valid liability, automobile and workmen’s compensation insurance in the minimum amounts established and required by separate resolution of the governing body of the Municipality.

D.	If they are hauling or collecting Source-Separated Recyclable Materials in the municipality, identify the materials being hauled or collected and provide the following information for each vehicle: identification information for each vehicle (such as vehicle license number, vehicle
 
registration number, or company identification number); date and location of most recent vehicle inspection; and hauling capacity of the vehicle.

Any person who fails to satisfy the minimum standards and requirements of this Ordinance or is in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance may not lawfully collect municipal waste or source-separated material in The Township of Haycock.

All Licensed Collectors and Licensed Waste Haulers shall meet the requirements of Act 90, Act 97, Act 101, the Bucks County Municipal Waste Management Plan, and all PADEP rules and regulations (25 PA Code Chapter 285).

SECTION 6: REPORTING REQUIREMENTS

All Licensed Collectors and Licensed Waste Haulers and collectors and haulers of Source-Separated Recyclable Materials operating within The Township of Haycock shall participate in the Bucks County Municipal Recycling Documentation Program. The program will provide a system for documenting the origin of municipal waste and source-separated recyclable material by municipality and the ultimate disposal point of said waste and recyclables. Each Licensed Collector and Licensed Waste Hauler and collectors and haulers of Source-Separated Recyclable Materials operating in The Township of Haycock shall prepare and submit an annual report to the municipality on the official Collectors and Haulers Recyclables Documentation Reporting Form. The report shall be submitted by the PADEP Licensed Collector or Licensed Waste Hauler and collectors and haulers of Source-Separated Recyclable Materials to the Township of Haycock by January 31 of each year and include all of the required information pertaining to the preceding calendar year.

All annual reports submitted to the municipality from Licensed Collectors and Licensed Waste Haulers and collectors and haulers of Source-Separated Recyclable Materials shall be combined into a single report and submitted by the municipality on the official Municipal Recyclables Documentation Reporting Form to the County by February 28 of the year following the reporting period.

SECTION 7: PENALTIES

Any person who shall violate any provision of this Ordinance, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this Ordinance continues or each Section of this Ordinance which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense. For purposes of this Section, the doing of any act or thing prohibited by any provision of this Ordinance, or the failure to do any act or thing as to which any provision of this Ordinance creates any affirmative duty, shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance punishable as herein stated. Licensed Collectors and Licensed Waste Haulers who shall violate any provision of this Ordinance may be reported to the PADEP, by the
 
Township of Haycock and may be subject to the revocation of the State authorization to transport municipal waste, as described in Act 90.

SECTION 8: INJUNCTIVE POWERS

The Township of Haycock may petition the Bucks County Court of Common Pleas for an injunction, either mandatory or prohibitive, in order to enforce any of the provisions of this Ordinance.

SECTION 9: SEVERABILITY

In the event that any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance, or any part thereof, shall be declared illegal, invalid or unconstitutional for any reason, the remaining provisions of this Ordinance shall not be affected, impaired or invalidated by such action.

SECTION 10: CONFLICT

Any ordinances or any part of any ordinance that conflicts with this Ordinance are hereby repealed insofar as the same is specifically inconsistent with this Ordinance.

SECTION 11: EFFECTIVE DATE

This Ordinance shall take effect five (5) days from the date enacted.




ORDAINED AND ENACTED into an Ordinance this 6th day of August, 2007.






ATTEST:	THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK




Nancy Yodis, Secretary	Kathleen Babb, Chairman


Mike Lennard, Vice-Chairman


 

(municipal seal)
 
Henry DePue, Member
 
ORDINANCE NO.	/f}f,,,


AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA AMENDING SECTION 520 OF THE SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP TO REQUIRE ON-LOT SEWAGE SYSTEMS REPLACEMENT AREAS FOR LOTS TO BE CREATED

A. Whereas. by Ordinance No. 86, enacted August 7, 2000, as amended, Haycock Township Board of Supervisors ("Board") has enacted a Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance ("SALDO") pursuant to its statutory authority, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code ("MPC"}, Act 247 of 1968, as amended (53 P.S. §10101 et seq.);

B.	Whereas, the failure of the primary sewage disposal area of  an  on-lot sewer system presents a significant threat to human health; and through careful study, the Board, with the assistance of its committees, recognizes the benefit  of  requiring areas designated for replacement on-lot  sewage  disposal  systems  for  newly  created lots and land developments with primary on-lot sewage disposal systems;

C.	Whereas, disregard of potential areas   that  could  otherwise  provide suitable replacement site for on-lot sewage systems could allow disturbance of soils that would render them unsuitable; and the Board also recognizes that by  requiring dedicated areas on each newly created lot or land development for both the primary and replacement systems, each property will have sufficient area to accommodate both the sewage disposal systems and the proposed use;

D.	Whereas, the requirement for and protection of replacement locations provide minimum standards for the prevention and suppression of disease and health risks associated with the use of private sewage disposal systems and to otherwise promote continuing public safety, maintain the present and future welfare of residents of Haycock Township, and protection of the environment; and

E.	Whereas, the proposed amendment has been advertised, considered and reviewed in accordance with MPC Section 505 and 506 (53 P.S. §10505 and 10506).

NOW, THEREFORE, it is hereby ENACTED and ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township and by authority of same as follows:

Section 01: A new subsection 9 is added to Section 520, of the SALDO, and shall read in full as follows:

9.	Replacement area for on-lot sewage system.

A.	Replacement  Location  Required.	A  replacement  area  for  the  on-lot sewage system shall be required for all lots to be created that are not



I
 
serviced or intended to be serviced by public sewers. Where a proposed subdivision includes existing houses, replacement areas must be provided for those houses in addition to all other proposed lots in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.   A minimum isolation distance of twenty
(20) feet shall be established between any and all absorption areas of on­ lot sewage systems and any and all proposed replacement on-lot sewage system absorption areas. However, if the replacement system is to be located down gradient of the primary system, the minimum isolation distance between the primary system  absorption  area  and  the replacement system absorption area shall be fifty (50) feet.

Should Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) or its designated agencies establish isolation distances greater than those established herein by the Township, then DEP's requirements shall supersede said Township requirements and DEP's minimum isolation distance shall be complied with.

B.	Replacement System.  The proposed lot must have sufficient suitable area for the proposed initial sewage disposal system, as well as 100% reserve replacement   area.	The  replacement  area  shall  be  in  an  appropriate location,  and  sized  to  allow  the  installation  of  an  approved  sewage disposal area  in the event of malfunction of the  initial system.   Minimum size of the replacement area must equal, or be greater than, the size of the initial system.  If the size of the initial system is increased in the future to	accommodate	additional	sewer	flows,	documentation	must	be submitted to the Township to verify that the size of the replacement area is sufficient to equal, or exceed, the capacity of the modified initial system. The area shall be protected and reserved for future use as an absorption area  with  similar  design  and  configuration  as  the  initial  system  so  the reserve area may be utilized for repair or replacement.  This replacement area   must  meet  the  criteria   required  by  DEP  regulations  and  local ordinances,  be tested,  and  receive soil suitability  approval  by the  Bucks County Department of Health.  A holding tank, small flow treatment facility, or  other  non  land  application  method  shall  not  be  designated  as  a replacement system.

C.	Replacement Area Disturbance Prohibited. Areas reserved for the original and replacement disposal sites may not have driveways, parking areas or structures over them. A  Declaration of Restrictions  shall be recorded  in the Office of the Bucks County Recorder of Deeds stating that the replacement area shall not be graded or disturbed, that no permanent or temporary improvements of any character  shall  be constructed  thereon, and that no plant material shall be established within the replacement area other than shallow-rooted plant matter. A plan depicting the replacement area shall be recorded with the Declaration of Restrictions. If the lot for which  the  replacement  area is required is part of a new subdivision, the
 
Record Plan shall  bear a note stating the restrictions  recited above and identifying the lot to which they pertain.

D.	Substitution of an Alternate Area. Any person who desires to construct improvements within the replacement area shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Bucks County Department of Health and Haycock Township that an alternate replacement location, which complies with all Township	and Department of Environmental Protection rules and regulations, exists upon the lot. If such an alternate replacement location shall be identified, the alternate replacement  location may be considered to be the replacement location required by this ordinance and shall be designated as the replacement location. A Declaration of Restrictions shall be executed by the parties and shall be recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds Office designating the new replacement area location and vacating the old one.

Section 02:  In addition,  all  inconsistent  provisions  of other ordinances  or resolutions are repealed to the extent of the inconsistency. All other provisions of the ordinances of Haycock Township shall remain in full force and effect.

Section 03: The provisions of this ordinance are declared to be severable. If any provision of this ordinance is declared to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall have no effect on the remaining provisions of this ordinance.

Section 04: Effective Date. This Ordinance shall take effect five (5) days after enactment.
ENACTED and ORDAINED this -'2- day of	ooJ

BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF
ATTEST:                                                                            HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP



NancyModi;	'>
Township Secretary



Michael Lennard, Vice Chair
i&fA,
U:\TWC Cltents\HAYCOCK\Ordinance\SALDO  Amend 2007\AJtemate  site on-lot replacement\Ordinance\Alternate  site on-lot
replacement area Ordinance.07.17.07.doc
 
ORDINANCE NO. 107




AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AUTHORIZING THE ENTERING INTO OF A CABLE FRANCHISE AGREEMENT GRANTING A NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE TO VERIZON PENNSYLVANIA INC., TO CONSTRUCT, INSTALL, MAINTAIN, EXTEND, AND OPERATE A CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM IN THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK.



WHEREAS, the Township of Haycock is a duly organized Township in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania;



WHEREAS, the Township of Haycock is authorized to grant one or more nonexclusive, revocable, franchises to construct, operate and maintain within the Township a system for providing “Cable Service”;



WHEREAS, Verizon Pennsylvania, Inc. is in the process of installing a Fiber to the Premises Telecommunications Network for the transmission of non-cable services in the Township and desires to use portions of the Network once installed to provide cable services in the Township;



WHEREAS, the Township of Haycock wishes to grant Verizon Pennsylvania Inc., a nonexclusive franchise to construct, install, maintain, extend, and operate a cable communications system in the Township of Haycock, in accordance with Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, 47 U.S.C. §521 et. seq.;



WHEREAS, the Township of Haycock, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, has considered the adoption of a cable television franchise agreement; and



WHEREAS, the Township of Haycock and Verizon Pennsylvania, Inc., have reached agreement on the terms and conditions of said franchise.



NOW, THEREFORE, the Township of Haycock Board of Supervisors hereby enacts into ordinance this Cable Television Franchise Agreement between Haycock Township and Verizon Pennsylvania, Inc. as herein provided.
 

All  provisions  of  this  Ordinance  shall  be  in  force  and  effect  five  days  after approval and adoption.

ORDAINED AND ENACTED this	day of	, 200_.



BOARD OF SUPERVISORS HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP

 
ATTEST:

Nancy M. Yodis, Secretary
 


Kathleen M. Babb, Chair, Chair
 

Michael Lennard, Vice Chairman


Henry Depue, Member


For:  VERIZON PENNSYLVANIA INC.

This Agreement proposed for acceptance by VERIZON PENNSYLVANIA INC. is subject to applicable federal, state, and local law. The EFFECTIVE DATE of this Agreement, recognized as being the date of ordination and enactment of an Ordinance duly adopted by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, Bucks County.

VERIZON PENNSYLVANIA INC



By:	 	 Authorized Official
 
























CABLE FRANCHISE AGREEMENT BETWEEN
TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, PENNSYLVANIA AND
VERIZON PENNSYLVANIA INC.
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page 1.	DEFINITIONS	2
2.	GRANT OF AUTHORITY; LIMITS AND RESERVATIONS	6
3.	PROVISION OF CABLE SERVICE	7
4.	SYSTEM OPERATION	9
5.	SYSTEM FACILITIES	9
6.	FRANCHISE FEES	9
7.	CUSTOMER SERVICE	10
8.	REPORTS AND RECORDS	10
9.	INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION… ................................................ …………11
11.	TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE	13
12.	RENEWAL OF FRANCHISE	13
13.	ENFORCEMENT AND TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE	13
14.	MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS	15
EXHIBIT A – MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS TO BE PROVIDED FREE CABLE SERVICE ….21 EXHIBIT B – SERVICE AREA	22
EXHIBIT B – CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS	23
 
THIS CABLE FRANCHISE AGREEMENT (the “Franchise” or “Agreement”) is entered into by and between the TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, a validly organized and existing political subdivision of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (the “Local Franchising Authority” or “LFA”), and VERIZON PENNSYLVANIA INC., a corporation duly organized under the applicable laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (the “Franchisee”).

WHEREAS, the LFA wishes to grant the Franchisee a nonexclusive franchise to construct, install, maintain, extend, and operate a cable communications system in the Franchise Area as designated in this Franchise;

WHEREAS, the LFA is a “franchising authority” in accordance with Title VI of the Communications Act (see 47 U.S.C. § 522(10)) and is authorized to grant one or more nonexclusive cable franchises pursuant to applicable state law;

WHEREAS, the Franchisee is in the process of installing a Fiber to the Premise Telecommunications Network (“FTTP Network”) in the Franchise Area for the transmission of Non-Cable Services pursuant to authority granted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania;

WHEREAS, the FTTP Network will occupy the Public Rights-of-Way within the LFA, and the Franchisee desires to use portions of the FTTP Network once installed to provide Cable Services (as hereinafter defined) in the Franchise Area;

WHEREAS, the LFA has identified the future cable-related needs and interests of the LFA and its community, has considered the financial, technical, and legal qualifications of the Franchisee, and has determined that the Franchisee’s plans for its Cable System are adequate, in a full public proceeding affording due process to all parties;

WHEREAS, the LFA has found the Franchisee to be financially, technically, and legally qualified to operate the Cable System;

WHEREAS, the LFA has determined that the grant of a nonexclusive franchise to the Franchisee is consistent with the public interest; and

WHEREAS, the LFA and the Franchisee have reached agreement on the terms and conditions set forth herein, and the parties have agreed to be bound by those terms and conditions.

NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the LFA’s grant of a franchise to the Franchisee, the Franchisee’s promise to provide Cable Service to residents of the Franchise/Service Area of the LFA pursuant to and consistent with the Communications Act (as hereinafter defined), pursuant to the terms and conditions set forth herein, the promises and undertakings herein, and other good and valuable consideration, the receipt and the adequacy of which are hereby acknowledged,

THE SIGNATORIES DO HEREBY AGREE AS FOLLOWS:
 
1.	DEFINITIONS

Except as otherwise provided herein, the definitions and word usages set forth in the Communications Act (as hereinafter defined) are incorporated herein and shall apply in this Agreement. In addition, the following definitions shall apply:

1.1	Additional Service Area: Shall mean any such portion of the Service Area added pursuant to Section 3.1.2 of this Agreement.

1.2	Affiliate: Any Person who, directly or indirectly, owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with, the Franchisee.

1.3	Basic Service: Any service tier that includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals.

1.4	Cable Service or Cable Services: Shall be defined herein as it is defined under Section 602 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).

1.5	Cable System or System: Shall be defined herein as it is defined under Section 602 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 522(7), meaning the Franchisee’s facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide Cable Service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple Subscribers within the Service Area. The Cable System shall be limited to the optical spectrum wavelength(s), bandwidth, or future technological capacity that is used for the transmission of Cable Services directly to Subscribers within the Franchise/Service Area and shall not include the tangible network facilities of a common carrier subject in whole or in part to Title II of the Communications Act or of an Information Services provider.

1.6	Channel: Shall be defined herein as it is defined under Section 602 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 522(4).

1.7	Communications Act:  The Communications Act of 1934, as amended.

1.8	Control: The ability to exercise de facto or de jure control over day-to- day policies and operations or the management of the Franchisee’s affairs.

1.9	FCC:  The United States Federal Communications Commission, or successor governmental entity thereto.

1.10	Fiber to the Premise Telecommunications Network (“FTTP Network”): The Franchisee’s network that transmits Non-Cable Services pursuant to the authority granted under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and under Title II of the Communications Act, which Non-Cable Services are not subject to Title VI of the Communications Act.

1.11	Force Majeure: An event or events reasonably beyond the ability of the Franchisee to anticipate and control. This includes, but is not limited to, severe or unusual weather conditions, strikes, labor disturbances, lockouts, war or act of war (whether an actual
 
declaration of war is made or not), insurrection, riots, act of public enemy, actions or inactions of any government instrumentality or public utility including condemnation, accidents for which the Franchisee is not primarily responsible, fire, flood, or other acts of God, or work delays caused by waiting for utility providers to service or monitor utility poles to which the Franchisee’s  FTTP Network is attached, and unavailability of materials and/or qualified labor to perform the work necessary.

1.12	Franchise Area: The incorporated area (entire existing territorial limits) of the LFA and such additional areas as may be included in the corporate (territorial) limits of the LFA during the term of this Franchise.

1.13	Franchisee:  Verizon Pennsylvania Inc., and its lawful and permitted successors, assigns, and transferees.

1.14	Gross Revenue:  All revenue, as determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, which is derived by the Franchisee from the operation of the Cable System to provide Cable Service in the Service Area, provided, however, that Gross Revenue shall not include:

1.14.1	Revenues received by any Affiliate or other Person in exchange for supplying goods or services used by the Franchisee to provide Cable Service over the Cable System;

1.14.2	Bad debts written off by the Franchisee in the normal course of its business, provided, however, that bad debt recoveries shall be included in Gross Revenue during the period collected;

 


third parties;
 
1.14.3	Refunds, rebates, or discounts made to Subscribers or other
 

1.14.4	Any revenues classified, in whole or in part, as Non-Cable Services revenue under federal or state law including, without limitation, revenue received from Telecommunications Services; revenue received from Information Services, including, without limitation, Internet Access service, electronic mail service, electronic bulletin board service, or similar online computer services; charges made to the public for commercial or cable television that is used for two-way communication; and any other revenues attributed by the Franchisee to Non-Cable Services in accordance with FCC or state public utility regulatory commission rules, regulations, standards, or orders;

1.14.5	Any revenue of the Franchisee or any other Person that is received directly from the sale of merchandise through any Cable Service distributed over the Cable System, notwithstanding that portion of such revenue which represents or can be attributed to a Subscriber fee or a payment for the use of the Cable System for the sale of such merchandise, which portion shall be included in Gross Revenue;

1.14.6	The sale of Cable Services on the Cable System for resale in which the purchaser is required to collect cable franchise fees from purchaser’s customer;
 
1.14.7	Any tax of general applicability imposed upon the Franchisee or upon Subscribers by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental entity and required to be collected by the Franchisee and remitted to the taxing entity (including, but not limited to, sales/use tax, gross receipts tax, excise tax, utility users tax, public service tax, communication taxes, and non-cable franchise fees);

1.14.8	Any revenue forgone as a result of the provision of free or reduced cost cable or other communications services to any Person, including without limitation, employees of the Franchisee and public institutions or other institutions designated in the Franchise; provided, however, that revenue foregone in exchange for trades, barters, services, or other items of value shall be included in Gross Revenue;

1.14.9	Sales of capital assets or sales of surplus equipment;

1.14.10	Program launch fees; and,

1.14.11	Directory or Internet advertising revenue including, but not limited to, yellow page, white page, banner advertisement, and electronic publishing.

1.15	Incumbent Local Exchange Carrier: Shall be defined herein as it is defined under Section 251(h) of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 251(h).

1.16	Information Services: Shall be defined herein as it is defined under Section 3 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. §153(20).

1.17	Internet Access:  Dial-up or broadband access service that enables Subscribers to access the Internet.

1.18	Local Franchise Authority (LFA):  The Township of Haycock or the lawful successor, transferee, or assignee thereof.

1.19	Non-Cable Services: Any service that does not constitute the provision of Video Programming directly to multiple Subscribers in the Franchise Area including, but not limited to, Information Services and Telecommunications Services.

1.20	Normal Business Hours:  Those hours during which most similar businesses in the community are open to serve customers.  In all cases, “normal business hours” must include some evening hours at least one night per week and/or some weekend hours.

1.21	Normal Operating Conditions: Those service conditions that are within the control of the Franchisee. Those conditions that are not within the control of the Franchisee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions that are ordinarily within the control of the Franchisee include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per- view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or rebuild of the Cable System. See 47 C.F.R. § 76.309(c)(4)(ii).
 
1.22	Person:  An individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation, or governmental entity.

1.23	Public Rights-of-Way:  The surface and the area across, in, over, along, upon, and below the surface of the public streets, roads, bridges, sidewalks, lanes, courts, ways, alleys, and boulevards, including public utility easements and public lands and waterways used as Public Rights-of-Way, as the same now or may thereafter exist, which are under the jurisdiction or control of the LFA. Public Rights-of-Way do not include the airwaves above a right-of-way with regard to cellular or other nonwire communications or broadcast services.

1.24	Service Area: All portions of the Franchise Area where Cable Service is being offered, including any Additional Service Areas.

1.25	Service Date: The date that the Franchisee first provides Cable Service on a commercial basis directly to multiple Subscribers in the Franchise Area. The Franchisee shall memorialize the Service Date by notifying the LFA in writing of the same, which notification shall become a part of this Franchise.

 


channels.
 
1.26	Service Interruption:  The loss of picture or sound on one or more cable
 

1.27	Subscriber: A Person who lawfully receives Cable Service over the Cable System with the Franchisee’s express permission.

1.28	Telecommunications Facilities: The Franchisee’s existing Telecommunications Services and Information Services facilities and its FTTP Network facilities.

1.29	Telecommunication Services: Shall be defined herein as it is defined under Section 3 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 153(46).

1.30	Title II: Title II of the Communications Act.

1.31	Title VI: Title VI of the Communications Act.

1.32	Transfer of the Franchise:

1.32.1	Any transaction in which:

1.32.1.1	an ownership or other interest in the Franchisee is transferred, directly or indirectly, from one Person or group of Persons to another Person or group of Persons, so that control of the Franchisee is transferred; or

1.32.1.2	the rights held by the Franchisee under the Franchise are transferred or assigned to another Person or group of Persons.

1.32.2	However, notwithstanding subsections 1.32.1.1 and 1.32.1.2, a
Transfer of the Franchise shall not include transfer of an ownership or other interest in the
 
Franchisee to the parent of the Franchisee or to another Affiliate of the Franchisee; transfer of an interest in the Franchise or the rights held by the Franchisee under the Franchise to the parent of the Franchisee or to another Affiliate of the Franchisee; any action that is the result of a merger of the parent of the Franchisee; or any action that is the result of a merger of another Affiliate of the Franchisee.

1.33	Video Programming: Shall be defined herein as it is defined under Section 602 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 522(20).

2.	GRANT OF AUTHORITY; LIMITS AND RESERVATIONS

2.1	Grant of Authority: Subject to the terms and conditions of this Agreement and the Communications Act, the LFA hereby grants the Franchisee the right to own, construct, operate, and maintain a Cable System along the Public Rights-of-Way within the Franchise Area, in order to provide Cable Service. No privilege or power of eminent domain is bestowed by this grant; nor is such a privilege or power bestowed by this Agreement.

2.2	The LFA Does Not Regulate Telecommunications: The LFA’s regulatory authority under Title VI of the Communications Act is not applicable to the construction, installation, maintenance, or operation of the Franchisee’s FTTP Network to the extent the FTTP Network is constructed, installed, maintained, or operated for the purpose of upgrading and/or extending Verizon’s existing Telecommunications Facilities for the provision of Non-Cable Services.

2.3	Term: This Franchise shall become effective on June 7, 2008 (the “Effective Date”). The term of this Franchise shall be fifteen (15) years from the Effective Date unless the Franchise is earlier revoked as provided herein.

2.4	Grant Not Exclusive: The Franchise and the rights granted herein to use and occupy the Public Rights-of-Way to provide Cable Services shall not be exclusive, and the LFA reserves the right to grant other franchises for similar uses or for other uses of the Public Rights-of-Way, or any portions thereof, to any Person, or to make any such use themselves, at any time during the term of this Franchise. Any such rights that are granted shall not adversely impact the authority as granted under this Franchise and shall not interfere with existing facilities of the Cable System or the Franchisee’s FTTP Network.

2.5	Franchise Subject to Federal Law: Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary herein, this Franchise is subject to and shall be governed by all applicable provisions of federal law as it may be amended, including but not limited to the Communications Act.

2.6	No Waiver:

2.6.1	The failure of the LFA on one or more occasions to exercise a right or to require compliance or performance under this Franchise, the Communications Act, or any other applicable state or federal law shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver of such right or a waiver of compliance or performance by the LFA, nor to excuse the Franchisee from complying or performing, unless such right or such compliance or performance has been specifically waived in writing.
 
2.6.2	The failure of the Franchisee on one or more occasions to exercise a right under this Franchise or applicable law, or to require performance under this Franchise, shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver of such right or of performance of this Agreement, nor shall it excuse the LFA from performance, unless such right or performance has been specifically waived in writing.

2.7	Construction of Agreement:

2.7.1	The provisions of this Franchise shall be liberally construed to effectuate their objectives.

2.7.2	Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the scope or applicability of Section 625 Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 545.

2.7.3	Should any change to state law have the lawful effect of materially altering the terms and conditions of this Franchise, then the parties shall modify this Franchise to the mutual satisfaction of both parties to ameliorate the negative effects on the Franchisee of the material alteration.  Any modification to this Franchise shall be in writing. If the parties cannot reach agreement on the above-referenced modification to the Franchise, then the Franchisee may terminate this Agreement without further obligation to the LFA or, at the Franchisee’s option, the parties agree to submit the matter to binding arbitration in accordance with the commercial arbitration rules of the American Arbitration Association.

2.8	Police Powers: Nothing in this Franchise shall be construed to prohibit the reasonable, necessary, and lawful exercise of the police powers of the LFA. However, if the reasonable, necessary, and lawful exercise of the police power results in any material alteration of the terms and conditions of this Franchise, then the parties shall modify this Franchise to the mutual satisfaction of both parties to ameliorate the negative effects on the Franchisee of the material alteration.  Any modification to this Franchise shall be in writing. If the parties cannot reach agreement on the above-referenced modification to the Franchise, then the Franchisee may terminate this Agreement without further obligation to the LFA or, at the Franchisee’s option, the parties agree to submit the matter to binding arbitration in accordance with the commercial arbitration rules of the American Arbitration Association.

3.	PROVISION OF CABLE SERVICE

3.1	Service Area:

3.1.1	Service Area: The Franchisee shall offer Cable Service to significant numbers of Subscribers in residential areas of the Service Area and may make Cable Service available to businesses in the Service Area, within twenty-four (24) months of the Service Date of this Franchise, and shall offer Cable Service to all residential areas in the Service Area within five (5) years of the Service Date of the Franchise, except: (A) for periods of Force Majeure; (B) for periods of delay caused by the LFA; (C) for periods of delay resulting from the Franchisee’s inability to obtain authority to access rights-of-way in the Service Area; (D) in areas where developments or buildings are subject to claimed exclusive arrangements with other providers; (E) in areas, developments, or buildings where the Franchisee cannot access under reasonable terms and conditions after good faith negotiation, as determined by the Franchisee;
 
and (F) in areas, developments, or buildings where the Franchisee is unable to provide Cable Service for technical reasons or which require non-standard facilities which are not available on a commercially reasonable basis; and (G) in areas where the occupied residential household density does not meet the density requirements set forth in subsection 3.1.1.1.

3.1.1.1	Density Requirement: The Franchisee shall make Cable Services available to residential dwelling units in all areas of the Service Area where the average density is equal to or greater than twenty-five (25) occupied residential dwelling units per mile as measured in strand footage from the nearest technically feasible point on the active FTTP Network trunk or feeder line. Should, through new construction, an area within the Service Area meet the density requirements after the time stated for providing Cable Service as set forth in subsection 3.1.1, the Franchisee shall provide Cable Service to such area within six (6) months of receiving notice from the LFA that the density requirements have been met.

3.1.2	Additional Service Areas: Except for the Service Area, the Franchisee shall not be required to extend its Cable System or to provide Cable Services to any other areas within the Franchise Area during the term of this Franchise or any Renewals thereof, including, but not limited to, those areas in which Verizon is not the Incumbent Local Exchange Carrier. If the Franchisee desires to add Additional Service Areas within the Franchise Area, the Franchisee shall notify the LFA in writing of such Additional Service Area at least ten (10) days prior to providing Cable Services in such areas.

3.2	Availability of Cable Service: The Franchisee shall make Cable Service available to all residential dwelling units and may make Cable Service available to businesses within the Service Area in conformance with Section 3.1, and the Franchisee shall not discriminate between or among any individuals in the availability of Cable Service. In the areas in which the Franchisee shall provide Cable Service, the Franchisee shall be required to connect, at the Franchisee’s expense, other than a standard installation charge, all residential dwelling units that are within two hundred (200) feet of trunk or feeder lines not otherwise already served by the Franchisee’s FTTP Network.  The Franchisee shall be allowed to recover, from a Subscriber that requests such connection, the actual costs incurred for residential dwelling unit connections that exceed two hundred (200) feet and actual costs incurred to connect any non- residential dwelling unit Subscriber.

3.3.	Cable Service to Municipal Buildings:  Subject to Section 3.1, the Franchisee shall provide, without charge within the Service Area, one service outlet activated for Basic Service to the Township Hall, Fire Hall, and Haycock Elementary Public School as provided in Exhibit A, and also required of other cable operators in the Service Area, in Exhibit A; provided, however, that if it is necessary to extend the Franchisee’s trunk or feeder lines more than two hundred (200) feet solely to provide service to any such school or municipal building, the LFA shall have the option either of paying the Franchisee’s direct costs for such extension in excess of two hundred (200) feet, or of releasing the Franchisee from the obligation to provide service to such building. Furthermore, the Franchisee shall be permitted to recover, from any school or other municipal building owner entitled to free service, the direct cost of installing, when requested to do so, more than one outlet, or concealed inside wiring, or a service outlet requiring more than two hundred (200) feet of drop cable; provided, however, that the Franchisee may charge for additional equipment for any additional outlets.  Cable Service may not be resold
 
or otherwise used in contravention of the Franchisee’s rights with third parties respecting programming. Equipment provided by the Franchisee, if any, shall be replaced at retail rates if lost, stolen, or damaged. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Franchisee shall not be required to provide Cable Service to any building set forth in Exhibit A until a reasonable period of time after Franchisee serves the applicable portion of the Franchise Area with its Title II FTTP Network, and the applicable wire center serving such building is video enabled. Also notwithstanding the foregoing, Franchisee shall not be required to provide Cable Service to any building set forth in Exhibit A until nine (9) months from the Service Date of the Agreement.

4.	SYSTEM OPERATION

The parties recognize that the Franchisee’s FTTP Network is being constructed and will be operated and maintained as an upgrade to and/or extension of its existing Telecommunications Facilities.  The jurisdiction of the LFA over such Telecommunications Facilities is restricted by federal and state law, and the LFA does not and will not assert jurisdiction over the Franchisee’s FTTP Network in contravention of those limitations.

5.	SYSTEM FACILITIES

5.1	System Characteristics: The Franchisee’s Cable System shall meet or exceed the following requirements:

5.1.1	The System shall be designed with an initial analog and digital carrier passband between 50 and 860 MHz.

5.1.2	The System shall be designed to be an active two-way plant for Subscriber interaction, if any, required for the selection or use of Cable Service.

5.2	Interconnection: The Franchisee shall design its Cable System so that it may be interconnected with other cable systems in the Franchise Area. Interconnection of systems may be made by direct cable connection, microwave link, satellite, or other appropriate methods.

5.3	Emergency Alert System:

5.3.1	The Franchisee shall comply with the Emergency Alert System (“EAS”) requirements of the FCC in order that emergency messages may be distributed over the System.

6.	FRANCHISE FEES

6.1	Payment to the LFA:  Franchisee shall pay to the LFA a Franchise Fee of three percent (3%) of annual Gross Revenue (the “Franchise Fee”). The LFA shall have the option to increase or decrease the Franchise Fee not to exceed the federal maximum of five percent (5%) upon ninety (90) days written notice to the Franchisee. The LFA may increase or decrease the Franchise Fee not more than one (1) time in any twelve (12) month period. If at any time during the duration of this agreement, the LFA chooses to increase or decrease the Franchise Fee pursuant to Section 5.1, it may only do so if all other service providers providing
 
Cable Service in the Franchise Area are required to pay a franchise fee at the same or higher rate as the proposed increased or decreased Franchise Fee. The twelve (12) month period applicable under the Franchise for the computation of the Franchise Fee shall be a calendar year.  Franchisee shall be allowed to correct any payments, and may offset or increase future Franchise Fee payments in connection with the quarterly Franchise Fee remittances. In the event that any franchise fee payment is not made on or before the applicable dates, then interest shall be added at the rate of five percent (5%) per year of the amount of the franchise fee revenue due to LFA. No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is the correct amount.  This requirement for the addition of interest to late payments shall only be applicable to Franchisee when the same interest requirement is included in the franchise agreement(s) of all existing cable operator(s) providing cable service in the Franchise Area.

6.2	Supporting Information: Each Franchise fee payment shall be accompanied by a brief report prepared by a representative of the Franchisee showing the basis for the computation.

6.3	Limitation on Franchise Fee Actions: The parties agree that the period of limitation for recovery of any Franchise fee payable hereunder shall be four (4) years from the date on which payment by the Franchisee is due.

6.4	Bundled Services: If Cable Services subject to the Franchise fee required under this Article 7 are provided to Subscribers in conjunction with Non-Cable Services, the Franchise fee shall be applied only to the value of the Cable Services, as reflected on the books and records of the Franchisee in accordance with FCC or state public utility regulatory commission rules, regulations, standards, or orders.

7.	CUSTOMER SERVICE

Customer Service Requirements are set forth in Exhibit C, which shall be binding unless amended by written consent of the parties.

8.	REPORTS AND RECORDS

8.1	Open Books and Records: Upon reasonable written notice to the Franchisee and with no less than thirty (30) business days’ written notice to the Franchisee, the LFA shall have the right to inspect the Franchisee’s books and records pertaining to the Franchisee’s provision of Cable Service in the Franchise Area at any time during Normal Business Hours and on a nondisruptive basis, as are reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this Franchise. Such notice shall specifically reference the section or subsection of the Franchise that is under review, so that the Franchisee may organize the necessary books and records for appropriate access by the LFA.  The Franchisee shall not be required to maintain any books and records for Franchise compliance purposes longer than three
(3) years. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth herein, the Franchisee shall not be required to disclose information that it reasonably deems to be proprietary or confidential in nature, nor disclose any of its or an Affiliate’s books and records not relating to the provision of Cable Service in the Service Area. The LFA shall treat any information disclosed by the Franchisee as confidential and shall only disclose it to employees, representatives, and agents
 
thereof that have a need to know, or in order to enforce the provisions hereof. The Franchisee shall not be required to provide Subscriber information in violation of Section 631 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 551.

8.2	Records Required:  The Franchisee shall at all times maintain:

8.2.1	Records of all written complaints for a period of four (4) years after receipt by the Franchisee. The term “complaint” as used herein refers to complaints about any aspect of the Cable System or the Franchisee’s cable operations, including, without limitation, complaints about employee courtesy. Complaints recorded will not be limited to complaints requiring an employee service call;

8.2.2	Records of outages for a period of four (4) years after occurrence, indicating date, duration, area, and the number of Subscribers affected, type of outage, and cause;

8.2.3	Records of service calls for repair and maintenance for a period of four (4) years after resolution by the Franchisee, indicating the date and time service was required, the date of acknowledgment and date and time service was scheduled (if it was scheduled), and the date and time service was provided, and (if different) the date and time the problem was resolved;

8.2.4	Records of installation/reconnection and requests for service extension for a period of four (4) years after the request was fulfilled by the Franchisee, indicating the date of request, date of acknowledgment, and the date and time service was extended; and

8.2.5	A map showing the area of coverage for the provisioning of Cable Services and estimated timetable to commence providing Cable Service.

9.	INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION

9.1	Insurance:

9.1.1	The Franchisee shall maintain in full force and effect, at its own cost and expense, during the Franchise Term, the following insurance coverage:

9.1.1.1	Commercial General Liability Insurance in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) combined single limit for property damage and bodily injury.  Such insurance shall cover the construction, operation, and maintenance of the Cable System and the conduct of the Franchisee’s Cable Service business in the LFA.

9.1.1.2	Automobile Liability Insurance in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage.

9.1.1.3	Workers’ Compensation Insurance meeting all legal requirements of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
 
9.1.2	The LFA shall be included as an additional insured under each of the insurance policies required in this Article 9 except Worker’s Compensation.

9.1.3	The Franchisee shall not cancel any required insurance policy without obtaining alternative insurance in conformance with this Agreement.

9.1.4	Each of the required insurance policies shall be with insurers qualified to do business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, with an A.M. Best Financial Strength rating of A- or better.

9.1.5	Upon written request, the Franchisee shall deliver to the LFA Certificates of Insurance showing evidence of the required coverage.

9.2	Indemnification:

9.2.1	The Franchisee agrees to indemnify, save and hold harmless, and defend the LFA, its officers, agents, boards, and employees, from and against any liability for damages or claims resulting from tangible property damage or bodily injury (including accidental death), to the extent proximately caused by the Franchisee’s negligent construction, operation, or maintenance of its Cable System, provided that the LFA shall give Franchisee timely written notice of its obligation to indemnify the LFA, but in any event, the LFA shall provide such notice to Franchisee within a sufficient period of time from receipt of a claim or action pursuant to this Subsection to enable Franchisee to timely answer complaints, raise defenses and defend all claims. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Franchisee shall not indemnify the LFA for any damages, liability, or claims resulting from the willful misconduct or negligence of the LFA, its officers, agents, employees, attorneys, consultants, independent contractors, or third parties or for any activity or function conducted by any Person other than the Franchisee in connection with EAS or the distribution of any Cable Service over the Cable System.

9.2.2	With respect to the Franchisee’s indemnity obligations set forth in subsection 9.2.1, the Franchisee shall provide the defense of any claims brought against the LFA by selecting counsel of the Franchisee’s choice to defend the claim, subject to the consent of the LFA, which shall not unreasonably be withheld.  Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the LFA from cooperating with the Franchisee and participating in the defense of any litigation by its own counsel at its own cost and expense, provided however, that after consultation with the LFA, the Franchisee shall have the right to defend, settle, or compromise any claim or action arising hereunder, and the Franchisee shall have the authority to decide the appropriateness and the amount of any such settlement. In the event that the terms of any such proposed settlement includes the release of the LFA, and the LFA does not consent to the terms of any such settlement or compromise, the Franchisee shall not settle the claim or action, but its obligation to indemnify the LFA shall in no event exceed the amount of such settlement.

9.2.3	The LFA shall hold harmless and defend the Franchisee from and against, and shall be responsible for damages, liability, or claims resulting from or arising out of, the willful misconduct or negligence of the LFA.
 
9.2.4	The LFA shall be responsible for its own acts of willful misconduct or negligence, or breach of obligation committed by the LFA for which the LFA is legally responsible, subject to any and all defenses and limitations of liability provided by law. The Franchisee shall not be required to indemnify the LFA for acts of the LFA that constitute willful misconduct or negligence on the part of the LFA, its officers, employees, agents, attorneys, consultants, independent contractors, or third parties.

10.	TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE

10.1	Subject to Section 617 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 537, no Transfer of the Franchise shall occur without the prior consent of the LFA, provided that such consent shall not be unreasonably withheld, delayed, or conditioned. No such consent shall be required, however, for a transfer in trust, by mortgage, by other hypothecation, by assignment of any rights, title, or interest of the Franchisee in the Franchise or Cable System in order to secure indebtedness, or for transactions otherwise excluded under Section 1.32 above.

11.	RENEWAL OF FRANCHISE

11.1	The LFA and the Franchisee agree that any proceedings undertaken by the LFA that relate to the renewal of this Franchise shall be governed by and comply with the provisions of Section 626 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 546.

11.2	In addition to the procedures set forth in said Section 626 of the Communications Act, the LFA shall notify the Franchisee of all of its assessments regarding the identity of future cable-related community needs and interests, as well as the past performance of the Franchisee under the then current Franchise term.  The LFA further agrees that such assessments shall be provided to the Franchisee promptly so that the Franchisee has adequate time to submit a proposal under 47 U.S.C. § 546 and complete renewal of the Franchise prior to expiration of its term.

11.3	Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth herein, the Franchisee and the LFA agree that at any time during the term of the then current Franchise, while affording the public appropriate notice and opportunity to comment, the LFA and the Franchisee may agree to undertake and finalize informal negotiations regarding renewal of the then current Franchise, and the LFA may grant a renewal thereof.

11.4	The Franchisee and the LFA consider the terms set forth in this Article 11 to be consistent with the express provisions of 47 U.S.C. § 546.

12.	ENFORCEMENT AND TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE

12.1	Notice of Violation: If at any time the LFA believes that the Franchisee has not complied with the terms of the Franchise, the LFA shall informally discuss the matter with the Franchisee. If these discussions do not lead to resolution of the problem in a reasonable time, the LFA shall then notify the Franchisee in writing of the exact nature of the alleged noncompliance in a reasonable time (for purposes of this Article, the “Noncompliance Notice”).
 
12.2	The Franchisee’s Right to Cure or Respond: The Franchisee shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of the Noncompliance Notice to: (i) respond to the LFA, if the Franchisee contests (in whole or in part) the assertion of noncompliance; (ii) cure such noncompliance; or (iii) in the event that, by its nature, such noncompliance cannot be cured within such thirty (30) day period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy such noncompliance and notify the LFA of the steps being taken and the date by which cure is projected to be completed. Upon cure of any noncompliance, the LFA shall provide written confirmation that such cure has been effected.

12.3	Public Hearing:  The LFA shall schedule a public hearing if the LFA seeks to continue its investigation into the alleged noncompliance in the event that: (1) the Franchisee fails to respond to the Noncompliance Notice pursuant to the procedures required by this Article, or (2) in the event that the Franchisee has not remedied the alleged noncompliance within thirty (30) days or the date projected pursuant to Section 12.2(iii) above.  The LFA shall provide the Franchisee at least thirty (30) business days’ prior written notice of such public hearing, which will specify the time, place, and purpose of such public hearing, and provide the Franchisee the opportunity to be heard.

12.4	Enforcement: Subject to applicable federal and state law, in the event that the LFA, after the public hearing set forth in Section 12.3, determines that the Franchisee is in default of any provision of this Franchise, the LFA may:

12.4.1	Seek specific performance of any provision, which reasonably lends itself to such remedy, as an alternative to damages; or

12.4.2	Commence an action at law for monetary damages or seek other equitable relief; or

12.4.3	In the case of a substantial material default of a material provision of this Franchise, seek to revoke the Franchise in accordance with Section 12.5.

12.5	Revocation: Should the LFA seek to revoke this Franchise after following the procedures set forth above in this Article, including the public hearing described in Section 12.3, the LFA shall give written notice to the Franchisee of such intent. The notice shall set forth the specific nature of the noncompliance. The Franchisee shall have ninety (90) days from receipt of such notice to object in writing and to state its reasons for such objection. In the event that the LFA has not received a satisfactory response from the Franchisee, it may then seek termination of the Franchise at a second public hearing. The LFA shall cause to be served upon the Franchisee, at least thirty (30) business days prior to such public hearing, a written notice specifying the time and place of such hearing and stating its intent to revoke the Franchise.

12.5.1	At the designated public hearing, the Franchisee shall be provided a fair opportunity for full participation, including the rights to be represented by legal counsel, to introduce relevant evidence, to require the production of evidence, to compel the relevant testimony of the officials, agents, employees, or consultants of the LFA, to compel the testimony of other persons as permitted by law, and to question and/or cross examine witnesses. A complete verbatim record and transcript shall be made of such hearing.
 
12.5.2	Following the second public hearing, the Franchisee shall be provided up to thirty (30) days to submit its proposed findings and conclusions to the LFA in writing, and thereafter the LFA shall determine (i) whether an event of default has occurred; (ii) whether such event of default is excusable; and (iii) whether such event of default has been cured or will be cured by the Franchisee. The LFA shall also determine whether to revoke the Franchise based on the information presented or, where applicable, grant additional time to the Franchisee to effect any cure. If the LFA determines that the Franchise shall be revoked, the LFA shall promptly provide the Franchisee with a written decision setting forth its reasoning. The Franchisee may appeal such determination of the LFA to an appropriate court, which shall have the power to review the determination of the LFA de novo. The Franchisee shall be entitled to such relief as the court finds appropriate. Such appeal must be taken within sixty (60) days of the Franchisee’s receipt of the determination of the LFA.

12.5.3	The LFA may, at its sole discretion, take any lawful action that it deems appropriate to enforce the LFA’s rights under the Franchise in lieu of revocation of the Franchise.

12.6	Franchisee Termination:  The Franchisee shall have the right to terminate this Franchise and all obligations hereunder within ninety (90) days after the end of three (3) years from the Service Date of this Franchise, if at the end of such three (3) year period the Franchisee does not then in good faith believe it has achieved a commercially reasonable level of Subscriber penetration on its Cable System. The Franchisee may consider Subscriber penetration levels outside the Franchise Area in this determination. Notice to terminate under this Section 12.6 shall be given to the LFA in writing, with such termination to take effect no sooner than one hundred and twenty (120) days after giving such notice. The Franchisee shall also be required to give its then current Subscribers not less than ninety (90) days’ prior written notice of its intent to cease Cable Service operations.

13.	MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

13.1	Actions of Parties: In any action by the LFA or the Franchisee that is mandated or permitted under the terms hereof, such party shall act in a reasonable, expeditious, and timely manner.  Furthermore, in any instance where approval or consent is required under the terms hereof, such approval or consent shall not be unreasonably withheld, delayed, or conditioned.

13.2	Binding Acceptance: This Agreement shall bind and benefit the parties hereto and their respective heirs, beneficiaries, administrators, executors, receivers, trustees, successors, and assigns, and the promises and obligations herein shall survive the expiration date hereof.

13.3	Preemption: In the event that federal or state law, rules, or regulations preempt a provision or limit the enforceability of a provision of this Agreement, the provision shall be read to be preempted to the extent, and for the time, but only to the extent and for the time, required by law. In the event such federal or state law, rule, or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended, or otherwise changed so that the provision hereof that had been preempted is no longer preempted, such provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect,
 
and shall thereafter be binding on the parties hereto, without the requirement of further action on the part of the LFA.

13.4	Force Majeure: The Franchisee shall not be held in default under, or in noncompliance with, the provisions of the Franchise, nor suffer any enforcement or penalty relating to noncompliance or default, where such noncompliance or alleged defaults occurred or were caused by a Force Majeure.

13.4.1	Furthermore, the parties hereby agree that it is not the LFA’s intention to subject the Franchisee to penalties, fines, forfeitures, or revocation of the Franchise for violations of the Franchise where the violation was a good faith error that resulted in no or minimal negative impact on Subscribers, or where strict performance would result in practical difficulties and hardship being placed upon the Franchisee that outweigh the benefit to be derived by the LFA and/or Subscribers.

13.5	Notices: Unless otherwise expressly stated herein, notices required under the Franchise shall be mailed first class, postage prepaid, to the addressees below. Each party may change its designee by providing written notice to the other party.

13.5.1	Notices to the Franchisee shall be mailed to:


President
Verizon Pennsylvania Inc. 1717 Arch Street, Floor 17
Philadelphia, PA 19103

13.5.2	with a copy to:


Senior Vice President and General Counsel Video Services
Verizon Telecom One Verizon Way Room VC43E010
Basking Ridge, NJ 07920-1097

13.5.3	Notices to the LFA shall be mailed to:


Secretary/Treasurer Haycock Township 640 Harrisburg Road
Quakertown, PA  18951

13.6	Entire Agreement:  This Franchise and the Exhibits hereto constitute the entire agreement between the Franchisee and the LFA and supersedes all prior or contemporaneous agreements, representations, or understanding (whether written or oral) of the
 
parties regarding the subject matter hereof.  Any ordinances or parts of ordinances that conflict with the provisions of this Agreement are superseded by this Agreement.

13.7	Amendments: Amendments to this Franchise shall be mutually agreed to in writing by the parties.

13.8	No Third Party Beneficiaries:  Except as expressly provided in this Agreement, this Agreement is not intended to, and does not, create any rights or benefits on behalf of any Person other than the parties to this Agreement.

13.9	Captions:  The captions and headings of articles and sections throughout this Agreement are intended solely to facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions of this Agreement.  Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this Agreement.

13.10	Severability: If any section, subsection, sentence, paragraph, term, or provision hereof is determined to be illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction or by any state or federal regulatory authority having jurisdiction thereof, such determination shall have no effect on the validity of any other section, subsection, sentence, paragraph, term, or provision hereof, all of which will remain in full force and effect for the term of the Franchise.

13.11	Recitals: The recitals set forth in this Agreement are incorporated into the body of this Agreement as if they had been originally set forth herein.

13.12	Modification: This Franchise shall not be modified except by written instrument executed by both parties.

13.13	FTTP Network Transfer Prohibition: Under no circumstance including, without limitation, upon expiration, revocation, termination, denial of renewal of the Franchise, or any other action to forbid or disallow the Franchisee from providing Cable Services, shall the Franchisee or its assignees be required to sell any right, title, interest, use, or control of any portion of the Franchisee’s FTTP Network including, without limitation, the Cable System and any capacity used for Cable Service or otherwise, to the LFA or any third party. The Franchisee shall not be required to remove the FTTP Network or to relocate the FTTP Network or any portion thereof as a result of revocation, expiration, termination, denial of renewal, or any other action to forbid or disallow the Franchisee from providing Cable Services. This provision is not intended to contravene leased access requirements under Title VI.

13.14	Independent Review; Agreement: The LFA and the Franchisee each acknowledge that they have received independent legal advice in entering into this Agreement. In the event that a dispute arises over the meaning or application of any term(s) of this Agreement, such term(s) shall not be construed by the reference to any doctrine calling for ambiguities to be construed against the drafter of the Agreement.

13.15	Counterparts:  This Agreement may be executed in two or more counterparts, each of which shall be deemed an original, and the parties may become a party hereto by executing a counterpart hereof.  This Agreement and any counterpart so executed shall
 
be deemed to be one and the same instrument.  It shall not be necessary in making proof of this Agreement or any counterpart hereof to produce or account for any of the other counterparts.




[SIGNATURE PAGE FOLLOWS]
 
AGREED TO THIS	DAY OF	, 2008. TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, PENNSYLVANIA

By:	 	


Print:   	


Title:   	




SIGNATURES CONTINUE ON NEXT PAGE
 
VERIZON PENNSYLVANIA INC.




By:   	 William Petersen
President, Verizon Pennsylvania Inc.





EXHIBITS

Exhibit A: Municipal Buildings to be Provided Free Cable Service Exhibit B: Service Area
Exhibit C: Customer Service Standards
 
EXHIBIT A

MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS TO BE PROVIDED FREE CABLE SERVICE




Township Hall
640 Harrisburg School Road Quakertown, PA  18951

Fire Hall
850 Old Bethlehem Road Quakertown, PA  18951

Haycock Elementary School* 1019 Old Bethlehem Road Quakertown, PA  18951



* Subject to Section 3.3, Franchisee is only required to provide free Basic Service to the Haycock Elementary School after such time that the same is required of all other cable operators in the Service Area.
 
EXHIBIT B SERVICE AREA

The Service Area is shown in the map set forth below.

 
 
EXHIBIT C



CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS

These standards shall, starting twenty-four (24) months after the Service Date, apply to the Franchisee to the extent it is providing Cable Services over the Cable System in the Franchise Area.

SECTION 1: DEFINITIONS

A.	Respond:  The Franchisee’s investigation of a Service Interruption by receiving a Subscriber call and opening a trouble ticket, if required.

B.	Significant Outage: A significant outage of the Cable Service shall mean any Service Interruption lasting at least four (4) continuous hours that affects at least ten percent (10%) of the Subscribers in the Service Area.

C.	Service Call:  The action taken by the Franchisee to correct a Service Interruption the effect of which is limited to an individual Subscriber.

D.	Standard Installation:  Installations where the Subscriber is within two hundred
(200)	feet of trunk or feeder lines.

SECTION 2: TELEPHONE AVAILABILITY

A.	The Franchisee shall maintain a toll-free number to receive all calls and inquiries from Subscribers in the Franchise Area and/or residents regarding Cable Service. The Franchisee representatives trained and qualified to answer questions related to Cable Service in the Service Area must be available to receive reports of Service Interruptions twenty four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week, and other inquiries at least forty five (45) hours per week. The Franchisee representatives shall identify themselves by name when answering this number.

B.	The Franchisee’s telephone numbers shall be listed, with appropriate description
(e.g. administration, customer service, billing, repair, etc.), in the directory published by the local telephone company or companies serving the Service Area, beginning with the next publication cycle after acceptance of this Franchise by the Franchisee.

C.	The Franchisee may use an Automated Response Unit (“ARU”) or a Voice Response Unit (“VRU”) to distribute calls.  If a foreign language routing option is provided, and the Subscriber does not enter an option, the menu will default to the first tier menu of English options.

After the first tier menu (not including a foreign language rollout) has run through three times, if customers do not select any option, the ARU or VRU will forward the call to a queue for a live representative. The Franchisee may reasonably substitute this requirement with another method of handling calls from customers who do not have touch-tone telephones.
 
D.	Under Normal Operating Conditions, calls received by the Franchisee shall be answered within thirty (30) seconds. The Franchisee shall meet this standard for ninety percent (90%) of the calls it receives at all call centers receiving calls from Subscribers, as measured on a cumulative quarterly calendar basis. Measurement of this standard shall include all calls received by the Franchisee at all call centers receiving calls from Subscribers, whether they are answered by a live representative, by an automated attendant, or abandoned after thirty (30) seconds of call waiting.

E.	Under Normal Operating Conditions, callers to the Franchisee shall receive a busy signal no more than three percent (3%) of the time during any calendar quarter.

F.	At the Franchisee’s option, the measurements above may be changed from calendar quarters to billing or accounting quarters. The Franchisee shall notify the LFA of such a change at least thirty (30) days in advance of any implementation.

SECTION 3: INSTALLATIONS AND SERVICE APPOINTMENTS

A.	All installations will be in accordance with FCC rules, including but not limited to, appropriate grounding, connection of equipment to ensure reception of Cable Service, and the provision of required consumer information and literature to adequately inform the Subscriber in the utilization of Franchisee-supplied equipment and Cable Service.

B.	The Standard Installation shall be performed within seven (7) business days after the placement of the Optical Network Terminal (“ONT”) on the customer’s premises or within seven (7) business days after an order is placed if the ONT is already installed on the customer’s premises.

The Franchisee shall meet this standard for ninety five percent (95%) of the Standard Installations it performs, as measured on a calendar quarter basis, excluding customer requests for connection later than seven (7) days after ONT placement or later than seven (7) days after an order is placed if the ONT is already installed on the customer’s premises.

C.	At the Franchisee’s option, the measurements of above may be changed from calendar quarters to billing or accounting quarters. The Franchisee shall notify the LFA of such a change not less than thirty (30) days in advance.

D.	The Franchisee will offer Subscribers “appointment window” alternatives for arrival to perform installations, Service Calls, and other activities of a maximum four (4) hours scheduled time block during appropriate daylight available hours, usually beginning at 8:00 a.m. unless it is deemed appropriate to begin earlier by location exception.  At the Franchisee’s discretion, the Franchisee may offer Subscribers appointment arrival times other than these four
(4)	hour time blocks, if agreeable to the Subscriber. These hour restrictions do not apply to weekends.

SECTION 4: SERVICE INTERRUPTIONS AND OUTAGES

A.	The Franchisee shall notify the LFA of any Significant Outage of the Cable Service.
 
B.	The Franchisee shall exercise commercially reasonable efforts to limit any Significant Outage for the purpose of maintaining, repairing, or constructing the Cable System. Except in an emergency or other situation necessitating a more expedited or alternative notification procedure, the Franchisee may schedule a Significant Outage for a period of more than four (4) hours during any twenty four (24) hour period only after the LFA and each affected Subscriber in the Service Area have been given fifteen (15) days’ prior notice of the proposed Significant Outage. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Franchisee may perform modifications, repairs, and upgrades to the System between 12.01 a.m. and 6 a.m. which may interrupt service, and this Section’s notice obligations respecting such possible interruptions will be satisfied by notice provided to Subscribers upon installation and in the annual Subscriber notice.

C.	The Franchisee representatives who are capable of responding to Service Interruptions must be available to Respond twenty four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week.

D.	Under Normal Operating Conditions, the Franchisee must Respond to a call from a Subscriber regarding a Service Interruption or other service problems within the following time frames:

(1)	Within twenty four (24) hours, including weekends, of receiving Subscriber calls respecting Service Interruptions in the Service Area.

(2)	The Franchisee must begin actions to correct all other Cable Service problems the next business day after notification by the Subscriber or the LFA of a Cable Service problem.

E.	Under Normal Operating Conditions, the Franchisee shall complete Service  Calls within seventy two (72) hours of the time the Franchisee commences to Respond to the Service Interruption, not including weekends and situations where the Subscriber is not reasonably available for a Service Call to correct the Service Interruption within the seventy two
(72) hour period.

F.	The Franchisee shall meet the standard in Subsection E of this Section for ninety percent (90%) of the Service Calls it completes, as measured on a quarterly basis.

G.	At the Franchisee’s option, the above measurements may be changed from calendar quarters to billing or accounting quarters. The Franchisee shall notify the LFA of such a change at least thirty (30) days in advance of any implementation.

H.	Under Normal Operating Conditions, the Franchisee shall provide a credit upon Subscriber request when all Channels received by that Subscriber are out of service for a period of four (4) consecutive hours or more.  The credit shall equal, at a minimum, a proportionate amount of the affected Subscriber(s) current monthly bill. In order to qualify for the credit, the Subscriber must promptly report the problem and allow the Franchisee to verify the problem if requested by the Franchisee. If Subscriber availability is required for repair, a credit will not be provided for such time, if any, that the Subscriber is not reasonably available.

I.	Under Normal Operating Conditions, if a Significant Outage affects all Video Programming Cable Services for more than twenty four (24) consecutive hours, the Franchisee
 
shall issue an automatic credit to the affected Subscribers in the amount equal to their monthly recurring charges for the proportionate time the Cable Service was out, or a credit to the affected Subscribers in the amount equal to the charge for the basic plus enhanced basic level of service for the proportionate time the Cable Service was out, whichever is technically feasible or, if both are technically feasible, as determined by the Franchisee provided such determination is non- discriminatory. Such credit shall be reflected on Subscriber billing statements within the next available billing cycle following the outage.

SECTION 5: CUSTOMER COMPLAINTS

Under Normal Operating Conditions, the Franchisee shall investigate Subscriber complaints referred by the LFA within five (5) business days. The Franchisee shall notify the LFA of those matters that necessitate an excess of five (5) business days to resolve, but those matters must be resolved within fifteen (15) days of the initial complaint.  The LFA may require reasonable documentation to be provided by the Franchisee to substantiate the request for additional time to resolve the problem. For purposes of this Section, “resolve” means that the Franchisee shall perform those actions which, in the normal course of business, are necessary to investigate the Customer’s complaint and advise the Customer of the results of that investigation.

SECTION 6: BILLING

A.	Subscriber bills must be itemized to describe Cable Services purchased by Subscribers and related equipment charges. Bills shall clearly delineate activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates, credits, and aggregate late charges. The Franchisee shall, without limitation as to additional line items, be allowed to itemize as separate line items, Franchise fees, taxes, and/or other governmentally imposed fees. The Franchisee shall maintain records of the date and place of mailing of bills.

B.	Every Subscriber with a current account balance sending payment directly to the Franchisee shall be given at least twenty (20) days from the date statements are mailed to the Subscriber until the payment due date.

C.	A specific due date shall be listed on the bill of every Subscriber whose account is current. Delinquent accounts may receive a bill that lists the due date as upon receipt; however, the current portion of that bill shall not be considered past due except in accordance with Subsection 6.B. above.

D.	Any Subscriber who, in good faith, disputes all or part of any bill shall have the option of withholding the disputed amount without disconnect or late fee being assessed until the dispute is resolved provided that:

(1)	The Subscriber pays all undisputed charges;

(2)	The Subscriber provides notification of the dispute to the Franchisee within five (5) days prior to the due date; and

(3)	The Subscriber cooperates in determining the accuracy and/or appropriateness of the charges in dispute.
 
(4)	It shall be within the Franchisee’s sole discretion to determine when the dispute has been resolved.

E.	Under Normal Operating Conditions, the Franchisee shall initiate investigation and resolution of all billing complaints received from Subscribers within five (5) business days of receipt of the complaint. Final resolution shall not be unreasonably delayed.

F.	The Franchisee shall provide a telephone number and address on the bill for Subscribers to contact the Franchisee.

G.	The Franchisee shall forward a copy of any Cable Service related billing inserts or other mailing sent to Subscribers to the LFA upon request.

H.	The Franchisee shall provide all Subscribers with the option of paying for Cable Service by check or an automatic payment option where the amount of the bill is automatically deducted from a checking account designated by the Subscriber. The Franchisee may in the future, at its discretion, permit payment by using a major credit card on a preauthorized basis. Based on credit history, at the option of the Franchisee, the payment alternative may be limited.

I.	The LFA hereby requests that the Franchisee omit the LFA’s name, address, and telephone number from Subscriber bills as permitted by 47 C.F.R. § 76.952.

SECTION 7: DEPOSITS, REFUNDS, AND CREDITS

A.	The Franchisee may require refundable deposits from Subscribers 1) with a poor credit or poor payment history, 2) who refuse to provide credit history information to the Franchisee, or 3) who rent Subscriber equipment from the Franchisee, so long as such deposits are applied on a non-discriminatory basis. The deposit the Franchisee may charge Subscribers with poor credit or poor payment history or who refuse to provide credit information may not exceed an amount equal to an average Subscriber’s monthly charge multiplied by six (6). The maximum deposit the Franchisee may charge for Subscriber equipment is the cost of the equipment that the Franchisee would need to purchase to replace the equipment rented to the Subscriber.

B.	The Franchisee shall refund or credit the Subscriber for the amount of the deposit collected for equipment, which is unrelated to poor credit or poor payment history, after one year and provided the Subscriber has demonstrated good payment history during this period. The Franchisee shall pay interest on other deposits if required by law.

C.	Under Normal Operating Conditions, refund checks will be issued within the next available billing cycle following the resolution of the event giving rise to the refund (e.g., equipment return and final bill payment).

D.	Credits for Cable Service will be issued no later than the Subscriber’s next available billing cycle, following the determination that a credit is warranted, and the credit is approved and processed.  Such approval and processing shall not be unreasonably delayed.
 
E.	Bills shall be considered paid when appropriate payment is received by the Franchisee or its authorized agent. Appropriate time considerations shall be included in the Franchisee’s collection procedures to assure that payments due have been received before late notices or termination notices are sent.

SECTION 8: RATES, FEES, AND CHARGES

A.	The Franchisee shall not, except to the extent permitted by law, impose any fee or charge for Service Calls to a Subscriber’s premises to perform any repair or maintenance work related to the Franchisee equipment necessary to receive Cable Service, except where such problem is caused by a negligent or wrongful act of the Subscriber (including, but not limited to a situation in which the Subscriber reconnects Franchisee equipment incorrectly) or by the failure of the Subscriber to take reasonable precautions to protect the Franchisee’s equipment (for example, a dog chew).

B.	The Franchisee shall provide reasonable notice to Subscribers of the possible assessment of a late fee on bills or by separate notice.

SECTION 9: DISCONNECTION /DENIAL OF SERVICE

A.	The Franchisee shall not terminate Cable Service for nonpayment of a delinquent account unless the Franchisee mails a notice of the delinquency and impending termination prior to the proposed final termination.  The notice shall be mailed to the Subscriber to whom the Cable Service is billed. The notice of delinquency and impending termination may be part of a billing statement.

B.	Cable Service terminated in error must be restored without charge within twenty four (24) hours of notice.  If a Subscriber was billed for the period during which Cable Service was terminated in error, a credit shall be issued to the Subscriber if the Service Interruption was reported by the Subscriber.

C.	Nothing in these standards shall limit the right of the Franchisee to deny Cable Service for non-payment of previously provided Cable Services, refusal to pay any required deposit, theft of Cable Service, damage to the Franchisee’s equipment, abusive and/or threatening behavior toward the Franchisee’s employees or representatives, or refusal to provide credit history information or refusal to allow the Franchisee to validate the identity, credit history, and credit worthiness via an external credit agency.

SECTION 10: COMMUNICATIONS WITH SUBSCRIBERS

A.	All Franchisee personnel, contractors, and subcontractors contacting Subscribers or potential Subscribers outside the office of the Franchisee shall wear a clearly visible identification card bearing their name and photograph. The Franchisee shall make reasonable effort to account for all identification cards at all times. In addition, all Franchisee representatives shall wear appropriate clothing while working at a Subscriber’s premises. Every service vehicle of the Franchisee and its contractors or subcontractors shall be clearly identified as such to the public. Specifically, Franchisee vehicles shall have the Franchisee’s logo plainly visible.  The vehicles of those contractors and subcontractors working for the Franchisee shall
 
have the contractor’s/subcontractor’s name plus markings (such as a magnetic door sign) indicating they are under contract to the Franchisee.

B.	All contact with a Subscriber or potential Subscriber by a Person representing the Franchisee shall be conducted in a courteous manner.

C.	The Franchisee shall send annual notices to all Subscribers informing them that any complaints or inquiries not satisfactorily handled by the Franchisee may be referred to the LFA.

D.	All notices identified in this Section shall be by either:

(1)	A separate document included with a billing statement or included on the portion of the monthly bill that is to be retained by the Subscriber; or

(2)	A separate electronic notification.

E.	The Franchisee shall provide reasonable notice to Subscribers of any pricing changes or additional changes (excluding sales discounts, new products, or offers) and, subject to the foregoing, any changes in Cable Services, including channel line-ups. Such notice must be given to Subscribers a minimum of thirty (30) days in advance of such changes if within the control of the Franchisee, and the Franchisee shall provide a copy of the notice to the LFA including how and where the notice was given to Subscribers.

F.	The Franchisee shall provide information to all Subscribers about each of the following items at the time of installation of Cable Services, annually to all Subscribers, at any time upon request, and, subject to Subsection 10.E., at least thirty (30) days prior to making significant changes in the information required by this Section if within the control of the Franchisee:

(1)	Products and Cable Service offered;

(2)	Prices and options for Cable Services and condition of subscription to Cable Services. Prices shall include those for Cable Service options, equipment rentals, program guides, installation, downgrades, late fees, and other fees charged by the Franchisee related to Cable Service;

(3)	Installation and maintenance policies including, when applicable, information regarding the Subscriber’s in-home wiring rights during the period Cable Service is being provided;

(4)	Channel positions of Cable Services offered on the Cable System;

(5)	Complaint procedures, including the name, address, and telephone number of the LFA, but with a notice advising the Subscriber to initially contact the Franchisee about all complaints and questions;

(6)	Procedures for requesting Cable Service credit;
 
(7)	The availability of a parental control device;

 


privacy; and
 
(8)	Franchisee practices and procedures for protecting against invasion of
 

(9)	The address and telephone number of the Franchisee’s office to which complaints may be reported.

A copy of notices required in this Subsection 10.F. will be given to the LFA at least fifteen (15) days prior to distribution to Subscribers if the reason for notice is due to a change that is within the control of the Franchisee and as soon as possible if not within the control of the Franchisee.

G.	Notices of changes in rates shall indicate the Cable Service new rates and old rates, if applicable.

H.	Notices of changes of Cable Services and/or Channel locations shall include a description of the new Cable Service, the specific channel location, and the hours of operation of the Cable Service if the Cable Service is only offered on a part-time basis. In addition, should the channel location, hours of operation, or existence of other Cable Services be affected by the introduction of a new Cable Service, such information must be included in the notice.

I.	Every notice of termination of Cable Service shall include the following information:

(1)	The name and address of the Subscriber whose account is delinquent;

(2)	The amount of the delinquency for all services billed;

(3)	The date by which payment is required in order to avoid termination of Cable Service; and

(4)	The telephone number for the Franchisee where the Subscriber can receive additional information about their account and discuss the pending termination.
 
Revised 3/19/08


ORDINANCE NO. 108

AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AMENDING REQUIREMENTS OF ARTICLE IV, SECTION 403, TABLE OF USE REGULATIONS OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE OF 1975, AS AMENDED SEPTEMBER 26, 1994, TO PERMIT FORESTRY BY-RIGHT IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS, ADD DEFINITIONS, AND REVISE FORESTRY REGULATIONS.



WHEREAS, Section 1516 (53 P.S. Section 66516) of the Pennsylvania Second Class Township Code provides that the corporate powers of the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township (the “Board of Supervisors”) include the ability to plan for the development of the Township through Zoning, Subdivision, and Land Development Regulations under the Act of July 13, 1968 (P.L. 805, No. 247), known as the “Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code”;

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors on or about September 26, 1994, duly adopted Ordinance No. 71, revising and restating the Haycock Zoning Ordinance as adopted in 1975;

WHEREAS, Section 1601 of the Second Class Township Code provides that the Board of Supervisors may adopt Ordinances in which general or specific powers of the Township may be exercised, and, by the enactment of subsequent Ordinances, the Board of Supervisors may amend, repeal, or revise existing Ordinances (53 P.S. Section 66601);

WHEREAS, since its adoption, the Zoning Ordinance has from time to time been amended;

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors on, or about, September 5, 1995, duly adopted Ordinance No. 72, amending the Zoning Ordinance to permit Use A4, Forestry, by-right in all zoning districts, except in the VC-1 and VC-2 Districts where the use is prohibited;

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors finds and determines that Section 403 should be amended to permit forestry by-right in the VC-1 and VC-2, to comply with current requirements of Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code; and use regulations and definitions should be amended to more appropriately reflect preservation of a healthy forest environment, and to conform with the State Forest Management Program developed by Pennsylvania Bureau of Forestry.

NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the forgoing, be it ENACTED and ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, as follows:

SECTI ON 1:	Article II.  Definitions is revised to add the following definitions in alphabetical order (section numbering of Article II is revised accordingly):
 
Revised 3/19/08





Basal Area

The cross sectional area of the stem of a tree measured 4½ feet above grade (dbh).



Basal Area Per Acre

The sum of each tree’s basal area in a woodland divided by the number of acres within the woodland.

Even-age Management

Management of a forest stand where the range in tree age does not exceed 20% of the rotation length resulting in a forest consisting of trees of the same or nearly the same age.

Forest Management Plan

A written description with a map of a specific forestry operation prepared before the operation commences, which meets the requirements of Section 403.A4 of this Ordinance.

Forest Plan Preparer

A forester who has a minimum of four years experience in the field of forestry including the preparations of forestry plans.

Forest Technician

A person who is, at a minimum, a graduate of a two-year forest technician program established by the Society of American Foresters.

Forester

A person who is, at a minimum, a graduate of a four year college or university forestry curriculum accredited by the Society of American Foresters.

Skid Road

Main route for skidding logs from woods to the landing. Skid Trail
A temporary trail used for skidding logs from the site of felling to the main skid road.
 
Revised 3/19/08


Skidding

Dragging trees on the ground, by any means, from the stump to the landing. Slash
Debris left after  logging, including logs, chunks, bark, branches, stumps, and broken understory trees or brush.



Snags

A standing dead tree without branches or the standing portion of a broken off tree.  Snags may provide feeding and/or nesting sites for wildlife.

Uneven-age Management

Management of a forest stand to maintain or create and regenerate a forest that has three or more distinctly different age classes including regeneration.



SECTI ON 2:	Article IV, Section 403.A of the Zoning Ordinance is hereby amended as it applies to Use A4, Forestry, as follows:

	RP	RA	RD	FC	VC-1	SRC	SRL	SRM	SRH	VC-2	URL	PC	CC	SC	PI	EXT
A4	FORESTRY	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P

SECTI ON 3:	Article IV, Section 403.A4 is revised to read as follows: A4 Forestry
Forestry  is  the  management  of  forests  and  timberlands  through  developing,
cultivating, harvesting, transporting, and selling trees for commercial purposes, beyond tree cutting that is necessary and approved as part of development of land or uses. These provisions are intended to ensure that forestry occurs in accordance with accepted silvicultural practices, as provided in Section 107 of the State Municipalities Planning Code.

a.	Forestry is permitted by-right, provided that a Zoning Permit shall be required for forestry. The following activities shall not require a zoning permit and are not required to comply with Subsections b. or c.:

(1)	Removal of diseased or dead trees;

(2)	Removal of trees that are in such a condition or physical position as to constitute a danger to the structure or occupants of properties or a public right-of-way;
 
Revised 3/19/08



(3)	Removal of trees with a trunk diameter of less than 6 inches;

(4)	Removal of up to 5 trees with a trunk diameter greater than 6 inches on each acre of land per calendar year, provided such does not exceed 20 trees with a trunk diameter of 6 inches or more per lot per calendar year, and provided that such tree removal does not involve trees: a) on slopes of greater than 25 percent or b) on areas within 50 feet from the centerline of a perennial stream/watercourse or intermittent stream/watercourse.

(5)	For removal of trees as part of development, requirements of Section 504, Environmental Performance Standards, shall apply in place of this subsection.

(6)	Christmas Tree Farms in which trees are regularly replanted. This exception shall only apply to trees that were planted for harvest.

(7)	Tree nurseries in which live trees are removed for replanting on another site. This exception shall only apply to trees that were planted for harvest.

b.	A zoning permit application for forestry shall be accompanied by a forestry plan prepared by a Forester, Forest Technician, or Forest Plan Preparer.  The Zoning Officer shall consult with the Township Engineer or a forester retained by the Township to determine the adequacy of the forestry plan. Each plan must contain the following components:

(1)	The criteria for selection of trees to be removed must be clearly stated and must conform to a plan for sustainable use of the forest resource. Such plan shall describe how the health and diversity of the forest will be protected and the potential for future timber harvests maintained.

(2)	The forestry plan shall address all applicable erosion and sedimentation control and stream crossing regulations under Chapter 102, Erosion Control Rules and Regulations and Chapter 105, Dam and Waterway Management Rules and Regulations.

(3)	Forestry activities located within or discharging to any exceptional value or high quality watershed as classified by PADEP shall comply with all requirements of the PA Code, Chapters 92 and 93. The forestry plan shall specifically state how the applicant intends to comply with these regulations, and shall show the location of all perennial creeks and perennial watercourses.
 
Revised 3/19/08


(4)	The forestry plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:

	(a)	Design, construction, maintenance, and retirement of the access system, including haul roads, skid roads, skid trails, and landing;
	(b)	Design,  construction,  and  maintenance  of  water  control
		measures and structures such as culverts, broad-based dips,
		filter strips, and water bars;
	(c)	Design,  construction,  and  maintenance  of  stream  and
		wetland crossings;
	(d)	Property boundary for the tract on which the logging will occur and boundary of the proposed harvest area.
	(e)	A stand description for each stand located in the proposed
		harvest area  including number, species, and diameter of
		trees to be removed.
	(f)	Copies of  all required  permits shall be  submitted  as  an
		Appendix to the forestry plan.

(5)	
Each	
Forestry  Plan  shall  include  a  site  map  containing  the
following information:

(a)	Site location and boundaries, including both the boundaries of the property on which the timber harvest will take place and the boundaries of the proposed harvest area within the property;

(b)	Significant topographic features related to potential environmental problems;

(c)	Location of all earth disturbance activities such as roads, landings, and water control measures and structures;

(d)	Location of the crossings of all water bodies, including but not limited to, Waters of the Commonwealth/Waters of the United States; and

(e)	The general location of the proposed operation to municipal and state highways, including any accesses to those highways.

(6)	Proof of current general liability and/or worker’s compensation insurance.

(7)	Proof of PennDOT Highway Occupancy Permit or Township Driveway Permit for temporary access, as applicable. The application shall only be approved if the applicant demonstrates to
 
Revised 3/19/08


the satisfaction of the Township that the area street system is suitable in terms of structure, cartway width, geometry, safety, and capacity to accommodate the additional truck traffic.

(8)	Copy of County Conservation District “Letter of Adequacy” for the proposed erosion control facilities, including associated plans, reports, and other permits as required.

c.	The  following  requirements  shall  apply  to  all  forestry  operations,  in addition to the requirements for a zoning permit:

(1)	The landowner shall notify the Township at least five (5) working days prior to the commencement of operations and upon completion of all work prescribed under the forestry plan.

(2)	The forestry plan and all related permits shall be available at the forestry operation site.

(3)	Before any permitted logging operation begins, all trees which are to be felled in connection therewith, shall be clearly marked on the trunk and stump.

(4)	General operational requirements: The following requirements shall govern all forestry operations:

(a)	A “No Logging” buffer zone with a width of 25 feet shall be maintained on the property on which the logging operation is to be conducted along all public streets. The buffer shall be measured from the legal right-of-way. No trees shall be cut, removed, skidded or transported within the “No Logging” buffer zone except as necessary for access to the site from the public street.

(b)	A “Limited Logging” zone with a width of 50 feet shall be maintained on the boundary of the site on which the logging operation is to be conducted along abutting properties. Uneven-age management shall be practiced within the Limited Logging Zone where the residual stand must contain at least 70 square feet of basal area per acre consisting of trees 10 inches or greater in diameter at breast height.

(c)	A “No Logging” buffer zone with a width of 50 feet shall be maintained from the centerline of all perennial streams/watercourses. All earth disturbance related to forestry within this buffer zone shall be prohibited with the
 
Revised 3/19/08


exception of temporary stream/watercourse crossings permitted by PADEP. No equipment, skidders, dozers, or tracked or tired machines or vehicles shall be permitted within a no logging buffer zone except to permit crossing of watercourses. No trees shall be felled into a no logging buffer zone.

(d)	All temporary stream/watercourse crossings of a perennial or intermittent stream/watercourse shall be made with a temporary bridge. Skidding of trees, and the operation of any vehicle and equipment thru a perennial or intermittent stream/watercourse shall be prohibited.

(e)	Felling or skidding on, or across, any public street is prohibited without written approval of the Township or Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, whichever is responsible for maintenance of said street.

(f)	No tops or slash shall be left within 25 feet of any public street.

(g)	All tops and slash shall be lopped to a maximum height of 6 feet above the surface of the ground.

(h)	No tops or slash shall be left on or across a property boundary without the consent of the adjoining landowner.

(i)	Litter (trash) resulting from any forestry operation shall be cleaned up and removed from the site before it is vacated by the operator.

(j)	Any soil, stones and/or debris carried onto a public street must be removed immediately.

(k)	On slopes of greater than 25%, uneven-age management shall be practiced where the residual stand must contain 70 square feet of basal area per acre consisting of trees 10 inches or greater in diameter at breast height. No equipment, skidders, dozers, or tracked or tired machines or vehicles shall be permitted on slopes greater than 25%.

(l)	When the harvest is completed, both dirt roads used by the trucks and skid roads used to drag the logs from the woods to the loading area must be graded approximately to the original contours, and be seeded and mulched (hardwood or straw mulch) as necessary to establish stable groundcover.
 
Revised 3/19/08



(m)	Temporary stone tire cleaning entrance (when required as part of an approved erosion and sedimentation control plan) must be removed, topsoil replaced, and area graded to approximate original contour, and be seeded and mulched to establish stable groundcover.

(n)	The no logging buffer zone required by Subsection c.(4)(c) above along streams/watercourses shall be marked with survey tape, temporary non-destructive fencing or similar demarcation to prevent accidental incursion into the buffer zone with heavy equipment.

(n) Snags shall not be cut down unless the snag is a potential hazard to improvements (e.g. dwelling, outbuilding, etc.) on the property.

(5)	No tops or slash shall be left within a drainage swale.

(6)	The use of clear-cutting must be fully justified by a forestry plan prepared by a qualified professional, and shall comply with Subsection b. Detailed information concerning increased stormwater runoff, erosion control, and a plan to assure regeneration shall be provided. Clear-cutting shall not be allowed on contiguous areas greater than ½ acre. A full set of stormwater calculations shall be submitted to show that postdevelopment peak runoff will not exceed predevelopment peak runoff.

(7)	If forestry involves more than 2 acres, a minimum of 30 percent of the forest cover (canopy) shall be kept and the residual trees shall be well distributed to promote reforestation. The forestry plan shall provide for replanting where necessary to continue proper forest management.

(8)	Financial Security – Financial security shall be established in a manner acceptable to the Township to guarantee repair of all damage that may occur to public streets due to the forestry/logging operations, and to guarantee compliance with erosion and sedimentation control plans, compliance with stormwater management plans and restoration of the site upon completion of logging operations. Pursuant to 67 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 189, the Township may also require the landowner or operator to furnish a bond to guarantee the repair of roads. Financial security shall not be released until the Zoning Officer issues a written notification that all provisions of this Ordinance and the permit have been completed.
 
Revised 3/19/08



d.	Enforcement

(1)	Inspections. The Township Zoning Officer or other Township designated employee or consultant, may go upon the site of any forestry/logging operation before, during or after active forestry to:
1) review the Forestry Plan or any other required documents for compliance with this Ordinance; and 2) inspect the operation for compliance with the Forestry Plan and other onsite requirements of this Ordinance.

(2)	Violation Notices; Suspensions. Upon finding that a forestry/logging operation is in violation of any provisions of this Ordinance, the Township Zoning Officer shall issue the operator and landowner a written notice of violation describing each violation and specifying a date by which corrective action must be taken. The Township Zoning Officer may order the immediate suspension of any operation upon finding that: 1) corrective action has not been taken by the date specified in a notice of violation; 2) the operation is proceeding without a Forestry Plan; or 3) the operation is causing an environmental risk. Suspension orders shall be in writing, shall be issued to the operator and the landowner, and shall remain in effect until, as determined by the Township Zoning Officer, the operation is brought into compliance with this Ordinance, or other applicable statutes or regulations. The landowner or the operator may appeal an order or decision of the Zoning Officer in accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.

(3)	Penalties. Any landowner or operator who: 1) violates any provision of this Ordinance, or who fails to comply with a notice of violation or suspension order issued under Paragraph 2 of this subsection, shall be subject to a fine of not less than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00), nor more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), plus costs and attorney fees, in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. Each day of continued violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall constitute a separate offense.

(4)	Any operator who knowingly and willfully removes trees not designated for removal in the approved Forestry Plan or removes trees outside of the areas designated for removal by the Forestry Plan shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) per tree removed in violation of the provisions of the Forestry Plan and this Ordinance.
 
Revised 3/19/08


SECTI ON 4:	Partial Repealer

All other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, as amended, shall remain in full force and effect. All other Ordinances or provisions of the Zoning Ordinance inconsistent herewith or in conflict with any of the terms hereof are, to the extent of said inconsistencies or conflicts, hereby specifically repealed.

SECTI ON 5:	Savings Clause

In event any portion of this Ordinance is determined by a Court of Jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or unenforceable, it should not affect any of the other provisions of this Ordinance or of the Zoning Ordinance. All other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and this Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.

SECTI ON 6:	Effective Date


All provisions of this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect five (5) days after the approval and adoption.

ORDAINED AND ENACTED this ___     day of _	_	, 2008.

BOARD OF SUPERVISORS


__	_ Kathleen M. Babb, Chairwoman


__	_ Michael Lennard, Vice Chairman

 




ATTEST:

__ 	 Nancy M. Yodis, Township Secretary/Treasurer
 
__	_
Henry DePue, Member
 
Revised 3/19/08


ORDINANCE NO. 109

AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA AMENDING ARTICLE II, DEFINITIONS AND ARTICLE V SECTION 502, OF THE HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE OF 1975, AS AMENDED SEPTEMBER 26, 1994, TO REVISE REGULATIONS FOR MINIMUM LOT AREA AND MINIMUM BUILDING ENVELOPE AREA.

WHEREAS, Section 1516 (53 P.S. Section 66516) of the Pennsylvania Second Class Township Code provides that the corporate powers of the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township (the “Board of Supervisors”) include the ability to plan for the development of  the Township through Zoning, Subdivision, and Land Development Regulations under the Act of July 13, 1968 (P.L. 805, No. 247), known as the “Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code”;

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors on or about September 26, 1994, duly adopted Ordinance No. 71, revising and restating the Haycock Zoning Ordinance as adopted in 1975;

WHEREAS, Section 1601 of the Second Class Township Code provides that the Board of Supervisors may adopt Ordinances in which general or specific powers of the Township may be exercised, and, by the enactment of subsequent Ordinances, the Board of Supervisors may amend, repeal, or revise existing Ordinances (53 P.S. Section 66601);

WHEREAS, since its adoption, the Zoning Ordinance has from time to time been amended;

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors deems it in the best interest of the citizens of the Township to amend the Zoning Ordinance to revise provisions associated with minimum lot area and minimum building envelope area, to ensure that newly created lots have sufficient area to permit reasonable development of the property while protecting natural resources.

NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the forgoing, be it ENACTED and ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, as follows:

SECT ION 1:	Article II, Section 204 is hereby amended to add Subsection c, as follows:

c.	Building E nvelope Area: The two dimensional area of a lot within which a principal structure is permitted to be built, and which is defined by the required yards of the lot.

SECT ION 2:	Article V, Section 502 is hereby amended to revise Subsection e, and add a new Subsection f as follows:

e.	Minimum lot area – This column refers to the minimum area of land on which a use can be located. All uses, activities, and buildings on lots with natural features shall comply with the requirements of Section 504 (E nvironmental Performance Standards).

f.	Minimum building envelope area – For all new single family detached dwelling lots having a minimum lot area of two acres or greater created in the RP and RA Zoning Districts after the adoption of this Ordinance, each lot shall have a minimum contiguous building envelope area of 15,000 square feet, which does not contain
 
Revised 3/19/08



any resources requiring 100% protection (including floodplains, floodplain soils, lakes, ponds, watercourses, wetlands, and tree protection zone),  easements, buffer yards, or any other restrictions from development. For new residential lots in the SRH Zoning District created after adoption of this Ordinance, and new residential lots created in conjunction with a cluster or performance standard subdivision after adoption of this Ordinance, no portion of the minimum lot area shall contain resources requiring 100% protection (including floodplains, floodplain soils, lakes, ponds, watercourses, wetlands, and tree protection zone), easements, buffer yards, or any other restrictions from development. On all residential lots that contain resources requiring 100% protection (including floodplains, floodplain soils, lakes, ponds, watercourses, wetlands, and tree protection zone), the minimum building envelope area shall be measured from the limit of these resource protected lands, rather than from the lot line, so that required minimum yard areas are free of resources requiring 100% protection.

SECT ION 3:	Partial Repealer

All other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, as amended, shall remain in full force and effect. All other Ordinances or provisions of the Zoning Ordinance inconsistent herewith or in conflict with any of the terms hereof are, to the extent of said inconsistencies or conflicts, hereby specifically repealed.

SECT ION 4:	Savings Clause

In event any portion of this Ordinance is determined by a Court of Jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or unenforceable, it should not affect any of the other provisions of this Ordinance or of the Zoning Ordinance. All other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and this Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.

SECT ION 5:	Effective Date

All provisions of this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect five (5) days after the approval and adoption.

ORDAINED AND ENACTED this	day of	, 2008.

BOARD OF SUPERVISORS


 		_ Kathleen M. Babb, Chairwoman


 		_ Michael Lennard, Vice Chairman


 



ATTEST:
 
 	_
Henry DePue, Member
 


Nancy M. Yodis, Township Secretary/Treasurer
 
Revised 3/19/08
 
Revised 3/19/08
 
Revised 6/3/08



ORDINANCE NO.  	

AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, WHICH AMENDS ARTICLE IV, SECTIONS 404 AND 405, AND ARTICLE XI, SECTION 1108 OF THE HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE OF 1975 AS AMENDED SEPTEMBER 26, 1994, TO ESTABLISH STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS FOR WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS WITHIN THE TOWNSHIP.


WHEREAS, Section 1516 (53 P.S. Section 66516) of the Pennsylvania Second Class Township Code provides that the corporate powers of the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township (the “Board of Supervisors”) include the ability to plan for the development of the Township through Zoning, Subdivision, and Land Development Regulations under the Act of July 13, 1968 (P.L. 805, No. 247), known as the “Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code”;

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors on or about September 26, 1994, duly adopted Ordinance No. 71, revising and restating the Haycock Zoning Ordinance as adopted in 1975;

WHEREAS, Section 1601 of the Second Class Township Code provides that the Board of Supervisors may adopt Ordinances in which general or specific powers of the Township may be exercised, and, by the enactment of subsequent Ordinances, the Board of Supervisors may amend, repeal, or revise existing Ordinances (53 P.S. Section 66601);

WHEREAS, since its adoption, the Zoning Ordinance has from time to time been amended;

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors finds it is in the interest of the Township and its citizens to amend the Zoning Ordinance to make provisions for the establishment of standards and regulations for wind energy systems within the Township;

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors finds and determines that this Zoning Ordinance Amendment is consistent with the Township Comprehensive Plan and the Community Development Objective stated therein and in the Zoning Ordinance.

NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the forgoing, be it ENACTED and ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, as follows:

SECTION 1:	Article IV, Section 403, Table of Use Regulations is hereby amended by adding Use H18, Wind Energy System, which is permitted by right in all zoning districts, as follows:

	R
P	R
A	R
D	F
C	VC-
1	SR
C	SR
L	SR
M	SR
H	VC-
2	UR
L	P
C	CC	S
C	PI	EX
T
H18 Wind Energy
System	
P	
P	
P	
P	
P	
P	
P	
P	
P	
P	
P	
P	
P	
P	
P	
P

SECTION 2:	Article IV, Section 404 of the Zoning Ordinance is hereby amended to add Use H18, Wind Energy System:

H18  Wind Energy System

A device, which includes a structure and associated mechanism(s) and supporting components, which is installed above ground for the purpose of generating electrical energy, and may include, but not be limited to, wind driven turbines, and wind mills.
 
Revised 6/3/08



a.	Such use shall be accessory to Use  B1,  Single  Family  Detached  Dwelling, only.

b.	Minimum lot area: two (2) acres.

c.	Wind energy system shall be located no less than 100 feet (or 1.1 times the height of the device, whichever is greater) from a side or rear property line, no less than 100 feet (or 1.1 times the height of the device, whichever is greater) from overhead utility lines, and no less than 100 feet (or 1.1 times the height of the device, whichever is greater) from a street line. A device may be located within the front yard, provided that it is located to the side of the dwelling.

d.	There shall be a maximum of one device on a single parcel, or multiple parcels in same ownership, and shall not exceed that which will produce 10 KW of output, as determined by the public utility providing electric service to Haycock Township.

e.	Maximum height of the structure, including all moving and rotating parts, shall be 72 feet, measured from the undisturbed ground elevation at the base of the device, to the highest point of the arc of the blade, or to the top of the tower, whichever is greater.  If a device is attached to an existing structure, then the maximum height of the attached wind energy device shall not exceed 72 feet, including the height of the existing structure. Exceptions to building height, as specified in Section 529, do not apply to wind energy systems.

f.	Minimum distance between the undisturbed ground at the base of the device and any protruding blade shall be 15 feet, as measured at the lowest point of arc of the blades.

g.	All ground mounted electrical and control equipment shall be labeled or secured to prevent unauthorized access. The tower shall not provide steps or a ladder readily accessible to the public for a minimum height of 8 feet above the ground surface.

h.	Operation of a device shall comply with nuisance standards of Article V of the Zoning Ordinance.

i.	No artificial lighting (unless  required  by  the  Federal  Aviation  Administration), signage, or any forms of advertising shall be utilized or attached to the wind energy system.

j.	Design and location of a wind energy system shall consider, to the greatest extent possible, the aesthetics of the surrounding environment. In no case shall a device be attached to a structure listed on the Registry of Historic Structures. Township may require submission of illustrations and photos depicting the color, size, shape, and architectural features of the proposed device; and submission of color photographs of the proposed tower location taken from view of all adjoining properties and roads. All utility lines, including electrical wires other than wires necessary to connect the wind generator to the tower wiring, the tower wiring to the disconnect junction box, and the grounding wires, must be installed underground in accordance with the prevailing standards of the servicing utility company.

k.	Any wind energy system that is defective, or has been abandoned, that is deemed to be  unsafe by the Township Building  Code  Official  shall  be  required  to  be repaired by  the owner to meet federal, state, and local safety standards, or be removed by the  property owner within six months of written notification from the Township.  If the owner fails to remove or repair the defective or abandoned wind energy system, the  Township may pursue a legal action to have the  system removed at the owner’s expense.
 
Revised 6/3/08


l.	A plot plan of the parcel on which the facility will be located shall be submitted, which identifies property lines, lot area, location of existing natural and manmade features, location of the proposed wind energy device, ownership information for adjoining properties, and setback measurements from property and street lines.

m.	A wind energy system, including tower, shall comply with all applicable state construction and electrical codes, and the National Electrical Code. Prior to issuance of a building/zoning permit for installation of the device, applicant must submit to the Township all documentation required by the Township Building Code Official to verify that the design of the device complies with the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code (UCC), including, but not limited to, documentation of the structural integrity of the foundation, base, tower, and all appurtenant structures; and electrical design. Design information must be certified by a licensed professional engineer in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and/or equipment manufacturer.

SECTION 3:	Partial Repealer

All other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, as amended, shall remain in full force and effect. All other Ordinances or provisions of the Zoning Ordinance inconsistent herewith or in conflict with any of the terms hereof are, to the extent of said inconsistencies or conflicts, hereby specifically repealed.

SECTION 4:	Savings Clause

In event any portion of this Ordinance is determined by a Court of Jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or unenforceable, it should not affect any of the other provisions of this Ordinance or of the Zoning Ordinance. All other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and this Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.

SECTION 5:	Effective Date

All provisions of this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect five (5) days after the approval and adoption.

ORDAINED AND ENACTED this	day of	, 2008.

BOARD OF SUPERVISORS



Kathleen M. Babb, Chairwoman



Michael Lennard, Vice Chairman



Henry DePue, Member

ATTEST:


Nancy M. Yodis, Township Secretary/Treasurer
 
Revised 6/3/08
 
ORDINANCE NO. 111

AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK,
BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA MODIFYING THE COMPENSATION RATE OF THE TAX COLLECTOR OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP



WHEREAS, Section 5511.35 of the Local Tax Collection Law establishes and fixes the compensation (salary, wages or a commission) of a tax collector in a second class township with less than three thousand residents at an amount not to exceed 10% of the amount of tax collected (72 P.S. § 5511.35);

WHEREAS, Section 3205 of the Second Class Township Code authorizes that the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors may by resolution levy annual taxes, in accordance with the annual budget and township revenues and expenditures, upon all real property within the township made taxable for township purposes, as ascertained by the last adjusted valuation for county purposes, at a annual tax not exceeding 14 mills for general township purposes (53 P.S. § 68205);

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors intends by separate enactment to increase the annual tax levy upon all real estate within Haycock Township beginning January 2009, from 1.25 mills to 2.5 mills, thereby collecting twice the tax as previous collected; and

WHEREAS, the current rate of compensation for the Tax Collector for Haycock Township is 5% of tax amount collected. The Board of Supervisors intends to reduce this compensation rate to 2.5% of tax amount collected effective beginning with the 2010 term of the Tax Collector for Haycock Township who will be elected at the municipal election in November 2009.

NOW THEREFORE, be it RESOLVED and ENACTED, by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, as follows:

1.	Beginning with the 2010 term of the Tax Collector for Haycock Township, who will be elected at the municipal election in November 2009, the rate of compensation of the Tax Collector for Haycock Township shall be 2.5% of tax amount collected by the Tax Collector of Haycock Township which is in accordance with section 35 of the Local Tax Collection Law (72 P.S. § 5511.35).

2.	All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.

3.	The provisions of this Ordinance are declared to be severable. If any sentence, clause, section or part of this Ordinance is for any reason determined  to  be  unconstitutional,  illegal  or  invalid,  such  unconstitutionality,
 
illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this Ordinance. It is hereby declared as the intent of this authority that such remainder shall be and shall remain in full force and effect.


4.	All provisions of this Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon adoption of this Ordinance.

 


2009.
 
ENACTED and ORDAINED	this   	
 
day of   	
 
A.D.
 


HAYCOCK TOW NSHIP
ATTEST:	BOARD OF SUPERVISORS


Nancy M. Yodis, Secretary	Kathleen M. Babb, Chair




Henry Depue, Vice Chair




Michael Lennard



























U:\ TWC Clients\ HAYCOCK\ Ordinance\Tax Collector -  Modification to Compensation\ Ordinance\Ordinance Modification of Tax Collector  Compensation.11.18.08.doc




2
 
ORDINANCE NO.  	




AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AUTHORIZING THE ENTERING INTO OF A CABLE FRANCHISE AGREEMENT GRANTING A NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE TO COMCAST OF SOUTHEAST PENNSYLVANIA LLC, TO CONSTRUCT, INSTALL, MAINTAIN,
EXTEND, ANDOPERATE A CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM
IN THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK.



WHEREAS, the Township of Haycock is a duly organized Township in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania;



WHEREAS, the Township of Haycock is authorized to grant one or more nonexclusive,  revocable,  franchises  to  construct,  operate  and  maintain  within  the Township a system for providing “Cable Service”;



WHEREAS, Comcast of Southeast Pennsylvania, LLC desires to provide cable television and other telecommunication services in the Township;



WHEREAS, the Township of Haycock wishes to grant Comcast of Southeast Pennsylvania, LLC, a nonexclusive franchise to construct, install, maintain, extend, and operate a cable communications system in the Township of Haycock, in accordance with Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, 47 U.S.C. §521 et. seq.;



WHEREAS, the Township of Haycock, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, has considered the adoption of a cable television franchise agreement; and



WHEREAS, the Township of Haycock and Comcast of Southeast Pennsylvania, LLC, have reached agreement on the terms and conditions of said franchise.



NOW, THEREFORE, the Township of Haycock Board of Supervisors hereby enacts into ordinance this Cable Television Franchise Agreement between Haycock Township and Comcast of Southeast Pennsylvania, LLC as herein provided.
 

All provisions of this Ordinance shall be in force and effect five days after approval and adoption.

 
ORDAINED AND ENACTED this_	day of  	
 
, 200_.
 



BOARD OF SUPERVISORS HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP

 
ATTEST:

Nancy M. Yodis, Secretary
 


Kathleen M. Babb, Chair, Chair
 

Michael Lennard, Vice Chairman Henry Depue, Member
For: COMCAST OF SOUTHEAST PENNSYLVANIA, LLC

This  Agreement  proposed  for  acceptance  by  COMCAST  OF  SOUTHEAST PENNSYLVANIA, LLC  is  subject  to  applicable federal,  state, and  local  law.  The EFFECTIVE DATE of this Agreement, recognized as being the date of ordination and enactment of an Ordinance duly adopted by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, Bucks County.

COMCAST OF SOUTHEAST PENNSYLVANIA, LLC



By:		 	 Authorized Official
 
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK AND COMCAST OF SOUTHEAST PENNSYLVANIA, LLC.
ncl	:;_ ooCJ
This agreement made this  )_,  -	day of	/:Jo VE.Nl J3c--(L..:, by and
between Haycock Township, a Township of the Second Class in Bucks County with its
principal offices located at 640 Harrisburg School Rd, Quakertown, Pa 18951 (hereinafter referred to as "Township").

AND

Comcast of Southeast Pennsylvania, LLC, its successors and assigns, with an office location at SS Industrial Drive, Ivyland, PA 18974 (hereinafter referred to as "Grantee" or "Comcast").

WITNESSETH:

WHEREAS, the purpose of this Franchise Agreement is to ensure quality Cable Service in compliance with FCC technical standards and requirements; and

WHEREAS, the Township is desirous of granting Grantee renewed permission to construct, operate and maintain a distribution system for video, audio, and other lawful services throughout the Township of Haycock, and setting forth terms and conditions; and

WHEREAS, the Township has also considered and analyzed the plans of Grantee for the continued operation of a Cable System to provide Cable Service and found Grantee's technical ability, financial condition, and character to be adequate and feasible in view of the cable-related needs and requirements of the Township; and

WHEREAS, the Township has determined that it is in the best interest of, and consistent with, the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Haycock Township to grant a non-exclusive Franchise to Grantee to operate a cable television and cable communications system within the confines of the Township and on the terms and conditions set forth; and

WHEREAS, the Township hereby awards Grantee a non-exclusive Franchise for the occupation and/or use of the public way within Haycock Township for the construction, operation and maintenance of a Cable System, which shall remain in effect for ten (10) years from the date of execution of this Agreement; and

WHEREAS, Grantee hereby accepts this award of a non-exclusive Franchise and has agreed to be bound by the conditions hereinafter set forth; and

WHEREAS, Grantee agrees to construct, operate and maintain its Cable System in accordance with applicable federal law and as set forth herein.
 
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the granting of a Franchise pursuant to this Agreement, the Grantee hereby promises to comply with the provisions herein.  In consideration of the Grantee's promises, the Township hereby grants to the Grantee a Franchise pursuant to this Agreement and in accordance with the following terms and conditions.



SECTION 1:	DEFINITIONS

For the purpose of this Agreement, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein.  When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense included the future; words used in the singular include the plural number.  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.

a.	GROSS REVENUES means all revenue of Grantee or any Affiliate derived from the operation of the Cable System to provide Cable Service in whatever form and from all sources within the municipal boundaries of the Township.  Gross Revenues includes, by way of illustration and not limitation, revenue from the following: fees charged to Subscribers for any type of Cable Service; fees charged to Subscribers for any optional, premium, per channel or per-program Cable Services; revenue from the sale or carriage of other Cable Services; charges for installation, additional outlets, relocation, disconnection,
reconnection, and changes in service; fees for leased access channels; revenue and/or other payments received from programmers as consideration for carriage of programming on the System; fees for video-on-demand;  charges for rental of any and all Cable Service subscriber equipment, including, but not limited to, converters and remote controls; advertising revenues; revenues from home shopping channels; sales commissions; revenue from interactive services; sales of hardcopy program guides; all music services; franchise fees; and any revenue received from the provision of any lawful Cable Service.	The following revenues shall not be included within the meaning of Gross Revenues: (1) revenue of any Affiliate which is a .cable channel supplier of programming and which supplies programming on a national basis to both the Grantee and to other cable  operators which are not Affiliates; (2) the revenue of the Grantee or any Affiliate from the operation of a facility of a common carrier which is subject in whole or in part to the provisions of Title 11 of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, and for which there is no forbearance, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of Section 621(c) of the Cable Act) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; and (3) interest income.  Gross Revenues from advertising received by Grantee or by any Affiliate, shall be prorated based upon the proportion of the number of Township subscribers as compared to the number of total subscribers to which such advertising is delivered by Grantee
and its Affiliates. "Gross Revenues" shall include amounts earned in any period, regardless of: (i) whether the amounts are paid in cash, in trade, or by means of
 
some other benefit to Grantee or its Affiliates; (ii) whether the goods or services with which the revenue is associated are provided at cost or the revenue amount can be matched against an equivalent expenditure; (iii) how the amounts are characterized, separately identified, or accounted as being for goods, services or fees to be paid to government entities; and/or (iv) whether the amounts are initially recorded by Grantee or its Affiliates. "Gross Revenues" shall not be a net of: (a) any operating expense; (b) any accrual, including, without limitation, any accrual for commissions; or (c) any other expenditure, regardless of whether such expense, accrual or expenditure reflects a cash payment. "Gross Revenues" shall not be double counted, "Gross Revenues" which have been included as Gross Revenues of both Grantee and an Affiliate but which sum is included in Gross Revenues due solely to a transfer of funds between Grantee and the Affiliate shall not be counted for purposes of determining Gross Revenues.



b.	CABLE SERVICE means the one-way transmission to customers of video programming and other programming services, together with customer interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such programming, or the utilization of any facilities or equipment of the Cable System to provide such services.

c.	CABLE SYSTEM A facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide Cable Service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple Subscribers within the Township, but such term does not include (A) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (B) a facility that serves Subscribers without using any public right-of-way; (C) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act, except that such facility shall be considered a Cable System (other than for purposes of Section 621 of the Cable Act) to the extent that facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to Subscribers unless the extent of that use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; (D) an open video system that complies with Section 653 of the Cable Act; or (E) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems.

d.	CHANNEL means a designated frequency band in the electromagnetic spectrum that is capable of carrying video, audio, or other programming signals, as such programming is defined by the FCC.

e.	GRANTEE means the Cable System operator, Comcast of Southeast Pennsylvania, LLC, to whom a Franchise is hereby granted for the construction, operation, maintenance and reconstruction of a Cable System and its lawful successors, transferees or assigns of said Cable System operator.
 
f.	CABLE ACT shall mean the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, Pub. L. No. 98-549, 98 Stat. 2779 (1984) (codified at 47 U.S.C. §§ 521-611 (1982 & Supp. V 1987)) as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. L. No. 102-385, and  the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as may, from time to time, be further amended.

g.	CONVERTER means an electronic device that allows for reception and selection of signals distributed over the Cable System frequencies that may not be readily receivable by an ordinary television receiver.

h.	FCC means Federal Communications Commission, or subsequent federal oversight entity.

i.	FRANCHISE shall mean the Grantee's right and authority to operate, own, extend, install and maintain a Cable System within the Township.

j.	FRANCHISE AGREEMENT or AGREEMENT means the Franchise Agreement as approved by the Township and Grantee set forth the rights and obligation of the parties under the Franchise.

k.	PERSON means any individual, trustee, partnership, association, corporation or other legal entity.

I.	PUBLIC WAY shall mean the surface of, and the space above and below, any public street, highway, freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard, sidewalk, parkway, way, lane, public way, drive, circle, or other public right-of - way, including, but not limited to, public utility easements, dedicated utility strips, or rights-of-way dedicated for compatible uses and any temporary or permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon or hereafter held by the Township in the Service Area which shall entitle the Grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing, operating, repairing and maintaining the Cable System. Public Way shall also mean any easement now or hereafter held by the  Township with the Service Area for the purpose of public travel, or for utility or public service use dedicated for compatible uses, and shall include other easements or rights-of-way as shall within their proper use and meaning entitle the Grantee to the use thereof for the purposes of installing or transmitting Grantee's Cable Service or other service over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to the Cable System.

m.	SECTION means any sections, subsection, line or provision of this Agreement.

n.	SERVICE AREA means that area within the present municipal boundaries of the Township, and shall include any additions thereto by annexations or other legal means, in which Grantee operates a Cable System to provide Cable Services.
 
o.	SUBSCRIBER means any person(s), firm(s), corporation(s) or other legal entity(ies) who, or which, elects to lawfully receive, for any purpose, Cable Service provided by Grantee in connection with the Cable System.

p.	TOWNSHIP shall mean Haycock Township, a political subdivision situated in the County of Bucks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or the lawful successor, transferee, or assignee thereof.




SECTION 2:	GRANT OF AUTHORITY

a.	Township hereby grants to Grantee the non-exclusive right, privilege and Franchise to have, acquire, construct, reconstruct, use, operate, own and maintain a Cable System in the Township.

b.	This Franchise shall have a term commencing upon full execution of this Franchise Agreement and shall continue in full force and effect for ten (10) years, at which time Grantee shall have the right to seek a franchise renewal
Agreement with the Township in accordance with 47 U.S.C. §546.

c.	Township hereby grants to Grantee the right and privilege to 'construct a Cable System over and below the Public Way within the franchise area to be owned and operated by Grantee and which has been dedicated for compatible uses, except that, in using such Public Way, Grantee shall ensure:

(i)	that the safety, functioning and appearance of the adjoining property and the convenience and safety of other persons not be adversely affected by the installation or construction of facilities necessary for a Cable System; and

(ii)	the cost of the installation, construction, operation or removal of such facilities shall be borne by Grantee or subscriber, or a combination of both; and

(iii)	that the owner of any adjoining property be justly compensated  by Grantee for any damages caused by the installation, construction, operation or removal of such Cable facilities by Grantee.

d.	In case of any disturbances of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other public improvements, Grantee shall, at its cost and expense, in a manner approved by the Township, replace and restore all such surfaces in as reasonably good a condition as existed before said work was commenced.
 
e.	Prior to commencing any phase of major construction to include rebuilds or upgrades of the cable system, Grantee shall submit documentation to Township clearly setting forth:

(i)	the work to be accomplished during the proposed construction phase and

(ii)	the precautions to be taken to ensure that property damage during installation is minimized.

f.	Construction shall not be permitted unless the Township, in accordance with the municipal code, approves the construction application, but such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, conditioned or delayed.

g.	In the event that Township determines that Grantee has not materially complied with the requirements in the aforementioned subsections or any other provision of this Agreement related to the construction of the Cable System, the Township is authorized to give written notice to Grantee to cease and desist from any further construction until said non-compliance issues are corrected.

h.	Grantee shall, in accordance with generally applicable regulations, have the authority to trim trees upon and hanging over streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public ways and places of the Township so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires, cables and facilities of the Grantee (see also Section 16 (g)).

i.	Grantee shall require a due diligence background check on each of its prospective employees and independent contractors who will be in contact with the public prior to his or her engagement.  Grantee shall require each subcontractor which is not a natural person to do same.  Grantee shall require a standard identification document for all employees, including employees of subcontractors, who will be in contact with the public.  In addition, Grantee shall use its best efforts to require clearly and prominently identify with the name of Grantee or "cable contractor'' on all field vehicles that operating under the authority of Grantee.  The Grantee shall use its best efforts to provide a contact number of the contractor and/or a Company contact number.



SECTION 3:	RIGHTS OF TOWNSHIP

a.	Township warrants to Grantee that it has the right to issue the Franchise and enter into this Franchise Agreement.  Any cable-related Ordinance approved by the Township shall give Grantee the opportunity to renew the Franchise pursuant to the procedures provided for under the Cable Act.

b.	The right is hereby reserved by the Township to adopt such additional general regulations in the exercise of its police power as it shall find necessary, provided
 
that such regulations shall be reasonable and not materially in conflict with the rights granted under this Franchise nor place an unreasonable economic or technical burden upon Grantee.

c.		The Franchise Agreement (including all of Grantee's particular,,righ . powers, protections, privileges, immunities and obligations associated there th as the same exist on the date hereof) shall constitute a legally binding contract between the Township and Grantee and as such cannot be amended, modified or changed by the Township without the consent of Grantee in any manner whatsoever, whether by ordinance, rule, regulation or otherwise, to impose on Grantee more stringent or burdensome requirements or conditions; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall preclude the Township from the proper exercise of its general regulatory and police powers, as described in Subsection (b) above.

d.		The Township or its officially designated representative shall have the right to inspect all pertinent records, books, and financial statements maintained by Grantee which relate directly to computation of Gross Revenues at Grantee's place of business upon reasonable notice and during normal business hours. The Township, and its officially designated representatives agree to treat any information disclosed as confidential and only to disclose it to employees, agents or representatives thereof that have a need to know or in order to enforce the provisions hereof.  Grantee shall not be required to provide subscriber
information in violation of Section 631 of the Cable Act.

e.	The Township, or its officially designated representatives or agents, upon reasonable notice in accordance with Section 18 (d) herein below, shall have the right to observe all construction or installation work performed subject to the provisions of this Agreement and to make such inspections, during regular business hours with an employee of the Grantee present, as it may find necessary to insure compliance with the terms of this Agreement and other applicable provisions of the law.	·

d.	Continuing administration of the provisions of this Agreement shall be the responsibility of the Township through its duly designated representative.



SECTION4:	SERVICE

The Township hereby adopts the customer service standards set forth in Part 76,
§76.309 of the FCC's rules and regulations, as amended. The Grantee is tiereby notified of the intent of the Township to enforce such rules, and Grantee shall comply in
all respects with the customer service requirements established by the FCC.




7
 
SECTION 5:	QUARTERLY FRANCHISE FEE

a.	Unless reduced, waived or increased by Haycock Township, Grantee shall pay to Haycock Township a franchise fee equal to five percent (5%) of annual "Gross Revenues." Said franchise fee may be increased or decreased at the sole and exclusive election of Haycock Township to an amount not to exceed the maximum amount allowed by law in such increments and in such amounts as the Township may elect, upon one hundred eighty (180) days prior written notice to the Grantee. Haycock Township reserves the right to change such amount one or more times and the failure to make any such election shall not constitute a waiver of the right hereunder.

b.	The franchise fee shall be assessed on a calendar year quarterly basis and shall be payable to the Township no later than forty-five (45) days after the expiration of the calendar quarter for which payment is due.  Specifically, payments shall be due and payable on or before May 15 (for the first quarter), August 15 (for the second quarter), November 15 (for the third quarter), and February 15 for the fourth quarter) of each year.  In the event that any franchise fee payment is not made on or before the applicable date, then interest shall be added at the rate of five (5%) per year of the amount of the franchise fee revenue due to the Township.  The interest rate shall be applied as described from the date such franchise fee payment was originally due.  Each franchise fee payment shall be accompanied by a written report containing an accurate statement of Comcast's Gross Revenues received for Cable Services for the quarter in connection with the operation of Comcast's Cable System and a brief report showing the basis for computation of fees.  The report shall contain a line item for every source of revenue received and the amount of revenue received from each source. The report shall be verified by a financial representative of Comcast.

c.	At the time of the fourth quarter payment of the Franchise Fee, Grantee shall furnish the Township with such other information, as the Township shall reasonably require with respect to the Grantee's operations within the Township during the prior year.

d.	Upon reasonable advance written notice, the Township may inspect the Grantee's books and records to determine the accuracy of the certified franchise fee statements submitted on behalf of the Grantee.  Such review of the records shall take place within twenty-four (24) months of any period questioned by the Township.   If the Township determines that Grantee has underpaid the amount due by five percent (5%) or more, then Grantee, in addition to repayments of all past due amounts, shall be responsible for the reasonable costs of the inspection. Once the franchise fees, plus any interest penalties, are paid by Grantee, the Township shall have no further rights to audit or challenge the franchise fee payment for that particular time period.
 
SECTION 6:	FRANCHISE AGREEMENT

a.	This Agreement is a contract between the Township and Grantee, and is binding upon both parties.  It is the intent of the parties that this Agreement (or any renewal hereof) may be subject to amendment from time to time to allow the Grantee to innovate and implement new Cable Services and developments or to agree to any terms allowed by law and for which each party agrees to bargain in good faith with the other party, subject to the mutual agreement of any proposed amendment.

b.	Grantee shall at all times endeavor to provide a state of the art, high-quality Cable Service in the Township that meets current and future technical capacity and service standards of the FCC.



SECTION 7:  CONSTRUCTION OF ADDITIONAL SYSTEM EXTENSIONS

a.  Grantee shall not be required to extend the Cable System into sparsely populated areas having fewer than twenty-five (25) homes per linear mile and is within one (1) mile of the existing Cable System.  Subject to this density requirement, Grantee shall offer Cable Service to all new homes or previously unserved homes located within two hundred (200) feet of the Grantee's distribution cable ("Normal Installation"). Grantee may choose to extend Cable Service to areas where there is a lesser density of dwelling units upon payment by requesting from households in such areas a charge, in addition to an installation charge, which does not exceed Grantee's actual and direct costs.  Notwithstanding the above, Grantee shall not be required to extend Cable Service in areas of the Township already served by another cable provider that owns and operates another cable system.



SECTION 8:  COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAWS AND ORDINANCES

a.	Grantee shall conform to all generally applicable laws, rules and regulations of the United States and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in the construction and operation of its Cable System and all generally applicable rules and regulations of the FCC.

b.	Grantee shall not refuse to hire or employ, nor bar, nor discharge from employment, nor discriminate against any person in compensation or terms, conditions or privileges of employment because of age, race, creed, color, national origin or gender.

c.	Any right, power, protection, privilege, immunity or obligation which is provided, granted or imposed on Grantee under or by virtue of the Cable Act shall remain inviolate and shall be available in Grantee notwithstanding any contrary provision of the Franchise Agreement, and the acceptance of the terms and conditions of
 
this Agreement shall not be construed as a waiver or release by Grantee of any right, power, protection, privilege, immunity or obligation under the Cable Act, the laws or Constitution of the United States or the laws and Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Nothing herein, nor Grantee's acceptance hereof, shall be construed to deny Grantee the right to Challenge the legality of any provision of the Franchise or to seek administrative and/or judicial review of any section or threatened action by the Township under, or arising out of this Agreement.



SECTION 9:	LIABILITY AND INDEMNIFICATION

a.	By its acceptance of this Agreement, Grantee specifically agrees that it shall defend and indemnify the Township, its officers, employees, agents, boards and commissions, acting in their official capacity, and hold them harmless from any and all damages, penalties or costs that may arise from a suit filed by a third
party due to the granting of the Franchise to Grantee, or any activities engaged in
by Grantee, provided that the Township shall give the Grantee written notice within the following:

i.	thirty (30) days of receipt of a claim or actions pursuant to this subsection or within

ii.	ten (10) days following service of legal process on the Township or its designated agent, of any actions related to this subsection but excluding any activities that are the result of negligence or deliberate acts of omissions of the Township, its officers, employees, agents, boards, or commissions.

b.	By its acceptance of this Agreement, Grantee specifically agrees that it shall pay all judgments or settlements due to damages and/or penalties for which it is liable under Subsection 8 (a).  In this connection, Grantee will provide the defense of any claims brought against the Township under this section of the Agreement. The Township shall give timely notification of any such claims, demands, actions, suits, proceedings, damages, or liability before Grantee shall be required to undertake the defense and to indemnify the Township.  Grantee shall have the right to defend, settle or compromise any claim or action arising hereunder. Expense of investigation, counsel and the amount of any settlement of any claim or suit will be paid by Grantee.  The Grantee shall have the sole authority to decide the appropriateness and the amount of any such settlement.

c.	By its acceptance of this Agreement, Grantee specifically agrees that it will maintain, through the term of this Franchise, and in any renewals thereof, liability insurance protecting Grantee and the Township with regard to all damages and/or penalties mentioned in Subsection 8 (a) in the following minimum amounts:
 
i.	Grantee shall maintain in full force and effect, at its own cost and expense, during the term of the Franchise, Commercial General Liability Insurance in the amount of two million dollars ($2,000,000) combined single limit for bodily injury, and property damage and Workers Compensation Insurance as required by law. The insurance carrier for the Grantee shall be solvent and authorized to conduct business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Any insurance policy issued in connection with this Franchise shall designate Haycock Township as an additional named insured. Such insurance shall be non-cancelable except upon thirty (30) days prior written notice to Haycock Township.

ii.	Worker's Compensation insurance on all employees engaged in installation or service of its equipment.

iii.	A Certificate of Insurance evidencing the insurance coverage herein provided shall be filed by Grantee with the Township, upon request.



SECTION 10:	TRANSACTIONS AFFECTING OWNERSHIP OF THE FRANCHISE

a.  Grantee shall not transfer this Franchise to any other person, firm, Grantee, corporation or entity - other than to the principal parents of Grantee, a parent corporation, a subsidiary, or affiliate corporation of a parent Grantee or subsidiary or affiliate corporation of Grantee, or any other firm or entity owned by Grantee - without the prior approval of the Township as to the financial and technical ability of the transferee to operate the System.  Such permission shall not be unreasonably withheld.  Within thirty (30) days of receiving the request for transfer, the Township shall, in accordance with FCC rules and regulations, notify Grantee in writing of the information it requires to determine the legal, financial and technical qualifications of the transferee.· If the Township has not taken action on Grantee's request for transfer within one hundred twenty (120) days after receiving such requested information, consent by the Township shall be deemed given.



SECTION 11:	FRANCHISE RENEWAL

a.	Renewal of this Franchise shall be governed by Section 626 of the Cable Act and the provisions of this Agreement.

b.	This Franchise may be renewed at any time by mutual agreement between Grantee and the Township in accordance with the formal or informal procedures provided by federal law.
 
c.	Either the Township or the Grantee may submit during the six (6) month period which begins with the thirty-sixth (36th) month before the Franchise expiration, a written notice requesting the initiation of a franchise renewal proceeding.

d.	Within six (6) months of such notification, the Township may undertake a proceeding, including a public notice and participation, for the purpose of (a) identifying future cable-related community needs, and (b) reviewing compliance of Grantee with the then current Franchise.  Such proceeding shall be completed within twelve (12) months of the date begun.  The Township shall submit a copy of its findings in writing to Grantee within said twelve (12) months.

e.	After receipt of the findings, Grantee may submit to the Township a proposal for renewal.  The Township may provide public notification of receipt of this proposal, and within four (4) months of receipt of such proposal shall either

i.	renew the Franchise, or

ii.	issue a preliminary assessment that the Franchise should not be renewed.

f.	If the Township preliminarily decides against renewal, and at Grantee's request, the Township shall begin an administrative proceeding, affording due process, including the rights to introduce evidence, subpoena evidence and examine witnesses to consider whether:

i.	Grantee has substantially complied with the material terms
of the existing Franchise Agreement and with applicable law;

ii.	the quality of Grantee's cable service, except for the mix or quality of cable services or other services provided over the system, has been reasonable in light of community needs;

iii.	Grantee has the financial, legal and technical ability to provide the cable services, facilities and equipment as set forth in this proposal; and

iv.	the proposal is reasonable to meet future cable-related community needs and interests, taking into account the cost of meeting such needs.

g.	The Township shall issue a written decision granting or denying the proposal for renewal based solely on the record of the proceeding.  A certified copy of such decision shall be furnished by the Township to Grantee.

h.	If such decision is to deny renewal, reasons therefore shall be stated. The Township shall give Grantee notice of and an opportunity to cure violations or
 
problems in accordance with the provisions outlined in Section 12 of this Franchise.

i.		If Grantee's proposal for renewal has been denied by a final decision of the Township, or if Grantee has been adversely affected by a failure of the Township to act in accordance with the procedural requirements of this section, Grantee may seek review of such final decision thorough any court of competent jurisdiction.

j.	If the current Franchise Agreement expires by its own term before the Township and Grantee have reached agreement on the terms and condition of a renewal Franchise or before completion of the formal renewal procedures set forth above, upon mutual agreement between the Grantee and the Township, may extend the expiration date of the current Franchise Agreement until either a new Franchise has been granted or the Township's denial has been upheld by a court of last resort.



SECTION 12:	REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE

a.	The Township shall have the right to initiate revocation proceedings for a knowing and substantial breach of any of the material terms and conditions of this Franchise Agreement by Grantee. A revocation shall be declared only by the Township Board of Supervisors after an appropriate public hearing that shall afford Grantee due process and full opportunity to be heard. Said revocation shall not be effective until after written notice of the breach, setting forth the grounds for revocation, has been served upon Grantee by certified mail, return receipt requested, and Grantee shall not have cured the breach
within ninety (90) days, or shall have failed to commence to cure said breach as soon as reasonably practicable, if such breach cannot be cured within ninety
(90) days after notice.

b.	Prior to any such revocation, Grantee shall have the right to challenge the Township's allegations before an impartial administrative fact finder which challenge shall stay the time periods specified in Subsection 11(a).  In any such administrative proceeding, both Grantee and the Township shall have the right to introduce evidence, to require production of evidence and to question witnesses in accordance with the standards of the process and fair hearing applicable to administrative hearings in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Either party may thereafter seek judicial review in a court of competent jurisdiction.   , All costs associated with the administrative proceedings or the judicial review, including reasonable attorney's fees, shall be borne by the  non­ prevailing party.

c.	Grantee shall not be in violation of this Franchise and no revocation shall be effected if Grantee is prevented from performing its duties and obligations or observing the terms and conditions of this Agreement by any Acts of God, labor
 
disputes, manufacturers' or contractors' inability to timely provide personnel or material or other causes of like or different nature force majeure beyond the control of Grantee.



SECTION 13:	RATES

a.	The rates charged by Grantee for installations, the rental and sale of equipment, and the provision of any and all Cable Services shall be as determined by Grantee in its sole discretion, except insofar as federal law in and applicable FCC rate regulations permit the Township to regulate certain of said rates.

b.	The Township shall not regulate rates for video programming offered on a per­ channel or per-program basis.

c.	Grantee shall provide notice to the Township and to affected subscribers of an increase in the rate of charge for any Cable Service.  The notice shall be in writing and shall specify the service or services affected, the new rate, and the effective date thereof.  Notice to subscribers affected by the rate increase shall be provided at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of the rate change.  This section shall not apply to pay-per-view programming.

d.	Grantee may require subscribers to pay for each month of service in advance at the beginning of each month.

e.	Nothing contained in this Agreement shall be deemed to restrict or prohibit Grantee from pursuing such legal remedies to collect past due debts owed to it by subscribers, including the reasonable costs and expenses incurred in pursuing such remedies, such as collection fees, attorney's fees and trip charges.

f.	Grantee shall not, as to rates, charges, services, service facilities, rules, regulations, or in any respect make or grant any undue preference or disadvantage on the basis of race, creed, national origin, religion, color, gender.· or age.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the temporary reduction or waiving of rates or charges in conjunction with valid promotional campaigns; or the offering of rate discounts for Cable Service to Persons or organizations of similar classes, under similar circumstances and conditions; or the offering of discounts to senior citizens.



SECTION 14:	SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS

a.	Grantee shall use reasonable efforts in good faith to provide to subscribers as wide a variety and number of services as is feasible in accordance with federal law.
 
b.	Grantee shall use materials of good and durable quality and all work involved in the construction, installation, maintenance, and repair of the Cable System
shall be performed in a safe, thorough and reliable manner.

c.	Upon request, Grantee shall, without charge, provide basic Cable Service to one (1) outlet in each municipal building, police and fire station, emergency medical station, each public, private and parochial school building, and each public library, if situated within the Grantee's service area currently or at that time in the future; that is located within two hundred (200) feet of Grantee's distribution system and is able to be connected with a normal aerial installation. Grantee shall be permitted to recover its labor, material and monthly service costs to provide service to more than one outlet in each such building, or for other than normal installation.  Users of such outlet shall hold Grantee harmless from any and all liability or claims arising out of their use of such outlets, including but not limited to, those arising from copyright liability.

d.	Grantee's Cable System shall be built with a bandwidth of no less than 750 MHz with addressable technology of no less than one hundred twenty-five
(125) video channels received for digital and/or analog transmission and shall allocate sufficient portion of said bandwidth capable of two-way Cable Services. Notwithstanding, Grantee reserves the right to alter, adjust, modify, rebuild, upgrade, redesign, or otherwise reconfigure the Cable System at any time during the term of the Agreement, in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement; however, Grantee agrees that no alteration, adjustment, modification, rebuild, upgrade, redesign, or other reconfiguration of the Cable System shall have the effect of reducing the technical capabilities of the Cable System from those that exist on the Effective Date of this Agreement.

e.	On the effective date of this Agreement, Grantee's system shall be capable of telecasting digital technology by utilizing digitally compressed signal technology.

f.		Reserved EG Access Channel Capacity.  In accordance with Section 611 of the Cable Act and if Township and/or school facilities are situated in the Grantee's Service Area currently or at that time in the future, Grantee shall reserve capacity for the use of up to two (2) dedicated channels, one for an "Educational Access Channel" for non-commercial, educational purposes for use by local public or non-profit, private school (K-12) authorities under the sanction of the Township; and/or one for a "Governmental Access Channel" for non-commercial, governmental purposes for use by the Township.  The Township may activate one or both of the reserved "EG" Access Channels during the term of this Franchise Agreement by providing Grantee with written notice one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the date it intends to activate any or all of the reserved access capacity.  In providing use of any Access Channels, Grantee reserves its external cost rights, and does not relinquish its ownership or ultimate right of control over a channel by activating it for Access
 
Channel use.  The Township and/or its designees utilizing the EG Access Channels, may select, and Grantee at its one-time sole cost and expense shall connect to the Cable System via return lines, a maximum of two (2) remote origination points- one to the transmission site of the Educational Access Channel, and one to the transmission site of the Governmental Access Channel
-- if located within the Grantee's Service Area.


g.   Upon the conversion of cable signals from an analog format, Grantee shall offer EG channels to Subscribers on the lowest level of Digital Cable Service available during the term of the Agreement.



SECTION 15:	CONSTRUCTION AND INSTALLATION

a.	Wherever a telephone or other utility Grantee has erected poles, Grantee shall be expected to make a good faith attempt to enter into a joint use agreement for those poles.  Grantee shall not set new poles, except where no pole exists or use of an existing utility pole is not practicable due to excessive
rearrangements or other conditions, and such pole construction shall be subject
to approval by the Township.

b.	Grantee shall apply for all required permits and shall not undertake any construction without receipt of such permits, issuance of which shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed by the Township.   Notwithstanding the requirements herein, Grantee shall not be required to obtain a permit for individual drop connections to Subscribers, servicing or installation of pedestals or other ancillary facilities, or other instances of routine maintenance or repair
to its Cable System.	The Township shall issue all such permits at no cost to
Grantee, such cost being covered by Grantee's franchise fee.

c.	The construction, installation and maintenance of the Cable System shall be effectuated by Grantee in a manner that is consistent with the laws, ordinances and construction standards of the State of Pennsylvania, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, the National Electrical Safety Code, National Electrical Code, FCC and the Standards of Good Engineering Practices for Measurement of Cable Television Systems of the National Cable Television Association to the extent applicable.

d.	All of Grantee's construction, installation, repair and maintenance shall be conducted in such a manner as to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of the public and any property owners that may be affected.

e.	Grantee shall promptly repair and restore any private property that may have been damaged as a result of the construction, installation, repair or maintenance of the system.  Any Township property damaged or destroyed
 
shall be promptly repaired or replace by Grantee and restored to serviceable condition.

f.	The Township agrees to promptly notify Grantee of all permits granted for the development of residential subdivisions or multiple dwelling complexes to enable Grantee to make arrangements for installation of its cable facilities within same.

g.	For subscribers requesting connection requiring an aerial drop line in excess of two hundred (200) feet.  Grantee shall extend cable service at a rate not to exceed Grantee's actual cost of construction from its main service line. In accordance with Section 2 (h) herein above, Comcast or its agents, including subcontractors, shall have the authority to trim, cut, or remove trees, as may be necessary for the installation and maintenance of its equipment in accordance with any Township regulations.  All tree trimming and removal of trees shall be performed in conformance with applicable Township ordinances and/or regulations. Comcast shall reasonably compensate the Township or other property owners for any damages caused by such tree trimming, cutting, or removal.  If Comcast or its agents, including subcontractors, wish to cut down and remove any tree or trees, it shall make every reasonable effort to notify the Township of such work.

h.	Grantee shall be required, at its expense, to protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in or remove from public streets, lands or places any property of Grantee whenever required by the Township upon reasonable written notice by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street construction, or any other public improvement purpose.

i.	Grantee, on the request of any person, firm or corporation holding a building permit issued by the Township, or permit issued by an appropriate state agency, shall temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings.  The person, firm or corporation requesting the same shall pay the expense of such temporary raising or lowering to Grantee, and Grantee shall have the authority to require su h payment in advance.  Grantee shall be given not less than ten (10) business days advance written notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.

j.	In those areas of the Service Area where the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public utilities providing telephone communications and electric services are both aerial and underground, Grantee shall have the sole discretion to construction, operate, and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities, or any part thereof, aerially or underground.  Grantee shall not be required to co.nstruct, operate or maintain any flush mounted or below­ ground level appurtenances such as subscriber taps, line extenders, system passive devices, pedestals or other related equipment.
 
SECTION 17:	OBSCENE PROGRAMMING

a.	Grantee shall make available, upon the request of a subscriber, either by sale or lease, a device or the capability to control the reception of any video and/or audio channel on the Cable System providing obscene, indecent or sexually explicit adult programming pursuant to Section 641 of the Cable Act.

b.	As provided under Section 639 of the Cable Act [47 U.S.C. §559], whoever transmits over the Cable System any material which is obscene or otherwise unprotected by the Constitution of the United States shall be fined under Title 18 of the United States Code, or imprisoned not more than 2 years, or both.



SECTION 18:  EXCLUSIVE SERVICE ARRANGEMENTS; TESTING

a.	Grantee shall, upon the presentation evidence by the Township, provide reasonable proof to the contrary that access to Cable Service is being denied to any group of potential cable subscribers in the Township because of the
income level of such residents.

b.	To the extent prohibited by federal or state law, Grantee agrees that, during the term of this Agreement, it shall not enter into exclusive service contracts, with owners of multiple family dwellings or real estate developers.

c.	Grantee agrees to comply with the provisions of Pennsylvania Act 1990-221, as amended, providing for tenants' access to cable service [68 P.S. §250.501, et seq.].

d.	Testing for Compliance is as follows:

 
(i.)







(ii.)
 
Upon written request of the Township and in accordance with FCC regulations, the Grantee shall furnish to the Township a copy of all technical tests performed on the Cable System by it or on its behalf at no cost or expense to the Township.

The Township may perform technical tests of the Cable System during normal business hours and in a manner which does not unreasonably interfere with the normal operations of the Grantee or the Cable System in order to determine whether or not the Grantee is in compliance with the terms hereof and all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.  Such tests may be undertaken only after giving Grantee reasonable written notice thereof, not to be less than
ten (10) business days, and providing a representative
 
of Grantee an opportunity to be present during such tests. In the event that such testing demonstrates that the Grantee has failed to comply with the terms hereof and all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, the costs of such tests shall be borne by the Grantee and paid to the Township within thirty (30) days. In the event that such testing demonstrates that Grantee has complied therewith, the cost of such testing shall be borne by the Township.



SECTION 19:	SUBSCRIBER  NOTICE; PRIVACY

a.	At the time of entering into an agreement to provide any Cable Service to a subscriber, and at least once a year thereafter, the Grantee shall provide notice in the form of a written statement to such subscriber of:

b.	Products and services offered;

i.	Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services;

ii.	Channel positions of programming carried on the Cable System;

iii.	Installation and service maintenance policies;

iv.	Instructions on how to use the Cable Service and any converters;

v.	Billing and customer complaint procedures;

vi.	Grantee's address, telephone number and office hours; and

vii.	A notice of Subscriber privacy rights as required by federal law.



c.	For purposes of this section, the term "personally identifiable information" does not include a record of aggregate data that does not identify particular persons.

d.	Grantee shall not use the Cable System to collect personally identifiable information concerning any subscriber without the prior written or electronic consent of the subscriber concerned.

e.	Grantee may use the Cable System to collect such information in order to:
 
i.	obtain information necessary to render a Cable Service or other service provided by Grantee to the subscriber, checking for illegal taps or detect unauthorized reception of Cable Service; or

ii.	conduct system-wide or individually addressed "sweeps" solely for the purpose of verifying system integrity,
controlling return-path transmissions, billing for pay services,
or monitoring Channel usage in a manner not inconsistent with the federal law.

f.	Grantee shall not disclose personally identifiable information concerning any subscriber without the prior written or electronic consent of the subscriber concerned.

g.	Grantee may disclose such information if the disclosure is:

i.	necessary to render or conduct a legitimate business activity related to a cable service or other service provided by Grantee to the subscriber;

ii.	subject to subsection 18(m), made pursuant to a court order authorizing such disclosure, if the subscriber is notified of such order by the person to whom the order is directed; or

iii.	a disclosure of the names and addresses of subscribers to any cable service or other service, if

a.	Grantee has provided the subscriber the opportunity to prohibit or limit such disclosure; and

b.	the disclosure does not reveal, directly or indirectly

i.	the extent of any viewing or other use by the subscriber of a cable service provided by Grantee, or

ii.	the nature of any transaction made by the subscriber over the System of the Grantee.

h.	A Cable Service subscriber shall be provided access to all personally identifiable information regarding that subscriber which is collected and maintained by the Grantee.  Such information shall be made available to the subscriber at reasonable times and at a convenient place designated by Grantee.  A Cable
 
Service subscriber shall be provided reasonable opportunity to correct any error in such information.

i.	Grantee shall destroy personally identifiable information if the information is no longer necessary for the purpose for which it was collected and there are no pending requests or orders for access to such information under subsection 18
(g) or pursuant to a court order.

j.	Any person aggrieved by any act of Grantee in violation of this section may bring civil action in a United States District Court.

k.	Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit or limit any State or agency with appropriate jurisdiction from enacting or enforcing laws consistent with this Section for the protection of subscriber privacy.

I.	A governmental entity may obtain personally identifiable information concerning a Cable Service subscriber pursuant to a court order only if, in the court proceeding relevant to such order:

i.	such entity offers clear and convincing evidence that the subject of the information is reasonably suspected of engaging in criminal activity and that the information sought would be material evidence in the case; and

ii.	the subject of the information is afforded the opportunity to appear and contest such entity's claim.

m. The privacy protections set forth herein above are subject to the provisions of Section 631 of the Cable Act [47 U.S.C. §551]



SECTION 20:	CONSUMER PROTECTION; RECORDS; LOCAL OFFICE

a.	Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit or limit any State or instrumentality with appropriate jurisdiction form enacting or enforcing any consumer protection law.

b.	Records and Reports:  In accordance with Section 5 (d) herein above, Grantee shall keep full, true, accurate and current books of account related to the calculation and payment of franchise fees, which books and records shall be made available for inspection and copying by the Township or the Township's authorized representative during normal business hours and upon reasonable advance written notice.

c.	Local Office, Complaint Procedures:
 
i.	During the term of this Franchise and any renewal thereof, Grantee shall maintain a conveniently-located  local business office for the purpose of receiving and resolving all complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and similar matters.
The provisions of this Section shall be complied with if the office
may be reached by a local and/or toll-free telephone number, and provides the Township or its designee with the name, address and phone number of a person who will act as Grantee's agent to receive complaints regarding quality of service, equipment malfunctions and similar matters.  The local office shall be open to receive inquiries or complaints from subscribers during Normal Business Hours, and in no event less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except legal holidays.  After normal business hours, the access telephone line may be answered by a service or an automated response system, including an answering machine.	Any complaints from subscribers shall be investigated and acted upon as soon as possible, but at least within three (3) business days of their receipt.  Grantee shall keep a maintenance service log that will indicate the nature of each service complaint originating from subscribers residing in the Township, which generated a work order and/or necessitated a service call within the prior twelve (12) month period.  The log shall note the number of such complaints, the general nature of such complaints generating the calls, and summary descriptions of the resolutions of the complaints.  Upon written request, the log shall be made available for inspection by the Township.




SECTION 21:	NOTICES

a.	Unless expressly otherwise agreed between the parties, every notice or response required by this Franchise to be served upon the Township or Grantee shall be in writing and shall be deemed to have been duly given when received by overnight delivery, confirmed facsimile transmission, or certified or registered mail (return receipt requested).
b.	The notices or responses to the Township shall be addressed as follows: Haycock Township
640 Harrisburg School Rd
Quakertown, PA 18951 Attention: Secretary/Treasurer




c.	The notices or responses to Grantee shall be addressed as follows:
 
Comcast of Southeast Pennsylvania, LLC. 55 Industrial Drive
Ivyland, PA 18974
Attention: Government Affairs Director With a copy to:
Comcast Cable
One Comcast Center
1701 John F. Kennedy Boulevard Philadelphia, PA 19103-2838
Attn:  Government Affairs Department



SECTION 22:	ENTIRE AGREEMENT

This Franchise Agreement constitutes the entire agreement between the parties and shall supersede all previous negotiations, commitments, representations and writings, or agreements, written or oral.  All ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with the provisions of this Agreement are hereby repealed.



SECTION 23:	CAPTIONS

The captions in this Franchise Agreement are for convenience only and shall not be considered a part of this Agreement. They are not intended to amplify or modify the terms and provisions herein.



SECTION 24:	ARBITRATION

Upon mutual agreement of this Township and Grantee, any controversy, dispute or claim arising out of this Franchise Agreement shall be settled by arbitration in accordance with the then appertaining rules of the American Arbitration Association or other mutually acceptable arbitration procedure.  The judgment, decision or award of the Association on the issues submitted to it shall be final and binding on both parties and shall be regarded as the terms of the issues so arbitrated by any court or administrative agency having jurisdiction thereof.



SECTION 25:	AMENDMENTS

No provision of this Franchise Agreement may be amended or otherwise modified except by a written instrument, duly executed by the Township and the Grantee, which amendment shall be authorized through the adoption of an appropriate resolution or order by the Township, as required by applicable law.
 



SECTION 26:	GOVERNING LAW

This Franchise Agreement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.



SECTION 27:	SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS

Subject to the terms and conditions set forth in Section 10 ("Transactions Affecting Ownership of the Franchise"), this Franchise Agreement shall be binding on any successors and/or assigns of Township and/or Grantee.



SECTION 29:	WAIVER

The waiver by any party hereto of a breach or violation of any provision of this Franchise Agreement shall not be a waiver or any subsequent breach of the same or any other provision of this Agreement.



SECTION 30:	SEVERABILTY

If any section, sentences, phrase, provision, paragraph or term of the Franchise Agreement or the particular application thereof shall be held void or otherwise invalid by any court or regulatory agency of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions and their application shall remain in full force and effect for the term of the Franchise, or any renewals thereof.



(INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK TO SIGNATURE PAGE.)
 

SECTION 31:	EFFECTIVE DATE OF THE FRANCHISE

The Effective Date of this Agreement  is the 2 vi.<'.\	day of (Jo'it=JA.Bt"'(I., 2009





GRANTEE

By:	David Breidinger::
Title:	Senior Vice President of Government Affairs. Comcast Eastern Division Attest:			;:;(: 

Date: f'vovEIV/f?;JE/2	, cxei6:J



TOWNSHIP

 
 



HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP ORDINANCE NO. I I 3
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK,  BUCKS COUNTY,  PENNSYLVANIA,  REGULATING  THE MANAGEMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF INDIVIDUAL AND COMMUNITY SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITIES WITHIN THE TOWNSHIP.

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township has adopted an update of the Township Sewage Facilities Plan (Act 537), and,

WHEREAS, the Sewage Facilities Plan includes adoption of a sewage management program consistent with the requirements of PA Code, Title 25, Chapter 71.73 program for on­ lot sewage disposal systems,

NOW, THEREFORE, be it ORDAINED and ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township as follows:

SECTION 1. Short Title; Introduction; Purpose

A.	This Ordinance shall be known as the "Haycock Township Sewage Management Ordinance."

B.	This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in the Second Class Township Code, the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law (35 P.S. §§ 699.1 - 699.1001 ), and the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act of January 24, 1966),
P.L. 1535, as amended, 35 P.S. §750.1, et seq, also known as Act 537. This Ordinance is also adopted pursuant to the official Sewage Facilities Plan adopted for Haycock Township pursuant to Act 537.

C.	This Ordinance is intended to prevent and abate groundwater and surface water pollution and the hazards to public health caused by the improper treatment and disposal of sanitary sewage. This Ordinance is further intended to provide for the inventory and inspection of individual and community sanitary sewage disposal systems within the Township, which said inventory and inspections are designed to provide	for the adequate maintenance, management, rehabilitation/repair/ replacement and construction of sewage disposal systems; to permit the Township to intervene in events which are public nuisances or hazards to the public health; and, to establish penalties and appeal procedures necessary for the appropriate administration of the Haycock Township Sanitary Sewage Disposal System Program.

D.	All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances inconsistent with this Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.

SECTION 2.  Definitions.

A.	Act 537:  The Act of January 4, 1966, P.L. 1535, as amended, 35 P.S. Section 750.1 et. seq. known as the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act.
 




B.	Evidence of Malfunction:

1.	Wet, murky conditions (not resulting from surface water runoff or ponding) in areas designated as the absorption area of an on-lot sanitary sewage disposal system.	These conditions are typically accompanied by high grass and/or increased growth in warm, dry months. In the winter, these areas generally do not freeze and the area is typically spongy and soft. Snow does not normally accumulate in these areas.

2.	There is a discharge of effluent directly or indirectly to the surface of the ground through ponding, surface breakout or damp soils above the disposal area or to a surface water of the Commonwealth.

3.	There is backup of sewage into the facility served by the system or any component of the system as a result of an overloaded and/or clogged soil absorption system or cesspool.

4.	The static liquid level in the distribution  box is above the level of the outlet invert.

5.	The liquid depth in a cesspool is less than six (6) inches from the inlet pipe invert or the remaining available volume within a cesspool above the liquid depth is less than     of one day's design flow.

6.	The septic tank or cesspool requires pumping more than four times a year.

7.	Septic tank and/or the tight tank is cracked or is otherwise structurally unsound, indicating that substantial infiltration or exfiltration is occurring or is imminent.

8.	Indications of previous repairs and/or extensions of the system not permitted by the Bucks County Health Department, and/or evidence of recently placed soil and/or dirt in the vicinity where the absorption area is located.

C.	Alternate  Sewage  Disposal  System:	A method of demonstrated on-lot sewage treatment and disposal not described in Section 7 of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, which may be permitted by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to Chapter 73, Section 73.72 of the Sewage Facilities Act, as amended.

D.	Authorized Agent: Any representative of the Township authorized by the Board of Supervisors to carry out the provisions of this Ordinance.

E.	BCHD:  Bucks County Health Department.

F.	Board: The Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township.

G.	Cesspool: A covered pit with open jointed lining which receives sanitary sewage or other organic wastes directly from a building drain  or building sanitary sewer. It retains and allows  liquid waste to pass through the bottom and sides.   This is an
 


antiquated  system  which  predates  PADEP  standards  (Chapter  73,  Title  25  PA Code).

H.	Code Enforcement Officer (CEO): An individual employed by the Township to administer and enforce Ordinances in the Township.

I.	Community On-lot Sewage System:  A system of piping, tanks or other facilities serving two or more lots and collecting, treating, and disposing of sewage into a soil absorption area or retaining tank located on one or more of the lots or at another site.

J.		Community Sewage System: Any system, whether  publicly or privately owned, for the collection of sanitary sewage from two or more lots or two or more equivalent dwelling units, and the treatment and/or disposal of the sewage on one or more lots or at any other site.

K.	Community Sewerage System: A publicly or privately-owned community sewage system which uses a method of sewage collection, conveyance, treatment, and disposal other than renovation in a soil absorption area, or retention in a retaining tank.

L.	Conventional Sewage System: A system employing the use of demonstrated on-lot sewage treatment and disposal technology in a manner specifically recognized by the regulations promulgated under Act 537. The term includes individual and community on-lot sewage systems, including sandmounds.

M.	Department: Department of Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (PADEP).

0.		Equivalent Dwelling Unit (EDU): An amount of sewage equal to the amount usually and typically produced in a single family dwelling unit,  in volume, strength, and character.  For the purpose of determining the number of lots in a subdivision only as it relates to the determination of planning exemptions and fees for planning module reviews under this chapter, that part of a multiple family dwelling or commercial or industrial establishment with flows equal to 400 gpd. These flow figures are not intended to be used for the calculation of flows for the design of community sewage systems or for the allocation of flows related to community sewage systems. Community sewage system flows for design and permitting purposes shall be calculated using the procedures established in the Department's Domestic Wastewater Facilities Manual (DEP-1357).

P.		Experimental Sewage Disposal System: A method of on-lot sewage treatment  and disposal not described in the Sewage Facilities Act, which is proposed for the purpose of testing and observation.

Q.		Experimental Onlot Wastewater Technology Verification Program - PADEP program to evaluate concepts or technologies new to Pennsylvania that are applicable to on­ lot wastewater disposal, as outlined in PADEP document #331-2208-001.

R.		Gray Water:	Domestically generated liquid wastes, including kitchen  and laundry wastes that do not contain sewage.
 


S.	Health Department:  Bucks County Health Department (BCHD).

T.	Individual  On-lot  Sewage  System:	An individual sewage system which uses a system of piping, tanks or other facilities for collecting, treating, and disposing of sewage into a soil absorption area or spray field or by retention in a retaining tank.

U.	Holding  Tank:	A watertight receptacle that receives and retains sewage and is designed and constructed to facilitate ultimate disposal of the sewage at another site.

V.	Individual Residential Spray Irrigation System (IRSIS): An individual sewage system permitted under Section 7 of the Sewage Facilities Act, which serves a  single dwelling and which treats and disposes of sewage utilizing a system of piping, treatment tanks, and soil application through spray irrigation.

W.	Individual Sewage System: A system of piping, tanks, or other facilities serving a single lot and collecting and disposing of sewage, in whole or in part, into the soil or into waters of this Commonwealth, or by means of conveyance to another site for disposal.

X.	Individual Sewerage System: An individual sewage system which uses a method of sewage collection, conveyance, treatment, and disposal other than renovation in a soil absorption area, or retention in a retaining tank.

Y.	Licensed  Sewage  Hauler:	A sewage hauler licensed by the Bucks County Department of Health.

Z.	Lot: A part of a subdivision or a parcel of land used as a building site or intended to be used for building purposes, whether immediate or future.

AA.		Maintenance: Those actions required to provide for the long term proper functioning of any sanitary sewage disposal system, including, but not limited to the pumping of septage from a septic tank, cesspool, or dry well and pump tank; cleaning, pumping and/or leveling of a distribution box; removal of trees or growth affecting the operation of an on-lot sanitary sewage disposal system; diversion of surface water away from an on-lot sanitary sewage disposal system; and, reduction of flow from the structure being served (e.g., installation of water conservation devices).

BB.		Malfunction: The condition which occurs when on on-lot sanitary sewage disposal system discharges untreated or inadequately treated sewage onto the surface of the ground, into groundwater, or into surface waters of the Commonwealth. Malfunction also occurs when sanitary sewage backs up into the building connected to the system, or otherwise causes a nuisance or hazard to the public health, pollution of the ground or surface water or contamination of any public and/or private drinking water wells.

CC.		Marginal conditions for Long term On-lot Sewage Disposal: Conditions of a site for use of on-lot sewage disposal facilities, as determined by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection  and/or the Bucks County Department of Health, which may include soil profile examinations which document areas of suitable soil intermixed with areas of unsuitable soils; site evaluation which documents soils generally suitable for elevated sandmounds,  with some  potential
 



lots with slopes over 12%; site evaluation which documents soils generally suitable for inground systems, with some potential lots with slopes in excess of 20%; or lot density of more than one EDU/acre.

DD.		Municipal Sewage System: A sanitary sewer system and/or the treatment facility owned, operated, or maintained by a municipality or municipal authority approved by the Department under a permit issued to the Clean Streams Law, 35 P.S. 691.1, et seq., as hereafter amended, supplemented,  modified, or reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.

EE.	Municipality:  Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.

FF.		New System: The installation of an on-lot sewage disposal system on a property where a system does not currently exist, or the installation of a larger on-lot sewage disposal system in conjunction with the expanded use of an existing structure after the effective date of this Ordinance. A new system does not include replacement systems installed on properties with existing on-lot sewage disposal systems where rehabilitation/repair efforts are required to correct an existing malfunction.

GG. Official Sewage Facilities Act 537 Plan: The plan adopted by the Township and approved	by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection in furtherance of the requirements as set forth in the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act.

HH.		On-Lot     Sanitary   Sewage  Disposal  System  (OLDS):	Individual on-lot sewage systems and community on-lot sewage systems.

II.		PADEP:	Department  of  Environmental   Protection  of  the   Commonwealth   of Pennsylvania.

JJ.		Person: Any individual, company, association, public or private corporation for profit or not for profit, partnership, firm, trust, estate, department, board, bureau or agency of the Commonwealth, political subdivision, municipality, district, authority, or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as having rights and duties. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty or imposing a fine, the term "person" shall include the members of an association, partnership or firm and the officers of any local agency or municipal, public or private corporation for profit or not for profit.

KK.		Pumper/Hauler: Any person, as that term is defined in this Ordinance, who engages in cleaning community or individual sanitary sewage systems and transports the septage removed from these systems for disposal, and, is licensed by the Bucks County Health Department.

LL.		Pumper's Report: Form used by licensed pumper/haulers to report pumping of an on-lot sanitary sewage disposal system.

MM.		Registration Form: Form which shall be made available by the Township for property owners to register their on-lot sanitary sewage disposal system with the Township.
 



NN.		Rehabilitation or Repair. Work completed pursuant to a permit issued by BCHD to modify, alter, or repair an existing on-lot sanitary sewage disposal system or individual components thereof, including the enlargement of the  total  absorption area, provided the flows from the structure being served are unchanged or reduced.

00.		Replacement Area: An area of a lot or property reserved for the installation of a replacement sanitary sewage system in the event of the malfunction of the originally installed on-lot sewage disposal system.

PP.		Replacement System: An on-lot sanitary sewage disposal system which replaces a previously installed on-lot sanitary sewage disposal system which cannot be repaired or rehabilitated to a condition acceptable to the Bucks County Health Department.

QQ.	Septage: The residual scum and sludge pumped from septic systems.

RR.		Sewage: Any substance that contains any of the waste products or excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals, and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or inimical to the public health, or to animal or aquatic life, or to the use of water for domestic water supply, or for recreation, or which constitutes pollution under the Act of June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987, No. 394), known as "The Clean Streams Law", as amended.

SS.		Sewage  Enforcement  Officer  (SEO):	A   person certified by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection who  issues and reviews permit applications and/or conducts such investigations and inspections as are necessary to implement the  Sewage  Facilities  Act  (Act  537)  and  the  rules  and  regulations  promulgated thereunder.

TT.		Sewage Facilities: A system of sewage collection, conveyance, treatment, and disposal which will prevent the discharge of untreated or inadequately treated sewage or other waste into Waters of the Commonwealth or otherwise provide for the safe and sanitary treatment and disposal of sewage or other waste.

UU.		Sewage Management Program: A comprehensive set of legal and  administrative requirements	encompassing  the  requirements  of   this   Ordinance    and other administrative requirements adopted by the Township to  effectively  enforce  and administer the Ordinance, and to implement the Sewage Facilities Plan.

W.		Small Flow Treatment Facility: An individual or community sewage system design to adequately treat sewage flows not greater than two thousand (2,000) gallons per day for final disposal using a stream discharge or discharge to the surface of the ground.

WW.		Subdivision:   As defined in the Pennsylvania Municipalities  Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as amended.

XX.	Subdivision, Lot Line Adjustment: A lot line adjustment subdivision involves relocation of one or more existing boundary line(s) between two adjacent lots, or the shifting of boundary lines to increase the area of an existing lot; provided; however, that the lot line adjustment subdivision results in the same or fewer number of lots than existed prior to the lot line adjustment subdivisions.
 



YY.	Subdivision, Major: Any subdivision not classified as a minor subdivision.

ZZ.	Subdivision, Minor: The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land by any means into not more than two (2) lots; or a lot line subdivision.

AAA.	Township:  Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.

BBB.		Waters  of  the  Commonwealth:	Any and all rivers,  streams,   creeks,  rivulets, impoundments,	ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,   dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this Commonwealth.

CCC.		Zoning Officer: An individual employed by the Township to administer and enforce the Township Zoning Ordinance.

All definitions included in Act 537 and the Clean Streams Act, as amended, are hereby incorporated by reference into this Ordinance.

SECTION 3. Applicability.

A.	The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to all existing and proposed individual and community sewage disposal systems within the Township after the effective date of this Ordinance.

B.	All new individual and community sewage systems shall be required  to  file  a Registration Form with the Township prior to the issuance of a Building Permit for the use of the structure being served by the on-lot sanitary sewage disposal system.

SECTION 4.  Permit Requirements.

A.	No person shall install, award a contract for construction or construct an individual or community on-lot sewage system, or install, construct, occupy, or use a building or structure to be served by that system without first obtaining a permit from Bucks County Health Department (BCHD) confirming that the system complies  with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, and any and all regulations adopted pursuant to said Act.

B.	A permit must be obtained from the Bucks County Department of Health for alterations or connections to an existing individual or community on-lot sewage disposal system when the alteration or connection requires the repair, replacement or enlargement of a treatment tank or retention tank, or the repair, replacement, disturbance, modification or enlargement of a soil absorption area or spray field, or the soil within or under the soil absorption area or spray field.

C.	No system or structure designed for individual or community sanitary sewage disposal or for rehabilitation, repair and/or replacement to or of an existing sewage disposal system shall be covered from view until final inspection and approval by BCHD.
 



D.	Applicants for individual or community sanitary sewage disposal system permits shall notify BCHD of the schedule for construction or rehabilitation,  repair  and/or replacement of  the  permitted  sewage  disposal  system  so  the  appropriate inspection(s) may be scheduled and performed by the BCHD.

E.	No building permit shall be issued by the Township for a new building which will utilize individual or community sanitary sewage disposal system, until a valid sanitary sewer permit has been obtained from BCHD, and a Registration Form is filed with the Township.

F.	No building permit shall be issued by the Township for any building addition, alteration, or change in use which may result in increased sewage flows until approval of use of the existing sewage system has been received from BCHD. The Township must receive notification by BCHD of all permits issued and final inspections performed in Haycock Township.

G.	No occupancy permit shall be issued by the Township for any new building until BCHD has informed the Township that the newly constructed sanitary  sewage system has been completed, and has had a final inspection.

H.	Individual or Community Sewage Disposal System permits may only be issued by BCHD or PADEP as applicable.

I.		All new structures served by individual or community sewage systems shall install water conservation devices and fixtures, in compliance with the provisions of the Unified Construction Code.

SECTION 5. Right of Entry.

A.	Authorized persons acting on behalf of the Township shall, upon presentation of proper credentials and identification, be permitted to enter upon the outside of the property that contains an individual or community sanitary sewage disposal system for the purpose of inspecting, observing, photographing, and sampling the sewage disposal system, in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.

B.	The Township shall provide advance notice to the property owner of the individual or community sewage disposal system prior to inspection.

SECTION 6. Sewage System Maintenance.

A.	All Sewage Systems shall be pumped out by a licensed sewage hauler selected by the property owner, at least once every three (3) years or whenever inspection reveals that the treatment tanks are filled with solids in excess of 1/3 of the liquid depth of the tank or with scum in excess of 1/3 of the liquid depth of the tank. The three (3) year time period shall begin when the system is approved as complete by BCHD. For systems existing on the effective date of this Ordinance, the three (3) year time period shall begin on the effective date of this Ordinance. Property owner shall provide the Township with a receipt documenting the date on which the septic tank was cleaned within thirty (30) days of the occurrence.
 



B.	Surface contouring (grades) and other measures consistent with PA Code Title 25, Chapter 73, shall be maintained to divert stormwater away from treatment facilities and absorption areas and protect absorption areas from physical damage.

C.	Sand filters included within IRSIS, SFTF, or other approved sewage system  shall also be inspected by the property owner and repaired if necessary at least once every year.

D.	Where applicable pursuant to Section 19.A of this Ordinance, the sewage system shall be maintained in accordance with provisions of the Operation and Maintenance Agreement executed for the system.

E.	Emergency repair or replacement of system components without  prior approval/permit from BCHD shall be limited to pumping of a septic tank, tight tank or cesspool as frequently as necessary to prevent backup or breakout.

F.	All emergency repairs other than pumping shall be in accordance with requirements, and where applicable permit approval, from BCHD.

G.	Any non-routine maintenance or repairs required to the system must be reported to the Bucks County  Department of Health and Township by the property owner for approval/permit.

SECTION 7.  Inspections.

A		All individual and community sanitary sewage disposal systems regulated by this Ordinance shall be inspected by an authorized agent of the Township as established by separate Resolution of the Board of Supervisors. The inspection may include the taking of samples from surface water, wells, or other groundwater sources, and/or the sampling of the contents of the sanitary sewage disposal system. A copy of the report .of the inspection shall be furnished to the property owner.

B.		In the event inspection is denied by the  property  owner, the  Township  shall  be authorized to take such steps as are appropriate to secure access to the property for the  purpose  of  determining   compliance  with  the  terms  and  conditions  of  this Ordinance.	Steps   shall   include,   but   not   be   limited to, the seeking of an administrative search warrant from the appropriate judicial official.

SECTION 8.  Operation.

A		No property owner shall operate and maintain an individual or community sanitary sewage disposal system in such a manner that it malfunctions. No system shall discharge untreated or partially treated sanitary sewage to the surface of the ground or into the Waters of the Commonwealth, as defined herein.

B.		All property owners with gray water discharges to the ground surface shall correct such discharges and route the gray water to the sanitary sewer disposal system. All rerouting and connections of gray water discharge to the sanitary sewage disposal system shall be in accordance with requirements of BCHD. Gray water discharges are a violation of Section 73.11 of the Pennsylvania Code, Title 25, Environmental Protection, and may also be a violation of Sections 202 and 207 of the Pennsylvania
 



Clean Streams Law, if the discharge  is to any Waters  of the Commonwealth  (as defined herein).  All violations shall be referred to BCHD.

SECTION 9. Sewage Management Priority.

A.		All lots, existing or proposed, on which sewage is generated must employ individual or community sewage disposal. The highest priority method of sewage disposal set forth in the following table that can be technically and administratively implemented on the subject  property must be utilized for new systems and repair situations. If disposal cannot be provided by higher-ranked method than proposed, the applicant must submit a written explanation of the reasons why the given lot is not suitable for these higher-ranked methods, along with the appropriate supporting data. A decrease in the number of dwelling units, businesses, and/or establishments that could be served by a certain method of sewage disposal upon the subject property shall not constitute a valid reason why a higher ranked method is not utilized in favor of a lower priority method. An applicant must show that the higher rank methods of sewage disposal will not function upon the subject property; and must demonstrate that the proposed system will not degrade surface or groundwater for its intended use for drinking water or wildlife habitat before proposing to employ a lower-ranked method.

B.	Sewage Management Priority Table

1.	Individual on-lot sub-surface sewage disposal.

2.	Individual on-lot elevated or at grade sandmound.

3.	Individual on-lot residential spray (IRSIS)/drip irrigation system.

4.	Individual on-lot alternate system.

5.	Community on-lot subsurface sewage disposal.

6.	Community on-lot elevated sandmound.

7.	Community on-lot spray/drip irrigation system.

8.	Small flow treatment facility with stream discharge.

9.	Experimental system or other system not listed above, as approved through the Technology Verification Program.

10.	Holding tank (residential repair, commercial, institutional, or industrial). SECTION 10. System Rehabilitation/Repair/Replacement.
A.		If BCHD determines that any individual or community sewage disposal  system is malfunctioning  and, further,  if the  property  abuts  or fronts  an  existing  municipal
sewer, then BCHD shall require that property be connected to the municipal sewer, at the property owner's sole cost and expense. Under those circumstances, BCHD will not issue a permit for the repair of a malfunctioning on-lot sewage disposal system.

B.	If any individual or community sewage disposal system is observed to be malfunctioning, the Township will notify BCHD. The Township must be notified by BCHD of all permits issued for repair of the system, and final inspections performed.
 



C.	Should BCHD indicate that it is not possible to repair or modify the system to comply with PADEP's standards for sewage disposal systems, then the property owner shall be required to have a replacement individual or community sewage disposal system designed for the property. The highest priority method of sewage disposal as listed above shall be utilized for the replacement system. Design shall conform to current regulations as promulgated by the PADEP and these regulations.

D.	BCHD may require the repair/rehabilitation/replacement of any malfunction by the following methods; cleaning, repair or replacement of components of the existing system, adding capacity or otherwise altering or replacing the system's treatment tank, expanding the existing disposal area, replacing the existing disposal area, replacing a gravity distribution system with a pressurized system, and such other alternatives as appropriate for the specific site, including use of reservation areas.

SECTION 11. Disposal of Septage.

A	All septage pumper/haulers operating within the Township shall be licensed by BCHD/PADEP, as applicable.

8.	All septage originating within the Township shall be disposed of at sites or facilities approved by PADEP.

C.		Septage shall be handled consistent with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act (Act 97 of 1980, 35 P.S., Sections 6018.101-6018.1003), and Regulations adopted pursuant to such ACT.

SECTION 12.  In Ground, Drip Irrigation, and Sand Mound Sewage Systems.

A	The owner of a property that utilizes a drip irrigation or sandmound systems shall comply with the following:

1.	Construct and maintain the system in conformance with this Ordinance and any other Ordinance of the Township, the Sewage Facilities Act, the rules and regulations of the BCDH and PADEP, and all applicable regulations and statues of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

2.	For drip irrigation systems, and other systems on lots deemed marginal for long term on-lot disposal as defined by PADEP, execute an agreement with the Township to hold the Township harmless in the event of a claim against the Township arising from the operation and maintenance of the system, and furthermore, pay a nonrefundable fee to the Township for Township costs of administration, compliance monitoring, and enforcement of this Ordinance.

B.	No portion of the sewage system property line or easement horizontal isolation distance, required pursuant to PA Code Title 25 Chapter 73 (Standards for Sewage Disposal facilities), may be located on any lot or property other than the parcel containing that system.

C.	No livestock or any type or equipment heavier than a common riding mower/garden tractor shall be allowed upon the absorption area of any sewage system.
 



SECTION 13. Individual Residential Spray Irrigation Systems (IRSIS).

A	The owner of a property utilizing an Individual Spray Irrigation System (IRSIS) shall:

1.	Construct and maintain the system  in conformance  with this and any other, applicable ordinance of the Township, the act and rules and regulations of the Bucks County Department of Health and Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, and all applicable statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

2.	Execute an agreement with the Township to hold the Township harmless in the event of a claim against the Township arising from the operation and maintenance of the system, and furthermore, pay a nonrefundable fee to the Township for Township costs of administration, compliance monitoring, and enforcement of this Ordinance.

B.	Design requirements:

1.		The wetted perimeter of the primary spray field shall not encroach within the required minimum front, side, or rear yard setback designated by the Township Zoning Ordinance, except in the case of a repair of an existing system.

2.		No portion of the sewage system property line or easement horizontal isolation distance, required pursuant to  PA Code Title 25 Chapter 73 (Standards for Sewage Disposal facilities), may be located on any lot or property other than the parcel containing the IRSIS.

3.		No portion of the sewage system may encroach within a floodplain, riparian buffer, or wetland.

4.	Buffering:

a.		Whenever the wetted perimeter of the spray irrigation field is located within 50 feet of the property boundary, buffer plantings, including a minimum of one (1) evergreen tree per twenty (20) feet arranged along and within twenty five (25) feet of the property boundary, are required.

b.		Buffer plant material shall conform to requirements of Section 515 of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, as amended.

c.	Where natural features/vegetation exist on the site, which duplicate, or essentially duplicate, requirements for buffering, buffer requirements may be waived or reduced by the Board of Supervisors.

5.	Spray irrigation  of the treated effluent shall be permitted only between the hours of 11:00 PM to 5:00 AM.

SECTION 14. Small Flow Treatment Facilities (SFTF).

A	The owner of a property that utilizes a small flow treatment facility shall:

1.	Construct and maintain the system in conformance with this and any other, applicable ordinance of the Township, the Act, and the rules and regulations of the Bucks County Department of Health, and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, and all applicable statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
 



2.	Execute an agreement with the Township to hold the Township harmless in the event of a claim against the Township arising from the operation and maintenance of the system, and furthermore, pay a nonrefundable fee to the Township for Township cost of administration, compliance monitoring, and enforcement of this Ordinance.

B.	No component of a SFTF, including discharge line, may be located on any lot or property other than the parcel containing the facility unless authorized by the Board of Supervisors.

C.	If municipal sewer service  becomes available for a property utilizing a small flow treatment facility, each and every owner of such property shall be required to make the necessary connection to the abutting or adjoining sewer lines. Small flow treatment facility must be disconnected and disposed of in accordance with applicable Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and the Bucks County Department of Health rules and regulations.

SECTION 15. Holding Tanks.

A		Every person who owns a property within the Township on which a holding tank is located and every person who applies for a building permit to construct a new residence or other building which is to be serviced by a holding tank for which a Bucks County Department of Health permit is issued after the effective date of this Ordinance, shall comply with the provisions of this Section 15 as hereafter set forth.

B.	Every person who owns a property within the Township on which a holding tank is located shall:

1.	Have the holding tank of the property pumped prior to or when the holding tank has reached 75% of designed capacity.

2.	Annually provide the Township with proof of a pumping and/or hauling contract with a DEP certified hauler licensed by the Bucks County Health Department.

C.	Procedure for Obtaining a Holding Tank Permit; Rehabilitation of a Holding Tank or Change in Ownership of a Holding Tank:

1.	Prior to the issuance of a Use and Occupancy Permit involving new construction, and in the case where no prior security has been  posted to secure the costs of future operation and maintenance of a holding tank, then also involving rehabilitation of a holding tank, resale of the property, or change of tenants in a dwelling using a holding tank, the owner shall:

a.	Obtain verification from the Bucks County Development of Health indicating that the site is generally suitable for installation of a holding tank.

b.	File copy of the site plan and design of the proposed holding tank with the Township.
 



c.	Submit such additional information on size, location, or otherwise as the Township may require in order to complete a review.

d.	Pay a fee to the Township for the holding tank permit in accordance with the appropriate Resolution as adopted by the Board of Supervisors from time to time.

e.	Execute an agreement for maintenance and hold the Township harmless in the event of a claim against the Township arising from the operation of the holding tank. (Refer Section 15.D of this Ordinance)

f.	Deposit and/or post permanent escrow funds in the form and/or amount as provided by the holding tank  Maintenance Agreement. These funds are to be held by the Township and used only in the event the Township is required to perform any services, or pay for any services, relative to the holding tank. Board of Supervisors shall have the right to claim the entire escrow deposit as reimbursement for Township expenses.

2.	Permit issued under the terms of this agreement shall become null and void if the holding tank installation has not been completed to the satisfaction of the Township within two (2) years of the date of issuance.

D.	Holding Tank Maintenance  Agreement: The owner of a property that utilizes a holding tank shall execute a maintenance agreement approved by the Township to ensure compliance with the regulations and standards of operation and maintenance of the system. The escrow or other security shall be sufficient to cover the cost of the future operation and maintenance of the system over its design life up to a maximum of 50% for each of the first two (2) years of operation and not more than 10% for each year thereafter of the equipment and installation cost of the system.

SECTION 16. Alternate and Experimental Systems.

The owner of a property that utilizes an alternate system shall comply with the following:

A.		Construct and maintain the system in conformance with this Ordinance and any other Ordinance of the Township, the Sewage Facilities Act, the rules and regulations of the BCDH and PADEP, and all applicable regulations and statues of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

B.		Execute an agreement with the Township to hold the Township harmless in the event of a claim against the Township arising from the operation and maintenance of the system, and furthermore, pay a nonrefundable fee to the Township for Township cost of administration, compliance monitoring, and enforcement of this Ordinance.

SECTION 17. Community Sewage Systems.

All  community  sewage  systems  shall  comply with the following,  along with  any specific requirements of the sewage system type listed in the above sections:

A.		Construct and maintain the system in conformance with this Ordinance and any other  Ordinance  of  the  Township,  the  Sewage   Facilities  Act,  the  rules  and
 



regulations of the BCDH and PADEP, and all applicable regulations and statues of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

B.	Execute an agreement with the Township to hold the Township harmless in the event of a claim against the Township arising from the operation and maintenance of the system, and furthermore, pay a nonrefundable fee to the Township for Township cost of administration, compliance monitoring, and enforcement of this Ordinance.

C.	Seepage bed(s) (including toe of sandmound slope) or the wetted perimeter of a spray field shall not encroach within the required minimum front, side, or rear yard setback designated by the Township Zoning Ordinance or within one hundred (100) feet of a property boundary, whichever setback distance is greater.

D.	No portion of the sewage system property line or easement horizontal isolation distance required pursuant to PA Code Title 25 Chapter 73 (Standards for Sewage Disposal facilities), may be located on any lot or property other than the lot containing the system.

E.	Buffering.  All community sewage systems shall be buffered as follows:

1.	Buffer plantings, including a minimum of one (1) evergreen tree per twenty (20) feet and one (1) canopy tree per twenty (20) feet arranged along and within twenty five (25) feet of the perimeter of the system, are required around the perimeter of the Community Sewage System including the disposal area.

2.	A fence at least four (4) feet in height of material approved by the Township installed along the entire length of the property line.

3.	Buffer plant  materials shall conform to requirements of Section 515 of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, as amended.

4.	Where full grown trees exist on the site which duplicates the requirements for buffering, the buffering requirements  of  this  Ordinance  may  be  waived  or reduced by the Board of Supervisors.

F.	No livestock of any type or equipment heavier than a common riding mower/garden tractor shall be allowed upon the absorption area of any community sewage system.

G.	Replacement sewage disposal area is required and shall be in accordance with Section 18 of this Ordinance.

SECTION 18. Replacement Areas.

A	Where replacement sewage disposal areas are required by the  Subdivision  and Land Development Ordinance or this Ordinance, the following requirements shall be met:

1.	Any proposed replacement area shall comply with this Ordinance, any other Township Ordinance, the Sewage Facilities Act, the rules and regulations of the BCDH and PADEP, and all applicable regulations and statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, including, but not limited to, isolation distances.
 



2.	Allowance of open land for the replacement area, without the performance of appropriate soil testing to verify suitability of the land for a replacement area, shall not constitute compliance with the requirements of this section.

3.	Every replacement area shall be protected by a deed restriction or recorded easement that contains the following restrictions:

a.	No grading or other improvements, whether permanent or temporary, shall be permitted upon or within the replacement area.

b.	No permanent or temporary alterations, grading, excavation, stockpiling of any soil or any other material shall take place on or in the replacement area.

c.	During any construction or other activities, the replacement area shall be marked and blocked off by construction fencing to prevent equipment with greater wheel loadings than a common riding mower/garden tractor from traveling over or operating upon the surface of the replacement area.

d.	The final cover or improvement to every replacement area shall be limited to shallow rooted plant material.

e.	Replacement area shall be protected from livestock pasture/grazing.

B.	Identification of replacement area.

1.	Any applicant who proposes to install an individual or community sewage system shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Township that a suitable replacement area exists on the same lot as the proposed sewage system. The Township or BCDH shall observe all tests required to identify the proper location for the replacement area.

2.	The location of the replacement area, as confirmed by the Township, shall be identified on the plot plans and diagrams submitted as part of any permit, subdivision, land development, or planning module application.

3.	Replacement areas for individual sewage systems may encroach with front, side, and rear yard setbacks as established by the Zoning Ordinance; however, must be consistent with environmental protection standards of the Zoning Ordinance.

4.	Replacement areas for community sewage systems shall not encroach within the required minimum front, side, or rear yard setbacks designated by the Township Zoning Ordinance or within fifty (50) feet of a property boundary, whichever setback is greater.

5.	Any revisions to a permit or plan affecting a previously approved replacement area   shall be reviewed for approval by the Board of Supervisors or its authorized representative.

6.	If a replacement area has  been already identified upon a lot or parcel, an applicant may attempt to identify, to the Township's satisfaction, an alternate replacement area upon the lot or parcel. The alternate replacement area shall comply with this Ordinance. When an alternate replacement area is identified, the alternate replacement area may be considered as such for the purposes of this Ordinance, as long as it meets all the requirements and protections of this Ordinance.
 




C.	Subdivision/Land Development Restrictions.

1.	All applications for subdivision or land development shall provide for a replacement area(s) upon its plan(s) and shall place a note upon the approved record plans stating that no improvements shall be constructed upon and no alterations shall be made to any replacement area. The applicant shall also execute and record new or corrected deeds for each lot created by or a part of the subdivision or land development that contain language protecting the replacement area within the lots boundaries.

2.	The subdivision/land development plan shall also note and specifically require the replacement area be marked and physically blocked off to prevent equipment with greater wheel loadings than a common riding mower/garden tractor from traveling over or operating upon the surface of the replacement area.	The plan shall require the final cover or improvement to every replacement area to be limited to shallow rooted plant matter.

SECTION 19. Sewage Maintenance Agreements; Fees.

A.		All owners of property or persons who propose utilizing an individual spray irrigation system, small flow treatment facility, community on-lot sewage disposal facility, alternate or experimental sewage disposal facility, or sewage disposal  facility  on sites containing marginal conditions for on-lot sewage disposal, shall execute a sewage facilities Operation and Maintenance Agreement  with the Township. The agreement shall provide for deposit of a nonrefundable fee to  the Township for administration and future compliance monitoring; and shall further provide for sufficient financial security to guarantee the proper operation and maintenance of the proposed facility in accordance with the Act, which may include cash,  Letter of Credit, or other Township approved financial security. The amount  of financial security to guarantee the proper operation and maintenance of the proposed facility shall be established by separate resolution of the Board of Supervisors, as amended from time to time.

B.	Prior to execution of an Operation and Maintenance Agreement by the Township, the property owner shall accomplish the following items:

1.	Applicant shall obtain verification from the Bucks County Department of Health indicating that the site is generally suitable for installation of an on-lot sewage disposal facility as proposed.

2.	Three copies of the site plan and design of the proposed sewage disposal system shall be filed with the Township, unless the property is subject of a subdivision or land development plan currently being processed by the Township.

3.	Any additional information, such as  information  on  size,  location,  or  as otherwise  required by the Township,  shall be submitted to the Township for review.

4.	A fee in an amount established by separate resolution of the Board of Supervisors, as amended from time to time, shall be paid to the Township for review of submitted documentation, and preparation of the Operation and Maintenance Agreement.
 



5.	Applicant shall deposit financial security as required by the Operation and Maintenance Agreement, to be held by the Township and used only in the event that the Township is required to perform any services, or pay for any services, relative to administering terms of the Operation and Maintenance Agreement. Financial security amount for community sewage systems shall be established by the Township based on the size of the system and an estimate of annual operation and maintenance costs submitted by the design engineer and approved by the Township.

SECTION 20.  Administration.

A		The Township shall be authorized to exercise the powers conferred upon it pursuant to the terms and conditions of this Ordinance  or any other applicable laws of the County, State and Federal government.

B.	The Board of Supervisors may establish a fee, by resolution, the purpose of which is to defray the cost of inspections and other aspects of the sewage management program as set forth in this Ordinance.

SECTION 21. Appeals.

A	Any property owner aggrieved by the written decision of a Township employee or other authorized agent of the Township pursuant to this Ordinance may appeal the decision by written notification to the Board of Supervisors, provided that the Appeal notification shall be filed within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision at issue.

8.		The  property owner  and/or  person filing  an Appeal  shall  be entitled  to  a hearing before the Board of Supervisors, or its designee, within thirty (30) days of receipt of the Appeal.   Either party, by good cause shown, may extend the time for a hearing but a decision shall be left to the  discretion  of the  Board of  Supervisors,  or  its designee.   A  hearing shall be conducted  in accordance with  the provisions of the Pennsylvania Local Agency Act and a decision shall be rendered, in writing, within forty five  (45) days  of the  conclusion  of the  hearing  and  all proceedings  related thereto.	If the Board of Supervisors or its designee  shall fail to render a decision within forty five (45) days following the conclusion of  all proceedings related to the hearing, then the relief sought by the property owner and/or person filing the appeal shall be deemed granted.  Any  property  owner   and/or person aggrieved by a decision of the Board of Supervisors or its designee may, within thirty (30) days after such decision of the Board, file an appeal to the  Court of Common Pleas of Bucks County.

SECTION 22. Penalties.

A	Any property owner and/or person who has violated or permitted the violation of the provisions of this Ordinance, upon being found liable therefore in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced  by the Township, shall pay a judgment  of not more than
$500.00 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of the violation by the District Justice. If the responsible party neither pays judgment  nor files a timely appeal, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.   All judgments,
 


costs  and  reasonable  attorney's  fees  collected for the violation  of this  Ordinance shall be paid over to the Township.

B.	In addition to the rights as set forth in this paragraph, the Township may take such other rights as are available to it to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance including resort to the courts of equity to seek compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance.

SECTION 23. Severability.

Should any section of this Ordinance or part thereof be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect the balance of the Ordinance since it was the intent of the Board of Supervisors that said Ordinance would have been adopted even if such invalid provision had not been included.

This Ordinance was duly ORDAINED and ENACTED this µday of	,()pu
f This Ordinance shall take effect in five (5) days.


HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
 






























19
T:\Draft Correspondence\Haycock Act 537 Plan\Act 537 Ordinance 9-15-10.doc
 

AGREEMENT

THIS AGREEMENT dated the	0 ivlJ.ay ou:l	, 2012 by and between Service Electric Cable TV & Communications, Inc. ("SECTV"), and Haycock Township (the ''Township").

WITNESS ETH

WHEREAS, on December 2, 1996, the Township by Ordinance No. 77 renewed SECTV's franchise agreement to operate cable television business with the Township;

WHEREAS,  the  term  of  the  Franchise  Ordinance  was  fifteen  (15)  years  and therefore expired on December 2, 2011;

WHEREAS,   the  Township   and  SECTV  are  entering   into  a  new  franchise agreement by separate agreement to commence in December 2012;

WHEREAS, the former franchise agreement required SECTV to pay the Township an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the annual gross subscriber revenues received by SECTV for regular monthly cable television rendered to customers located within the Township;

WHEREAS, the new franchise agreement requires SECTV to pay the Township an amount equal to five percent (5%) of the annual gross subscriber revenues received by SECTV for regular monthly cable television rendered to customers located within the Township;.

WHEREAS, the Township and SECTV intend by this agreement to require SECTV to pay the Township the difference between five percent (5%) of the annual gross subscriber revenues and three percent (3%) of the annual gross subscriber revenues for the period starting January 1, 2012 and ending upon the commencement of the new franchise agreement.

NOW THEREFORE,   in consideration of the mutual agreements and promises contained herein, the Township and SECTV agree as follows:

1.	SECTV shall pay to the Township an amount equal to five percent (5%) of the Gross Revenues, as that term is defined in the existing franchise agreement between SECTV and  the Township, derived from the operation of its cable system in the Township for the period starting January 1, 2012 and ending upon the commencement of the new franchise agreement, less the three percent (3%) of Gross Revenues already paid by SECTV to the Township for that same period.  SECTV shall not deduct or otherwise credit against this fee any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability.

2.	SECTV shall pay this additional two percent (2%) fee on or before February 28, 2013.
 
3.	In the event that this additional fee is not paid on or before February 28, 2012, interest shall be added at the rate of six percent (6%).



IN WITNESS WHEREOF this AGREEMENT has been duly executed, the parties intending to be legally bound hereby:



ATTEST:	HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP


 



 

ATT S/

-(.
 
RVICE ELECTR IC CABLE TV, INC.
 




















U:\TWC Clients\HAYCOCK\SECTV\Agreement.re .Retroactive fees for 2012. 11.06.12.docx
 







{) }(,;, -	I I If


CABLE FRANCHISE AGREEMENT




BETWEEN




TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK AND

SERVICE ELECTRIC CABLE TV, INC.
 
JABLE OF CONTENTS
 


Page
 

 
SECTION 1	GRANT OF FRANCHISE	2
1.1	GRANT OF AUTHORITY	2
1.2	TERM OF FRANCHISE	3
1.3	NON-EXCLUSIVITY	3
1.4	POLICE POWERS	3
1.5	NO WAIVER OF RIGHTS	3
SECTION 2	COMPENSATION TO THE TOWNSHIP	4
2.1	FRANCHISE FEES	4
2.2	QUARTERLY PAYMENTS	4
2.3	QUARTERLY REPORTS	4
2.4	AUDITS	5
SECTION 3	SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION AND
MAINTENANCE	5
3.1	TECHNICAL REQUIREMENT	5
3.2	AREA TO BE SERVED	5
3.3	PERMITS	6
3.4	REPAIRS AND RESTORATION	6
3.5	SYSTEM MONITORING ...................................................... ?
3.6	SERVICE AREA MAPS	8
3.7	BUILDING MOVES	8
3.8	DISCONNECTION AND RELOCATION	8
3.9	EMERGENCY REMOVAL OF EQUIPMENT	8
3.10	TREE TRIMMING	9
SECTION 4	CABLE SYSTEM SPECIFICATIONS AND
STATE-OF-THE-ART	9
4.1	CABLE SYSTEM SPECIFICATIONS	9
SECTION 5	CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS	10
5.1	OFFICE HOURS AND TELEPHONE
AVAILABILITY	10
5.2	INSTALLATIONS AND SERVICE CALLS	10
5.3	NOTICES	11
5.4	BILLING	12
5.5	CUSTOMER COMPLAINT PROCEDURES	13
5.6	DISCONNECTION	13
5.7	CREDIT FOR SERVICE INTERRUPTIONS	14
5.8	PRIVACY	14
SECTION 6	SERVICES TO THE COMMUNITY	15
6.1	SERVICES TO COMMUNITY FACILITIES	15
SECTION 7	REGULATION BY THE TOWNSHIP	16
7.1	RIGHT TO INSPECT	16
7.2	RIGHT TO CONDUCT COMPLIANCE REVIEW	16
7.3	RESERVED AUTHORITY	16
SECTION 8	REPORTING REQUIREMENTS	16
8.1	QUARTERLY FRANCHISE FEE REPORT	16
8.2	ANNUAL CUSTOMER COMPLAINT REPORT	17
8.3	GOVERNMENT REPORTS	17
SECTION 9	FRANCHISE VIOLATIONS,  DAMAGES
AND REVOCATION	17
9.1	VIOLATIONS	17
9.2	LI QUIDATED DAMAGES	18
9.3	REVOCATION	18
SECTION 10	PROGRAMMING	19
10.1	CHANNEL CAPACITY	19
10.2	BROADCAST CHANNELS	19
10.3	SIGNAL SCRAMBLING	19
10.4	CONTINUITY OF SERVICE	19
10.5 PARENTAL CONTROL CAPABILITY ................................ ;".0
10.6 TIER BUY THROUGH PROHIBITION	20
SECTION 11	LIABILITY AND INDEMNIFICATION	20
11.1  INDEMNIFICATION	20
11.2 INSURANCE	20
SECTION 12	FRANCHISE TRANSFER	21
12.1 TRANSFER, ASSIGNMENT OR CHANGE IN
CONTROL	21
SECTION 13	MISCELLANEOUS	22
13.1	FORCE MAJEURE	22
13.2	REMOVAL OF SYSTEM	22
13.3	NOTICES	23
13.4	EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY	24
13.5	CAPTIONS	24
13.6	GOVERNING LAW	24
13.7	ENTIRE AGREEMENT	24
13.8	SEVERABILITY	24
13.9	CHANGE OF LAW	25
13.10	APPLICABILITY OF AGREEMENT	25
SECTION 14	DEFINITIONS	25
EXHIBIT A	LIST OF DESIGNATED LOCATIONS FOR SERVICES
TO COMMUNITY FACILITIES	29
 
 
CABLE FRANCHISE AGREEMENT




This Cable Franchise Agreement (hereinafter referred to as the "Agreement")	is  executed	as	of  the	day	of	Da cs.M b ,r	,	2012
(hereinafter referred to as the "Effective Date") by and between the Township of Haycock, a municipality located in Bucks County, Pennsylvania (hereinafter referred to as the "Township") and Service Electric Cable TV, Inc. (hereinafter referred to as "Service Electric").

WHEREAS, pursuant to the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (hereinafter collectively referred  to  as  the "Cable Act"), the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission (hereinafter referred to as the "FCC") and Pennsylvania law, the Township is authorized to grant and renew franchises to construct, operate and maintain a Cable System utilizing public rights-of-way and properties within the Township's jurisdiction;  and

WHEREAS, Service Electric currently holds a cable franchise from the Township by virtue of a cable franchise agreement/ordinance  originally granting a cable franchise to Service Electric; and

WHEREAS, Service Electric has requested that the Township renew Service Electric's franchise to maintain, construct, operate, and upgrade  its Cable System over, under and along the aforesaid rights-of-ways for use by the Township's  residents; and

WHEREAS, the aforesaid rights-of-way used by Service Electric are public properties acquired and maintained by the Township at significant expense to the Township's taxpayers and the right to use said rights-of-way is a valuable property right; and

WHEREAS, the Township desires to protect and manage the aforesaid rights-of-way, require high standards of customer service, ensure future technical improvements to maintain a state-of-the-art Cable System, establish certain reporting requirements, obtain certain complimentary services,  maintain educational and governmental channels, receive financial compensation  for Service Electric's use of the Township's rights-of-ways as  provided  by federal law, and provide for the current and future cable-related needs of its residents; and
 
WHEREAS, the Township has determined that Service Electric has the financial, legal and technical ability to provide Cable Services to Subscribers located in the Township; and

WHEREAS, the Township, after affording the public notice and opportunity for comment, has determined that the public interest would be served by renewing Service Electric's franchise according to the terms and conditions contained herein;

NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual promises contained herein and intending to be legally bound hereby, the Township and Service Electric agree as follows:



SECTION 1 GRANT OF FRANCHISE


1.1	GRANT OF AUTHORITY

Pursuant to the Cable Act, the regulations of the FCC and Pennsylvania law, the Township hereby grants a non-exclusive and revocable franchise to Service Electric, authorizing and permitting Service Electric to construct, operate, and maintain a Cable System in the Township's public rights-of-way.

Subject to the terms and conditions contained herein, the Township hereby grants to Service Electric the right to construct, extend, install, operate, maintain, upgrade and rebuild a Cable System, including such wires, cables, fiber, conductors, ducts, conduits, amplifiers, pedestals,  attachments  and  other property and equipment as are necessary and appropriate to the operation of the Cable System in, under, over, along, across and upon the streets, lanes, avenues, alleys, sidewalks, bridges, highways and other public places and rights­ of-way under the jurisdiction of the Township, including property over which the Township has a sufficient easement or right-of.-way, for the purpose of reception, transmission, amplification, origination, distribution or redistribution of  video, audio, and other electronic signals and impulses to provide Cable Services as permitted by applicable law.


Notwithstanding this authority, Service Electric shall obtain all necessary government permits for occupying or disturbing any public places and/or rights­ of-way. Prior to obtaining such permits, Service Electric shall provide the Township with all reasonable information and documentation that the Township requires. Service Electric shall comply with all other government regulations and requirements  thereto.
 

1.2	TERM OF FRANCHISE


The term of this Agreement shall be for a period of fifteen ( 15) years commencing  on  the  Effective  Date  and  expiring  on  P-zr.. ,,...Jo 'le 31  2°?.7  ,
unless the franchise is terminated prior to the expiration date in accordance with the terms and conditions of this Agreement. This Agreement may be renewed at any time by mutual agreement between Service electric and the Township. Prior to the expiration of the fifteen (15) year term of this Agreement, the Township and Service Electric shall make good faith efforts to negotiate a renewal Agreement. If the current Agreement expires by its own term before  the Township and Service Electric have reached agreement on the terms and conditions of a renewal Agreement, the  Township  shall  extend  the  expiration date of the current Agreement until either a new Agreement has been granted or the Township's denial has been upheld by a court of last resort.

1.3	NON-EXCLUSIVITY


This franchise granted to Service Electric shall be non-exclusive.  Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the right of the Township to grant another franchise to construct, operate or maintain a Cable System or for any other purpose. To the extent that such other franchise shall contain terms deemed more favorable than that awarded Service Electric, the more favorable terms shall be deemed to be incorporated herein by reference.

1.4	POLICE POWERS


Service Electric's rights under this Agreement are subject to the police powers of the Township to adopt and enforce general laws and regulations necessary for the safety and welfare of the public. Such laws and regulations are separate and distinct from the terms and conditions contained in this Agreement.

1.5	NO WAIVER OF RIGHTS


No course of dealing between the Township and Service Electric, nor any delay on  the part of the Township in exercising any rights hereunder, shall operate as a waiver  of any such rights of the Township or acquiescence in the actions of Service Electric in contravention of such rights, except to the extent expressly waived by the Township.



SECTION 2 COMPENSATION TO THE TOWNSHIP
 

2.1	FRANCHISE  FEES


Service Electric shall pay to the Township an amount equal to five percent (5%) of the Gross Revenues derived from the operation of its Cable System in the Township. The term "Gross Revenues" is defined in Section 14 "Definitions" below. Service Electric shall not deduct or otherwise credit against the franchise fee any tax, fee or assessment of general  applicability.  The  Township  may amend the franchise fee upward or downward upon ninety  (90)  days  written notice to Service Electric provided that the franchise fee may not exceed the maximum percentage permitted by law.

2.2	QUARTERLY  PAYMENTS


Beginning January 1, 2013, franchise fee payments to the Township under this provision shall be computed at the end of each calendar quarter and shall be due and payable within forty-five (45) days after the end of each  calendar quarter. Specifically, payments shall be due and payable on or before May 15 (for the first quarter), August 15 (for the second quarter), November 15 (for the third quarter), and February 15 (for the fourth quarter). Service Electric shall mail the franchise fee payments to the Township. In the event that any franchise fee payment is not made on or before the date by which it is due, then interest shall be added at the rate of six percent (6%). The interest rate shall be applied as described from the date such franchise fee payment was originally due. No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall acceptance of any payment be construed as a release of any claim the Township may have for additional sums payable under this Agreement.

2.3	QUARTERLY  REPORTS


Each franchise fee payment shall be accompanied by a written report to the Township containing an accurate statement of Service Electric's Gross Revenues received for Cable Services for each calendar quarter in connection with the operation of Service Electric's Cable System and a brief report showing the basis for computation of fees. The report shall contain a line item for every source of revenue received and the amount of revenue received from each source. The report shall also include the number of Subscribers in the Township for each tier of Cable Service. The report shall be verified by a financial representative of Service Electric.


2.4	AUDITS
 
On an annual basis, upon thirty (30) days prior written notice, the Townst1ip shall have the right to conduct an independent audit or franchise fee review of Service Electric's records reasonably related to the sources, amounts and computation of Gross Revenues in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles. Upon request, Service Electric shall make available to the Township at Service Electric's main office the financial records related to the franchise fee audit or review. Any reproduction of such records for purposes of inspection shall be performed at Service Electric's expense. If the audit or franchise fee review shows that franchise fees have been underpaid, then Service Electric shall pay the underpaid amount and monetary fines of  five percent (5%) of the underpayment. If franchise fees have been underpaid by five percent (5%) or more, then Service  Electric shall also pay the total cost of the audit or the review.



SECTION 3
SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION,  OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE

3.1	TECHNICAL  REQUIREMENT


(a)	Service Electric shall operate, maintain, construct and extend the Cable System so as to provide high quality signals and reliable delivery of one­ way and two-way Cable Services for all programming services  throughout  all parts of the Township. The video signals provided by the Cable System shall be delivered in high quality resolution. The Cable System shall meet or exceed any and all technical performance standards of the FCC, the  National  Electrical Safety Code, the National Electric Code and any other applicable federal laws and the laws, ordinances and construction standards of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the Township.


(b)	Stand-by power at the headend(s) and at the hub(s) shall be provided in the event of a service interruption. Stand-by power must activate automatically upon the failure of commercial utility power.

3.2	AREA TO BE SERVED


(a)	Service shall be provided to every dwelling occupied by a person requesting Cable Service provided that Service Electric is able to obtain from the property owners any necessary easements and/or permits  in accordance with Section 621(a)(2) of the Cable Act. Service Electric shall  extend  the  Cable System into all areas within the Township where there is a minimum of twenty­ five (25) dwelling units per linear plant mile of cable, calculated from the end of the nearest trunk line.  Service Electric shall complete said extensions within six
 
(6) months of notification to Service Electric by thf3 Township that an area has met trie minimum density standard set forth herein. Service Electric's obligation hereunder shall be subject to the timely performance of walk-out, pole permitting, make ready and location of all underground utilities.

(b)	Any dwelling unit within two hundred feet (200 ft.) aerial distance of the cable system shall be entitled to a standard installation rate. For any dwelling unit in excess of two hundred feet (200 ft.) aerial distance or that requires an underground installation, Service Electric shall extend Cable Service at a rate not to exceed Service Electric's actual cost of installation from its main distribution system.


(c)	The Township has the right to require that Service Electric places wires and/or equipment underground in any new residential developments, provided that the Township imposes such requirement on all similarly situated entities.

3.3	PERMITS


Service Electric shall apply to the Township for all required permits and shall not undertake any activities in the public rights-of-way subject to a permit without receipt of such permit, issuance of which shall not be unreasonably withheld by the Township. Service Electric shall not be required to pay any applicable permit fees.

3.4	REPAIRS AND RESTORATION


(a)	Whenever Service Electric or any agent, including any subcontractor, takes up or disturbs any pavement, sidewalk or other improvement of any public or private way or place, the same shall be replaced and the surface restored in as good condition as before the disturbance within ten ( 10) business days, weather permitting, of the completion of the disturbance. Upon failure of Service Electric to comply within the time specified, the Township may cause proper restoration and repairs to be made and the expense of such work shall be paid by Service Electric upon demand by the Township.

(b)	Whenever Service Electric or any agent, including any subcontractor, shall install, operate or maintain equipment, cable, or wires, it shall avoid damage and injury to property, including structures, improvements and trees in and along the routes authorized by the Township, except as may be approved by the Township if required for the proper installation, operation and maintenance of such equipment, cable, or wires. Service Electric shall promptly repair   and  restore  any   private   property  that   is  damaged   as  a  result  of
 
construction,  installation,  repair or maintenance of the Cable System within ten
(10) business days, weather permitting.


(c)	Service Electric's operating, construction, repair and maintenance personnel, including all agents and subcontractors, shall be thoroughly trained in the use of all equipment and the safe operation of vehicles. Service Electric's operating, construction, repair and maintenance personnel shall follow all safety procedures required by all applicable federal, state and  local  laws  and regulations. All areas of the Cable System shall be inspected at least twice a year and maintained so that conditions that could develop into safety hazards for the public and/or operating and maintenance personnel may be corrected before they become a hazard. Service Electric shall install  and  maintain  its wires, cables, fixtures, and other equipment in such a manner as shall not interfere with any installations of the Township or any public utility serving the Township.

(d)	Should a public safety emergency occur as a result of, incident to, or connected with operation, construction,  repair, or maintenance activities by Service Electric personnel, including all agents and subcontractors, then such personnel shall immediately contact the applicable public safety emergency dispatcher and all relevant utility companies to respond to the emergency.

(e)	Whenever Service Electric or any agent, including  any subcontractor, shall disturb any pavement, sidewalk or other public property in order to perform any underground activity, it shall utilize the Pennsylvania One Call System prior to any such disturbance. It shall notify the Pennsylvania One Call System no less than three (3) and no more than ten (10) working days in advance of any such disturbance and adhere to any  additional  requirements which the Commonwealth may establish in the future. Service Electric shall also adhere to all requirements of the Pennsylvania Underground  Utility  Line Protection Act.


(f)	All structures and all lines, equipment and connections in, over, under, and upon streets, sidewalks, alleys, and public and private ways  and places of the Township, wherever  situated or located, shall at all times be kept and maintained in a safe and suitable condition and in good order and repair. Service Electric shall not keep or maintain disconnected or loose cables, lines, or wires on utility poles or anywhere else in the public rights-of-way.


3.5	SYSTEM MONITORING


Upon completion of any construction, Service Electric shall conduct periodic signal monitoring in accordance with the requirements of the FCC. Such capability   shall  enable  Service  Electric  to  monitor  the  signal  quality  of  all
 
channels	delivered	on  the	Cable	System,	including	any	Educational	and Governmental  Channels.

3.6	SERVICE AREA MAPS


Service Electric shall provide to the Township for its exclusive use and shall maintain at its local offices a complete set of Service Electric service area maps of the Township, on which will be shown those areas in which its facilities exist and the location of all streets. The maps shall be provided to the Township in hardcopy format. The maps shall also designate where the cable wires and other equipment are aerial and where they are underground.




3.7	BUILDING MOVES


In accordance with applicable laws, Service Electric shall,  upon  the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the Township, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of the building. Service Electric shall be given at least thirty (30) days advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. If the building to be moved is owned or operated by the Township, Service Electric shall raise or lower its wires at no cost to the Township.

3.8	DISCONNECTION AND RELOCATION


(a)	Service Electric shall, at no cost to the Township, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same street, or other public way  and place, or remove from any street or any other public way or place, any of its property as required by the Township or its designee by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street construction, change or establishment of street grade, or the construction of any public improvement or structure.

(b)	In requiring Service Electric to protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove any portion of its property, the Township shall treat Service Electric the same as, and require no more of Service Electric than, any similarly situated entity.

3.9	EMERGENCY REMOVAL OF EQUIPMENT


If, at any time, in case of fire or other disaster in the Township, it shall be necessary, in the reasonable judgment of the Township or its agent, to cut or move any of the wires, cable or equipment of the Cable System, the Township
 
shall have the  right to do so without cost or liability,  provided that, wherever possible, the Township shall give Service Electric notice and the ability to relocate wires, cable or other equipment.

3.10	TREE TRIMMING


(a)	Service Electric, or its agents, including subcontractors, shall notify the Township prior to trimming trees upon and overhanging public streets, alleys, sidewalks and the public rights-of-way so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires, cables, or other equipment  of Service Electric. Any such tree trimming shall only be performed in accordance with accepted arboreal standards and applicable laws and regulations. Service Electric shall reasonably compensate the Township or other property owner for any damages caused by such tree trimming. Service Electric shall be treated the same as other similarly situated entities with regard to tree trimming.


(b)	If Service Electric or its agents, including subcontractors, wish to cut down and remove any tree or trees as may be necessary for the installation and maintenance of its equipment, it shall apply to the Township for permission, and if permission is granted, comply with accepted arboreal standards and applicable laws and regulations. Service Electric shall notify adjacent property owners at least seven (7) days prior to any tree removal or tree trimming.



SECTION 4
CABLE SYSTEM SPECIFICATIONS AND STATE-OF-THE-ART


4.1     CABLE SYSTEM SPECIFICATIONS


Service Electric shall design, construct and maintain a Cable System covering the Township that utilizes fiber optic backbone connections from headend to hubs, hubs to hubs, and hubs to nodes. Within three (3) years of the Effective Date, this Cable System shall be built for digital television standards with a bandwidth no less than 750 MHz with addressable technology with no less than one hundred fifty (150) video channels received for digital and analog transmission and shall allocate sufficient portion of said bandwidth to deliver reliable two-way Cable Services. The Cable System shall include nodes that serve no more than six hundred (600) dwellings.
 
SECTION 5
CUSTOMER  SERVICE  STANDARDS

5.1	OFFICE HOURS AND TELEPHONE AVAILABILITY

(a)	Service Electric shall maintain a business office that is conveniently located and which shall be open during Normal Business Hours.  The  term "Normal Business Hours" is defined in Section 14 "Definitions" below.


(b)	Service Electric shall provide and maintain a toll free telephone access line that will be available to Subscribers twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week. Trained representatives shall be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries during Normal Business Hours. After Normal Business Hours, the access line may be answered by a service or an automated response system. Inquiries received after Normal Business Hours must be responded to by a trained company representative on the next business day.


(c)	Under Normal Operating Conditions, telephone answering time by a customer representative, including wait time, shall, subject to Service Electric's best efforts obligation, not exceed thirty (30) seconds after  the  connection  is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall, subject to Service Electric's best efforts obligation,  not  exceed  thirty  (30)  seconds.  These standards shall be met no less than ninety (90) percent of the time under Normal Operating Conditions measured on a quarterly basis. The  term  "Normal Operating Conditions" is defined in Section 14 "Definitions" below.

(d)	Under Normal Operating Conditions, the customer shall  receive  a busy signal less than five (5) percent of the time.

5.2	INSTALLATIONS AND SERVICE CALLS

(a)	Service Electric shall maintain a competent staff of well-trained employees sufficient to provide adequate and prompt service to its Subscribers. Any Service Electric employee or agent, including any subcontractor, who personally visits any residential dwelling shall display a photo identification badge. Any vehicle used for installation, operation or maintenance activities by any Service Electric employee or agent, including any subcontractor, shall prominently display the Service Electric logo.

(b)	Standard cable and internet service installations will be performed within seven (7) business days after an order has been placed except that such "appointment window" may be extended to fourteen (14) days during periods of unusually high installations.   "Standard" installations are those aerial installations
 
that are located up to two hundred (200) feet from the existing  distribution system.


(c)	Excluding conditions beyond its control, Service Electric shall begin working on a Service Interruption promptly and in no event later than twenty-four
(24)  hours after the  interruption becomes  known and shall diligently  pursue to
completion. Notice of a Service Interruption of a single Subscriber shall give rise to this obligation on behalf of Service Electric. The term "Service Interruption" is defined in Section 14 "Definitions" below. All other service  calls not affecting public health, safety or welfare shall occur within a maximum of seventy-two (72) hours after notice to Service Electric or scheduled at the convenience of the customer and shall be diligently pursued to completion.


(d)	Upon scheduling of appointments with the customer for  standard cable or internet installations, service calls and other activities, Service Electric shall provide the customer with either a specific time or an "appointment window" of a maximum of four (4) hours during Normal Business Hours. Service Electric may schedule service calls and installation activities outside of Normal Business Hours for the express convenience of the customer.


(e)	Service Electric may not cancel an appointment  with  a  customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the  scheduled appointment other than in the case of extreme weather conditions.  If, at any time, an installer or technician is running late, an attempt to contact the customer must be made prior to the time of the appointment. If the appointment must be rescheduled, it must be done so at a time that is convenient for the customer.


5.3	NOTICES


(a)	Service Electric shall provide written notice to each Subscriber upon initial subscription, at intervals not more than one (1) year thereafter to each Subscriber and the Township, and at any time upon request, regarding each of the following areas:


(1)	Products and services offered;

(2)	Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services;


(3)	Channel positions and information regarding programming carried on the Cable System such that the programming information corresponds to the channel positions;
 
(4)	Installation and service maintenance policies;


(5)	Instructions	on   how  to	use  the	Cable	Service	and	any converters;

(6)	Customer	service	requirements	contained	in  the	Section
76.309 of the Code of Federal Regulations;

(7)	Billing and customer complaint procedures;

(8)	Policy  and  procedures  for  disconnecting	or  terminating	a Subscriber's service for cause;


(9)	Service	Electric's	address,	telephone	number	and	office hours;


(10)	The  Subscriber's  right  to  obtain  at  cost  a  parental  control device contained in Section 10.5; and

(11)	A  notice of  Subscriber  privacy  rights  as  required  by federal law.

(b)	Service Electric shall notify Subscribers and the Township in writing of any changes in rates a minimum of thirty (30) days in advance of such changes. Service Electric shall not be required to provide prior notice to Subscribers of any rate change that is the result of a regulatory fee, franchise fee or any other fee, tax, assessment or charge of any kind imposed by any federal agency, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the Township on the transaction between Service Electric and the Subscriber.

(c)	Service Electric shall maintain a file available to the public containing all written notices provided to Subscribers  pursuant  to  the  requirements contained herein by Service Electric during the previous twenty-four (24) months.


5.4	BILLING


(a)	Bills shall be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be fully itemized, with itemizations including, all applicable service tiers, equipment charges and any installation or repair charges. Bills shall state the billing period, including an effective due date, the amount of current billing and any relevant credits or past due balances.
 
5.5	CUSTOMER COMPLAINT PROCEDURES


Service Electric shall establish clear written procedures for resolving all customer complaints, which shall include at least the following:

(a)	Service Electric shall provide  the customer with a  written  or electronic response to a written complaint within thirty (30) days of its receipt. Such response shall include the results of its inquiry into the subject matter of the complaint, its conclusions based on the inquiry, and its decision in response to the complaint.

(b)	If the Township is contacted directly about a customer complaint, it shall notify Service Electric in writing. When Service Electric receives such notification, the time period for Service Electric  to  respond  as  required  above shall commence.

(c)	Any Subscriber who, in good faith, disputes all or part of any bill sent by Service Electric has the option of withholding the disputed amount, without a late fee or disconnection, until Service Electric has investigated the  dispute  in good faith and has made a determination that the amount is owed provided that:

(1)	The  Subscriber  provides  a  written  complaint  to Service Electric in a timely fashion and includes identifying information;
(2)	The Subscriber pays all undisputed charges; and

(3)	The Subscriber cooperates in determining the appropriateness of the charges in dispute.

(d)	Service Electric shall maintain customer complaint records,  which shall contain the date each complaint is received, the name and address of the affected Subscriber, a description of the complaint, the date of resolution of the complaint, and a description of the resolution.

5.6	DISCONNECTION


(a)	Service Electric may disconnect or terminate service for cause:


(b)	If there is no pending written dispute with Service Electric regarding the bill; or
 
(c)	If at any time and without notice, Service Electric determines in good faith that Subscriber has tampered with or abused Service  Electric's equipment or is engaged in theft of Cable Service.

5.7	CREDIT FOR SERVICE INTERRUPTIONS


In the event that there is a Service Interruption to any Subscriber for twenty-four (24) or more consecutive hours, Subscriber can request a pro rata credit or rebate, on a daily basis, of that portion of the service charge during the next consecutive billing cycle, or, at its option, apply  such credit to any outstanding balance that is currently due.

5.8	PRIVACY

(a)	Service Electric shall protect and abide by the rights of privacy of every Subscriber and shall not violate such rights through the use of any device or signal associated with the Cable System. Service Electric shall at all times comply with the privacy provisions of Section 631 of the Cable Act and all other applicable federal and state privacy laws and regulations.

(b)	Service Electric shall be responsible for carrying out and enforcing such privacy policy and shall at all times maintain adequate physical, technical and administrative security safeguards to ensure that personal Subscriber information is handled and protected strictly in accordance with this policy and all applicable laws and regulations.

(c)	Neither Service Electric nor its designee shall tap, monitor, arrange for the tapping or monitoring, or permit any person to tap or monitor, any cable, line, signal, input device, or Subscriber outlet or receiver for any purpose, without the prior written authorization of the affected Subscriber or user, provided, however, that Service Electric may conduct system-wide or  individually addressed "sweeps" solely for the purpose of verifying system integrity, checking for illegal taps, controlling return-path transmission, billing for pay services or monitoring channel usage in a manner not inconsistent with the federal law. Service Electric shall report to the affected parties any instances of monitoring or tapping of the Cable System, or any part thereof, of which it has knowledge, whether or not such activity has been authorized by Service Electric. Service Electric shall not record or retain any information transmitted between a Subscriber and any third party, except as required for lawful business purposes.

(d)	Except as permitted by Section 631 of the Cable Act as amended, neither Service Electric nor its designee nor its employees shall make available to  any  third  party,  including the Township,  information  concerning  the  viewing
 
habits or subscription package decisions of any individual Subscriber. If a court authorizes or orders such disclosure, Service Electric shall notify the Subscriber prior to disclosure, unless such notification is otherwise prohibited by applicable law or the court.

(e)	Upon a request by a  Subscriber, Service Electric shall make available for inspection at a reasonable time and place all personal Subscriber information that Service Electric maintains regarding said Subscriber. Service Electric shall ensure that all information related to billing and service requests is accurate and up to date and shall promptly correct any errors upon discovery.

(f)	Service Electric shall not make its Subscriber list or lists, or any portion thereof, available to any other person or entity, with or witl1out remuneration, except where expressly permitted by law.

SECTION 6
SERVICES TO THE COMMUNITY

6.1	SERVICES TO COMMUNITY  FACILITIES


Service Electric shall, at no charge to the Township, provide the following services to all present and future public facilities including, but not limited to, the Township Building, police stations, fire companies, public works buildings, water and sewer authorities, recreational facilities, senior citizens centers, all public elementary and secondary school buildings and libraries. No charge shall  be made for installation or service, except that Service Electric may charge for installation or service for more than one (1) drop in each building.


(a)	Within three (3) months of the Effective Date, one (1) cable Drop, outlet and Basic and Expanded Basic Services (or equivalent) package to each building. No charge shall be made for installation or service, except that Service Electric may charge for installation and service for more than one drop in each building. The Township may add any new facilities during the term of this Agreement to receive such complimentary service to the extent that such new facilities would have been accepted by Service Electric had they originally been included in Exhibit A.


(b)	The buildings currently designated to receive the services described in (a) above as of the Effective Date are identified in Exhibit "A" below.
 
SECTION 7 REGULATION BY THE TOWNSHIP

7.1	RIGHT TO INSPECT


(a)	The Township shall have the right, upon ten (10) business days written notice and during Normal Business Hours, to inspect at the notice location for Service Electric specified in Section 13.3 below all documents, records and other pertinent information maintained by Service Electric which  relate to  the terms of this Agreement.


(b)	In addition, Service Electric shall maintain for inspection by  the public and the Township  all records required by the FCC and as specified  in 47
C.F.R. § 76.305 in the manner specified therein.

7.2	RIGHT TO CONDUCT COMPLIANCE  REVIEW


The Township or its representatives may conduct a full compliance review, including possible public hearings, with respect to whether Service Electric has complied with any material term of this Agreement so long as it provides Service Electric with thirty (30) days written notice in advance of the commencement of any such reviews or public hearings.

7.3	RESERVED  AUTHORITY


The Township reserves the regulatory authority arising from the Cable Act, any amendments thereto, and any other federal,  state  or  local  laws  or regulations.



SECTION 8 REPORTING  REQUIREMENTS

8.1	QUARTERLY FRANCHISE FEE REPORT


In accordance with Section 2.3 of this Agreement, Service Electric shall provide to the Township a quarterly report containing an accurate statement of Service Electric's Gross Revenues received for each calendar  quarter  in connection with the operation of Service Electric's Cable  System  and  a  brief report showing the basis for computation of fees. The report will contain a line item for every source of  revenue received and the amount of revenue received from each source. The report shall be verified by a financial representative of Service  Electric.
 
8.2	ANNUAL CUSTOMER COMPLAINT REPORT


Upon written request by the Township, Service Electric shall submit to the Township on an annual basis a report showing the number  of Complaints, as defined in Section 14 of "Definitions" below, originating from the Township received during the reporting period, the dates they were received, summary descriptions of the Complaints, the dates the Complaints were resolved and summary descriptions of the resolutions.

8.3	GOVERNMENTREPORTS


Service Electric shall provide to the Township, upon request, copies of any and all communications, reports, documents, pleadings and notifications of any l<ind which Service Electric or any of its Affiliated Entities have submitted to any federal, state or local regulatory agencies, courts or other governmental bodies if such documents relate to Service Electric's Cable System within the Township. Service Electric shall provide copies of such documents no later than thirty (30) days after their request. Service Electric shall not claim confidential, privileged or proprietary rights to such documents unless such documents have been determined to be confidential, privileged or proprietary by a court of competent jurisdiction or a federal or state agency.

SECTION 9
FRANCHISE VIOLATIONS, DAMAGES AND REVOCATION

9.1	VIOLATIONS


(a)	If the Township has reason to believe that Service Electric violated any provision of this Agreement, it shall notify Service Electric in writing of the nature of such violation and the section of this Agreement that it believes has been violated. If the Township does not notify Service Electric of any violation of this Agreement, it shall not operate as a waiver of any rights of the Township hereunder or pursuant to applicable law.


(b)	Service Electric shall have thirty (30) days to  cure  such  violation after written notice is received by taking appropriate steps to  comply  with the terms of this Agreement. If the nature of the violation is such that, in the Township's reasonable judgment, it cannot be fully cured within thirty (30) days due to circumstances outside of Service Electric's control, the period of time in which Service Electric must cure the violation may be extended by the Township in writing for such additional time necessary to complete the cure, provided that Service Electric shall have promptly commenced to cure and is  diligently pursuing its efforts to cure in the reasonable judgment of the Township.
 
9.2	LIQUIDATED  DAMAGES


Because Service Electric's failure to comply with any material provisions of this Agreement will result in injury to the Township and because it will be difficult to measure the extent of such injury, the Township may assess liquidated damages against Service Electric in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each day the violation continues, for a maximum of sixty (60) days, provided Service Electric has had an opportunity to cure in accordance with Section 9.1.  Such damages shall not be a substitute for other possible remedies.

9.3	REVOCATION


(a)	In addition to the other rights, powers and remedies retained by the Township under this Agreement, the Township reserves the separate and distinct right to revoke this franchise if:


(1)	Service Electric  practices any fraud or deceit upon the Township in its operation of its Cable System or any other activities pursuant to this Agreement;


(2)	Service Electric repeatedly fails, after notice and opportunity to cure, to maintain signal quality pursuant to the standards provided for by the FCC or the technical requirements set forth in Section 3.1 of this Agreement;


(3)	Service Electric repeatedly violates, after notice  and opportunity to cure, one or more of the material terms or conditions of this Agreement.

(b)	The foregoing shall not constitute a violation of a material term or condition if the violation occurs without the fault of Service Electric or occurs as a result of circumstances beyond its control in the reasonable judgment of the Township. Service Electric shall not be excused from the performance of any of its obligations under this franchise by mere economic hardship or by the misfeasance or malfeasance of its directors, officers or employees.


(c)	A revocation shall be declared only by a written decision of the Township Board of Supervisors after an appropriate public hearing that  shall afford Service Electric due process and full opportunity to be heard and  to respond to any notice of grounds to terminate. All notice requirements shall be met by providing Service Electric at least thirty (30) days prior written notice of any public hearing concerning the proposed revocation of this franchise. Such notice shall state the grounds for revocation. The  Township  Board   of Supervisors, after a public hearing and upon finding the existence of grounds for
 
revocation, may either declare this franchise terminated or excuse such grounds upon a showing by Service Electric of mitigating circumstances or good cause for the existence of such grounds.

SECTION 10 PROGRAMMING

10.1	CHANNEL CAPACITY


Service Electric shall meet or exceed programming and channel capacity requirements set forth in this Agreement and required by federal, state and local law and regulations.

10.2	BROADCAST CHANNELS


To the extent required by federal law, Service Electric shall provide all Subscribers with Basic Service including, but not limited to: 1) all broadcast television signals carried in fulfillment of the requirements of Section 614 of the Cable Act; 2) the signals of qualified non-commercial educational television signals carried in fulfillment of the requirements of Section 615 of the Cable Act. All such signals shall be delivered to Subscribers in high quality resolution.


10.3	SIGNAL SCRAMBLING

Service Electric shall at all times comply with FCC regulations regarding scrambling or other encryption of audio and video signals.

10.4	CONTINUITY OF SERVICE


It shall be the right of all Subscribers to continue to receive service from Service Electric provided their financial and other obligations to Service Electric are honored. Subject to the force majeure provisions in Section 13 of this Agreement, Service Electric shall use its best efforts  to ensure  that  all Subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service regardless of the circumstances. For the  purpose of construction,  routine repairing or testing  of the Cable System, Service Electric shall use its best efforts to interrupt service only during periods of minimum use. When necessary service  interruptions  of more than twenty-four (24) hours can be anticipated, Service Electric shall notify Subscribers in advance of such service interruption along with providing Subscribers with a pro-rata credit for the time of such service interruption.

10.5	PARENTAL CONTROL CAPABILITY
 
Upon request, Service Electric shall provide Subscribers with the capability to control the reception of any video and/or audio channel on the Cable System providing sexually explicit adult programming.

10.6	TIER BUY THROUGH  PROHIBITION


Service Electric shall not require Subscribers in the Township to purchase a particular video service tier, other than the Basic Service tier, in order to obtain access to video programming on a per-channel or per-program basis, unless Service Electric has been granted a written waiver by the FCC pursuant  to Section 623(b)(8)(c) of the Cable Act.

SECTION 11
LIABILITY AND INDEMNIFICATION


11.1	INDEMNIFICATION


Service Electric shall indemnify, defend, save and hold harmless the Township, its elected and appointed officials, officers,  agents  and employees, from any and all claims for injury, loss, liability, cost or expense arising in whole or in part from, caused by or connected with any act or omission of Service Electric, its officers, agents or employees, arising out of or in any way connected to, but not limited to, the construction, installation, upgrade, reconstruction, operation, maintenance or removal of the Cable System or any other equipment or facilities. The obligation to indemnify, defend, save and hold the Township harmless shall include, but not be limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities, damages, penalties, attorneys' fees, expert fees, court costs and all other costs of such indemnification.






11.2	INSURANCE


(a)	Service Electric shall maintain insurance throughout the term of this Agreement with the Township as an additional insured, with an insurance company which is authorized to conduct business in Pennsylvania and which has an A.M. Best rating (or equivalent) no less than "A", indemnifying the Township from and against any and all claims for injury or damage to persons or property, both real and personal, caused by the construction, installation, reconstruction, operation, maintenance or removal of the Cable System by Service Electric or any of its contractors, subcontractors, agents or employees in the following amounts:
 

(1)	The amount of such insurance against liability for damage to property shall be no less than Two Million Dollars ($2,000,000) as to any one (1) occurrence.


(2)	The amount of such insurance against liability for injury or death to any person shall be no less than Two Million Dollars ($2,000,000).


(3)	The amount of such insurance for excess liability shall be Five Million Dollars ($5,000,000) in umbrella form.


(4)	The amount of such insurance against all claims arising out of the operation of motor vehicles and general tort or contract liability shall be Two Million Dollars ($2,000,000).

(b)	All insurance coverage shall be maintained throughout the period of this Agreement. All insurance policies shall contain a provision that the Township will receive thirty (30) days written notice prior to any changes or cancellation of the policy. All expenses incurred for said insurance shall be at no cost to the Township.


(c)   A certificate evidencing the insurance coverage required herein shall be provided by Service Electric to the Township within thirty (30) days of the Effective Date and within thirty (30) days of obtaining new insurance coverage or renewal of such insurance coverage throughout the term of this Agreement.

SECTION 12 FRANCHISE TRANSFER

12.1	TRANSFER, ASSIGNMENT OR CHANGE IN CONTROL


(a)	Neither Service Electric nor its parent nor any Affiliated Entity shall transfer, assign or otherwise encumber (other than pledging its ownership in the Cable System as  security for  ordinary course financing matters or through a transfer to any parent or subsidiary), through its own action or by operation of law, its right, title or interest in the Cable System or in this Agreement without the prior written consent of the Township.


(b)	Neither Service Electric nor its parent nor any Affiliated Entity shall change, transfer or assign, through its own action or by operation of law, its control of the Cable System or of this Agreement without the prior written consent of the Township.
 
(c)	Neither Service Electric nor its parent nor any Affiliated Entity shall sell, convey, transfer, exchange or release more than twenty percent (20%) of its equitable ownership in the Cable System without the prior written consent of the Township.

(d)	Service Electric  shall make written application to  the  Township  of any transfer, change in control or assignment as described above and shall provide all information required by FCC Form 394 and any other  applicable federal, state, and local statutes and regulations regarding transfer  or assignment. The Township shall have thirty (30) days from the receipt of FCC Form 394 to notify Service Electric of any additional information it needs to make an informal decision on the transfer or assignment.  The Township  shall  have one hundred twenty (120) days from the receipt of all required information to tal<e action on the transfer or assignment.

(e)	Any consent by the Township for any transfer or assignment described above shall not be effective until the proposed transferee or assignee shall have executed a legally binding document stating that it shall be bound by all the terms and conditions contained in this Agreement.

SECTION 13 MISCELLANEOUS


13.1	FORCE MAJEURE

If for any reason of force majeure, Service Electric is unable in whole or in part to carry out its obligations hereunder, Service Electric shall not be deemed in violation of this Agreement during the continuance of such inability. The term "force majeure" as used herein shall have the following meaning: acts of God; acts of public enemies, including terrorist attacks; orders of any kind of the government of the United States of America or of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any of their departments, agencies, political subdivisions, or officials, or any civil or military authority;  insurrections,  riots,  epidemics; landslides; lightning; earthquakes; fires; hurricanes; volcanic activity; storms; floods; washouts; droughts; explosions; and partial or entire failure of utilities.

13.2	REMOVAL OF SYSTEM


(a)	Upon lawful termination or revocation of this Agreement or of any renewal hereof by passage of time or otherwise, Service Electric shall remove its supporting structures, poles, transmissions and distribution systems and other appurtenances from the streets, ways, lanes, alleys,  parkways,  bridges, highways,  and other  public and  private places  in, over,  under, or along which
 
they are installed and shall restore the areas to their original condition. If such removal is not completed within three (3) months of such lawful termination or revocation, the Township or property owner may deem any property not removed as having been abandoned and the Township may remove it at Service Electric's cost.


(b)	During the term of the Agreement, if Service Electric decides to abandon or no longer use all or part of its Cable System, it shall give  the Township written notice of its intent at least ninety (90) days prior to the announcement of such decision, which notice shall describe the property and its location. The Township shall have the right to either require Service Electric to remove the property, remove the property itself and charge Service Electric with the costs related thereto, or transfer ownership of the property to the Township's designee provided fair market value is paid to Service Electric.

13.3 NOTICES


Every notice or payment to be served upon or made to the Township shall be sent to:


Township  Manager Township of Haycock
640 Harrisburg School Road Quakertown, PA   18951

The Township may specify any change of address in writing to Service Electric.

Every notice to be served upon Service Electric shall be sent to:



General Manager Service Electric Cable TV, Inc.
2260 Avenue A
Bethlehem, PA	18017

Service Electric may specify any changes of address in writing to the Township.

Each delivery to Service Electric or the Township shall be equivalent to direct personal notice, direction or order, and shall be deemed to  have  been given at the time of receipt.
 
13.4	EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY


Service Electric is an equal opportunity employer and shall comply with all applicable federal and state laws and regulations regarding equal opportunity employment.

13.5	CAPTIONS


The captions for sections throughout this Agreement are intended solely to facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions of this Agreement. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this Agreement.

13.6	GOVERNING LAW AND ARBITRATION


This Agreement shall be governed and construed by and in accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. If suit is brought by a party to this Agreement, the parties agree that trial of such action shall be vested exclusively in the state courts of Pennsylvania, County of Bucks, or in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania.

13.7	ENTIRE  AGREEMENT

This written instrument contains the entire agreement between the parties, supersedes all prior agreements or proposals except as specifically incorporated herein, and cannot be changed without written amendment approved by both the Township and Service Electric.

13.8	SEVERABILITY

If any section, provision or clause of this Agreement is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be illegal, invalid or unenforceable, or is pre-empted by federal or state laws or regulations, such section, provision or clause shall be deemed to be severable from the remaining portions of this Agreement and shall not affect the legality, validity or enforceability of the remaining portions of this Agreement.

13.9	CHANGE OF LAW


In the event there  is a change  in a federal  or state statute  or  regulation applicable to the  Cable System or to this Agreement,  the Township  or Service Electric may notify the other party of its desire to amend this Agreement  in order to comply with the change  in statute  or regulation.	The Township  and Service Electric  may  amend  this Agreement  to  comply  with  such  change  in statute  or
 
regulation provided such amendment  is approved by the Township and Service Electric.



13.10	APPLICABILITY OF AGREEMENT


All of the provisions in this Agreement shall bind Service Electric, the Township  and  their  respective  successors  and  assigns.  This  Agreement   is
authorized by Ordinance  No.	11 'f	dated	/Jee e.,,,lir  'J	, 2012 of the
Township Board of Supervisors.


SECTION 14 DEFINITIONS


The following terms used in this franchise shall have the following meanings:


(a)	Affiliated Entity - Any corporation, partnership or other  business entity that owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with Service Electric.

(b)	Basic Service - That service tier which shall include at least the retransmission of local broadcast television signals and any Educational and Governmental ("EG") access channel.

(c)	Broadcast - Over-the-air transmission by a television or radio station.


(d)	Cable Service - The one-way transmission to Subscribers of video programming or other programming service and Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service.

(e)	Cable System - A facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide Cable Service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple Subscribers within the Township, but such term does not include (A) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (B) a facility that serves Subscribers without using any public right-of-way; (C) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act, except that such facility shall be considered a Cable System (other than for purposes of Section 621 of the Cable Act) to the extent that facility is used in the transmission of video  programming  directly  to  Subscribers  unless the  extent  of that  use is
 

solely to provide interactive on-demand services; (D) an open video system that complies with Section 653 of tl1e Cable Act; or (E) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems.

(f)	Complaint - Any written or oral communication by a Subscriber expressing dissatisfaction with any aspect of Service Electric's business or the operation of its Cable System.

(g)	Drop - The coaxial or fiber optic or other cable that connects a home or building to the Cable System.

(h)	FCC - Federal Communications Commission.


(i)	Gross Revenues - All revenue received directly or indirectly by Service Electric or its Affiliated Entities from any source whatsoever arising from, attributable to, or in any way derived from the operation of  Service Electric's Cable System in the Township to provide Cable Services. Gross Revenues shall include, but are not limited to, the following:

(1)	Basic Service fees;
(2)	fees  charged  to  Subscribers  for  any  service  tier  other  than Basic Service;
(3)	fees charged for premium services;
(4)	fees  charged to Subscribers  for  any optional,  per-channel or per-program services;
(5)	revenue from the provision of any other Cable Services;
(6)	charges for installation, additional outlets, relocation, disconnection,	reconnection and change-in-service fees for video or audio programming;
(7)	fees for downgrading any level of Cable Service programming;
(8)	fees for service calls; (9)fees for leasing of channels;
(10)	charges based on the sale or lease of any portion of the Cable
System or fiber capacity;
(11)	rental or sales of any and all equipment,  including converters and remote control devices;
(12)	studio rental, production equipment and personnel fees;
(13)	any and all advertising revenues;
(14)	sale or rental of Subscriber lists;
(15)	revenues or commissions from home shopping channels;
(16)	launch fees;
 
(17)	Internet access or cable modem service fees (provided such service is deemed to be a Cable Service by the FCC or a court of competent jurisdiction);
(18)	revenue from interactive television services;
(19)	fees for any and all music services;
(20)	fees for video-on-demand; and
(21)	sales of program guides.

Gross Revenues shall not include bad debts or any taxes on services furnished by Service Electric and imposed directly upon any Subscriber or user by the Township, state, federal or other governmental  unit.

(j)	Normal Business Hours - Those hours during which most similar businesses in the community are open to serve customers. In all cases, "Normal Business Hours" must include some evening hours at least one night per week and/or some weekend hours.


(le)	Normal Operating Conditions - Business conditions within Service Electric's service department which are within the control of  Service  Electric. Those conditions that are not within the control of Service  Electric  include,  but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages and severe or unusual weather conditions.

(I)	Outlet - An interior receptacle that connects a television set to the Cable System.

(m)	Programming - Any video or audio signal carried over the Cable System.

(n)	Service Interruption - The loss of picture or sound on one (1) or more channels.


(o)	Subscriber - A person or entity who contracts with Service Electric for, and lawfully receives, the video signals and Cable Services distributed by the Cable System.
 


Agreement.
 
WITNESS our  hands and  official seals to this  Cable  Franchise
 




ATTEST:	TOWN SHIP OF HAYCOCK



 




Title:	C!..;Q. L  c....-"

Date:	I	- 3- 2--





 
 
EXHIBIT A


LIST OF DESIGNATED LOCATIONS  FOR SERVICES TO COMMUNITY FACILITIES





1.	Township Building
640 Harrisburg School Road Quakertown, PA  18951



2.	Township Fire Department 850 Old Bethlehem Road Quakertown, PA  18951
 
ORDINANCE NO.  	

FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE

AN ORDINANCE OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP REQUIRING ALL PERSONS, PARTNERSHIPS, BUSINESSES, AND CORPORATIONS TO OBTAIN A PERMIT FOR ANY CONSTRUCTION OR DEVELOPMENT WITH A FLOODPLAIN; PROVIDING FOR THE ISSUANCE OF SUCH PERMITS; SETTING FORTH CERTAIN MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR CONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT WITHIN AREAS OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP WHICH ARE SUBJECT TO FLOODING; AND ESTABLISHING PENALTIES FOR ANY PERSONS WHO FAIL, OR REFUSES TO COMPLY WITH, THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS ORDINANCE.

ARTICLE I. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION

The legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage of the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management Act of 1978, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township does hereby order as follows:

ARTICLE II. GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section 2.01 Intent

The intent of this Ordinance is to:

A.	Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.

B.	Encourage  the utilization  of  appropriate  construction  practices  in  order  to prevent  or minimize flood damage in the future.

C.	Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and natural drainage.

D.	Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental units, and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas subject to flooding.

E.	Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.

Section 2.02 Applicability

A.	It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or development anywhere within an Identified Floodplain Area within Haycock Township unless a Floodplain Permit has been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.

B.	A Floodplain Permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or structures.
 

Section 2.03 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions

This ordinance supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the provisions of this Ordinance, the more restrictive shall apply.

Section 2.04 Severability

If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Ordinance shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision shall not affect the remaining portions of the Ordinance, which shall remain in full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby declared to be severable.

Section 2.05 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability

The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this Ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as dams, ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This Ordinance does not imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.

This Ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the Township or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made there under.

ARTICLE III. ADMINISTRATION

Section 3.01 Designation of the Floodplain Administrator

The Board of Supervisors shall annually appoint the Township Engineer as the Floodplain Administrator to administer and enforce this Ordinance and is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator. In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain Administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Township Secretary.

Section 3.02 Permits Required

A Floodplain Permit shall be required before any construction or development is undertaken within any Identified Floodplain Area of Haycock Township.

Section 3.03 Duties and Responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator

A.	The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a Permit only after it has been determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable codes and ordinances.

B.	Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary government permits required by state and federal laws have been obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania
 
Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966-537, as amended); the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended); the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended); and the U.S. Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33, U.S.C. 1344. No permit shall be issued until this determination has been made.

C.	During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon completion of the work as are deemed necessary.

D.	In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of this ordinance.

E.	In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall revoke the Permit and report such fact to the Board of Supervisors for whatever action the Board of Supervisors considers necessary.

F.	The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain all records in perpetuity associated with the requirements of this ordinance including, but not limited to, finished construction elevation data, permitting, inspection and enforcement in perpetuity.

G.	The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a biennial report to FEMA concerning community participation in the National Flood Insurance Program.

H.	The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments of the Floodplain Administrator can be delegated from the person identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies with the person identified in the Floodplain Ordinance as the floodplain administrator/manager.

I.	The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34 PA Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or latest revisions thereof.

Section 3.04 Application Procedures and Requirements

A.	Application for a Floodplain Permit shall be made, in writing, to the Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the Township. The application shall contain the following:

1.	Name and address of applicant.

2.	Name and address of owner of land on which proposed construction is to occur.

3.	Name and address of contractor.

4.	Site location including address and tax map parcel number.
 
5.	Listing of other permits required.

6.	Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a breakout of flood- related cost and the market value of the building before the flood damage occurred where appropriate.

7.	A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or structures.

B.	If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for a Floodplain Permits shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:

1.	all such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other applicable codes and ordinances;

2.	all utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;

3.	adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards;

4.	structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or lateral movement;

5.	building materials are flood-resistant;

6.	appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used; and

7.	electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and located to prevent water entry or accumulation.

C.	Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain Administrator to make the above determination:

1.	A completed Floodplain Permit Application Form.

2.	A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one (1) inch being equal to one hundred (100) feet or less, showing the following:

a.	north arrow, scale, and date;

b.	topographic contour lines, if available;

c.	all property and lot lines including dimensions, and the size of the site expressed in acres or square feet;

d.	location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, and other improvements, including the location of any existing or proposed subdivision and land development;
 
e.	location of all existing streets, drives, and other access ways; and

f.	location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses, identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water including direction and velocities.

3.	Plans  of  all  proposed  buildings,  structures  and  other  improvements,  drawn  at suitable scale showing the following:

a.	proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;

b.	elevation of the base flood; and

c.	supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 PA Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC.

4.	The following data and documentation:

a.	if available, information concerning flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with a base flood;

b.	detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing measures and corresponding elevations;

c.	if available, information concerning flood depth, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with a base flood; and Floodway Area (Refer Section 4.02 A) when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the base flood elevation at any point;

d.	a document, certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, which states that the proposed construction or development has been adequately designed to withstand the pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with the base flood.

Such statement shall include a description of the type and extent of flood proofing measures which have been incorporated into the design of the structure or the development;

e.	detailed information needed to determine compliance with Section 5.03 F., Storage, and Section 5.04, Development Which May Endanger Human Life, including:

(1)	the amount, location and purpose of any materials or substances referred to in Sections 5.03 F and 5.04 which are intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise maintained on site.

(2)	a description of the safeguards incorporated into the design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills of the dangerous materials or substances listed in Section 5.04 during a base flood.
 
f.	the appropriate component of the Department of Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land Development"; and

g.	where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control.

Section 3.05 Review by County Conservation District

A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or development which will result in an earth disturbance of 1000 square feet or more in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval shall be submitted by the applicant to the Bucks County Conservation District for review. Requirements of the Bucks County Conservation District shall be incorporated by the applicant into the proposed plan. Where applicable, a “letter of adequacy” must be received from Bucks County Conservation District.

Section 3.06 Review of Application by Others

A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate agencies or individuals (e.g. Zoning Officer, Planning Commission, etc.) for review and comment.

Section 3.07 Changes

After the issuance of a Floodplain Permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes of any kind shall be made to the application,  permit or any of the plans,  specifications or other documents submitted with the application without the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests for any such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the applicant to Floodplain Administrator for consideration.

Section 3.08 Placards

In addition to the Floodplain Permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of the Floodplain Permit and the date of its issuance, and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.

Section 3.09 Start of Construction

Work on the proposed construction and/or development shall begin within 180 days after the date of issuance and shall be completed within twelve (12) months after the date of issuance of the Floodplain Permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator.

The actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading,  and filling;  nor  does it include the installation of  streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
 
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first, alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted by the applicant, which sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request and the original permit is compliant with the Ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect at the time the extension is granted.

Section 3.10 Fees

Applicants for a Floodplain Permit shall, at the time of making application, pay to the Township, a fee in accordance with a Fee Schedule adopted by Resolution of the Board of Supervisors upon enactment of this Ordinance or as such schedule may be amended by Resolution of the Board of Supervisors.

Section 3.11 Enforcement

A.	Notices

Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized Township representative determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this Ordinance, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:

1.	be in writing;

2.	include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;

3.	allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of thirty (30) days for the performance of any act it requires;

4.	be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other method authorized or required by the laws of this State; and

5.	contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance.

B.	Penalties

Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or provisions of this Ordinance or who fails or refuses to comply with any notice, order or direction of the Floodplain Administrator or any other authorized employee of the Township shall be guilty of a summary offense and upon conviction shall pay a fine to Haycock Township of not less than Twenty-five Dollars ($25.00) nor more than Six Hundred Dollars ($600.00) plus costs of prosecution.   In addition to the above penalties all other actions are hereby
 
reserved including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this Ordinance. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or noncompliance with, this Ordinance shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered, or relocated, in noncompliance with this Ordinance may be declared by the Board of Supervisors to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.

Section 3.12 Appeals

A.	Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this Ordinance, may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be filed, in writing, within thirty (30) days after the decision, determination or action of the Floodplain Administrator.

B.	Upon receipt of such appeal the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the appeal in accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code and any other local ordinance.

C.	Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may seek relief there from by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this Commonwealth including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.

ARTICLE IV. IDENTIFICATION OF FLOODPLAIN AREAS

Section 4.01 Identification

The Identified Floodplain Area shall be:

A.	Any areas of Haycock Township, classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated March 16, 2015 and issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof, including all digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study and,

B.	For areas abutting streams and watercourses where the one hundred year floodplain (one percent [1%] annual chance flood) has not been delineated by a Flood Insurance Study, the applicant shall submit a floodplain identification study. The study prepared by a registered professional engineer expert in the preparation of hydrologic and hydraulic studies shall be used to delineate the one hundred year floodplain. The floodplain study shall be subject to the review and approval of the Township. All areas inundated by the one-hundred year flood shall be included in the Floodplain Area.

The above referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions and amendments are hereby adopted by Haycock Township and declared to be a part of this Ordinance.

Section 4.02 Description and Special Requirements of Identified Floodplain Areas

The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas/districts:

A.	The Floodway Area/District identified as floodway in the FIS which represents the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
 
the base flood without any increase in the water surface elevation at any point. This term shall also include floodway areas which have been identified in other available studies or sources of information for those special floodplain areas where no floodway has been identified in the FIS.

1.	Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other development shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and  hydraulic analysis performed  in accordance with standard engineering practice that  the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

2.	No new construction or development shall be allowed, unless a permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.

B.	The AE/District shall be those areas adjacent to the floodway and identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided.

C.	The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no one-percent (1%) annual chance flood elevations have been provided. For these areas, elevation and floodway information from other Federal, State, or other acceptable source shall be used when available. Where other acceptable information is not available, the elevation shall be determined by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by registered professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the Township.

D.	For areas adjoining streams, ponds, and lakes not included in the FIS prepared by FEMA, the applicant shall be required to determine the elevation and area of the floodplain with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by registered professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the Township. All areas inundated by the one-hundred year flood shall be included in the Floodplain Area.

E.	In any identified floodplain area, no new construction or development with the exception of stream crossing for utilities, roads, and driveways shall be located within the area measured fifty (50) feet landward from the top-of-the-bank of any watercourse where a permit has been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.

Section 4.03 Changes in Identification of Area

The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Board of Supervisors where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such change within the A Area/District or AE Area/District, approval must be obtained from the FEMA. Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later
 
than six (6) months after the date such information becomes available, FEMA shall be notified of the changes by submission of technical or scientific data. Refer Section 5.01 B for situations where FEMA notification is required.




Section 4.04 Boundary Disputes

Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an initial determination shall be made by the Floodplain Administrator and any party aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.

Section 4.05 Jurisdictional Boundary Changes

Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the Township shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary changes. The Township shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or exceed those in CFR 44 60.3.

ARTICLE V. TECHNICAL PROVISIONS

Section 5.01 General

A.	Alteration or Relocation of Watercourse

1.	No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which may be affected by such action have been notified by the Township, and until all required permits or approvals have been first obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.

2.	No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity will not reduce or impede the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse in any way.

3.	In addition, FEMA and Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of any watercourse included in the FIS.

B.	When a community proposes to permit the following encroachments:

•	Any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations within the floodway; or

•	alteration or relocation of a stream (including but not limited to installing culverts and bridges) within Identified Floodplain Areas determined pursuant to Section 4.02 B or C;

the applicant shall (as per 44 CFR Part 65.12):
 
1.	apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to permitting the encroachment to occur.

2.	Upon receipt of the Administrator’s conditional approval of map change and prior to approving the proposed encroachments,  a community shall provide evidence in FEMA of the adoption of floodplain management ordinances incorporating the increased base flood elevations and/or revised floodway reflecting the post-project condition.

3.	Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a community shall provide as-built certifications, FEMA will initiate a final map revision upon receipt of such certifications in accordance with 44 CFR Part 67.

C.	Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the provisions contained in this Ordinance and any other applicable codes, ordinances and regulations.

D.	Within any Identified Floodplain established pursuant to Section 4.02.D, no new construction or development shall be located within the area measured fifty (50) feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse except for stream crossings for roads, driveways and utilities when the appropriate permit is obtained from the PA Department of Environmental Protection Regional office.

Section 5.02 Elevation and Floodproofing Requirements

A.	Residential Structures when permitted as a variance by the Zoning Hearing Board:

1.	In AE Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.

2.	In A Zones, where there are no Base Flood Elevations specified on the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with Section 4.02.C of this Ordinance.

3.	The design and construction standards and specifications contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 PA Code (Ordinances 401-405 as amended) shall be utilized, where they are more restrictive.

B.	Non-residential Structures when permitted as a variance by the Zoning Hearing Board:

1.	In AE Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement of a non-residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:

a.	is  floodproofed  so  that  the  structure  is  watertight  with  walls  substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and

b.	has  structural  components  with  the  capability  of  resisting  hydrostatic  and
 
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy, and

c.	is certified by a registered professional/architect that the design and methods of construction meet requirements of Title 44, Section 603, Subpart A, Requirements for Floodplain Management Regulations.

2.	In A Zones, where there are no Base Flood Elevations specified on the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or floodproofed to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with Section 4.02.C of this ordinance.

3.	Any non-residential structure, or part thereof, made watertight below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in accordance with the WI or W2 space classification standards contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations" published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional engineer or architect which states that the proposed design and methods of construction are in conformance with the above referenced standards.

4.	The design and construction standards and specifications contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 PA Code (Ordinances 401-405 as amended) shall be utilized where they are more restrictive.

C.	Space below the lowest floor

1.	Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements) which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement, shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of flood waters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" includes crawl spaces but does not include basements.

2.	Designs  for  meeting  this  requirement  must  either  be  certified  by  a  registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

a.	a minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.

b.	the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade.

c.	openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc. or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.

D.	Historic Structures

Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement as defined in this Ordinance, must comply with all Ordinance requirements that  do  not  preclude  a  structure’s  continued  designation  as  a  historic  structure.
 
Documentation that a specific Ordinance requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic Place or the State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained from the Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from Ordinance requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.

E.	Accessory structures

Structures accessory to a principal building need not  be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a minimum, with the following requirements:

1.	the structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or activity; and

2.	floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet; and

3.	the structure will have a low damage potential; and

4.	the structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least obstruction to the flow of flood waters; and

5.	power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to at least one and one-half (1½) feet above the regulatory flood elevation; and

6.	permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc. are prohibited; and

7.	sanitary facilities are prohibited; and

8.	the structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, lateral movement and collapse and shall be designed to automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

a.	a minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.

b.	the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade.

c.	openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc. or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood waters.

Section 5.03 Design and Construction Standards

The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and development proposed within any identified floodplain area:

A.	Fill
 
Within any designated floodplain area, the use of fill shall be prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, fill shall:

1.	extend laterally at least fifteen (15) feet beyond the building line from all points;

2.	consist of soil or small rock materials only – sanitary landfills shall not be permitted;

3.	be compacted to provide necessary permeability and resistance to erosion, scouring, or settling;

4.	be no steeper than one (1) vertical to three (3) horizontal feet unless substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to, and approved by the Floodplain Administrator; and

5.	be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent properties.

B.	Drainage Facilities

Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of storm water runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system shall insure proper drainage along streets, and provide positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.

C.	Water and Sanitary Sewer Facilities and Systems

1.	All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of flood waters.

2.	Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent the discharge of untreated sewage into flood waters.

3.	No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all State and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or contamination from it, during a flood.

4.	The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA #348, “Protecting Building Utilities from Flood Damages” and the “International Private Sewage Disposal Code” shall be utilized.

D.	Other Utilities

All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.

E.	Streets

The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no less than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation.
 

F.	Storage

All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and not listed in Section 5.04, Development Which May Endanger Human Life, shall be stored at or above the Regulatory Flood Elevation or flood proofed to the maximum extent possible.

G.	Placement of Buildings and Structures

All buildings and structures shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of flood water.

H.	Anchoring

1.	All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.

2.	All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation and waterproofed.

I.	Floors, Walls and Ceilings

1.	Wood flooring used at or below the Regulatory Flood Elevation shall be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing structural damage to the building.

2.	Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a "marine” or "water-resistant" variety.

3.	Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed of materials that are "water-resistant" and will withstand inundation.

4.	Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be made of metal or other "water-resistant" material.

J.	Paints and Adhesives

1.	Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of "marine" or "water-resistant" quality.

2.	Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a "marine" or "water-resistant" variety.

3.	All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a "marine" or "water-resistant" paint or other finishing material.

K.	Electrical Components
 

1.	Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three (3) feet above the base flood elevation.

2.	Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be dropped from above.

L.	Equipment

Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall not be located below the Regulatory Flood Elevation.

M.	Fuel Supply Systems

All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to prevent the infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharges from the system into flood waters. Additional provisions shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the event that flood water infiltration occurs.

N.	Uniform Construction Code Coordination

The Standards and Specifications contained in 34 PA Code (Ordinances 401-405), as amended and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to the above and other sections and sub-sections of this ordinance, to the extent that they are more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this ordinance.

International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition thereof: Secs. 801, 1202,
1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and Appendix G.

International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest edition thereof: Secs. R104, R105, R109, R323, Appendix AE101, Appendix E and Appendix J.

Section 5.04 Development Which May Endanger Human Life

A.	In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, and the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially improved structure which:

1.	will be used for the production or storage of any of the following substances listed in Section 5.04.B of this Ordinance; or,

2.	will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550 gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous materials or substances on the premises; or,

3.	will involve the production, storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances; shall be prohibited in an Identified Floodplain Area. No variance shall be granted.
B.	The following list of materials and substances are considered dangerous to human life and are prohibited in an Identified Floodplain Area:
 

•
•
•	Acetone Ammonia Benzene	
•	Calcium carbide	
•	Carbon disulfide	
•	Celluloid	
•	Chlorine	
•	Hydrochloric acid	
•	Hydrocyanic acid	
•	Magnesium	
•	Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen	
•	Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.)	
•	Phosphorus	
•	Potassium	
•	Sodium	
•	Sulphur and sulphur products	
•	Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides)	
•	Radioactive  substances,  insofar  as  such  substances  are
regulated.	not  otherwise

Section 5.05 Special Requirements for Subdivisions and Land Developments

All subdivision proposals and development proposals in Identified Floodplain Areas where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision or Letter of Map Revision. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant.

Section 5.06 Special Requirements for Manufactured Homes

A.	Within any Identified Floodplain Area, manufactured homes shall be prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with criteria in Article VIII, all manufactured homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:

1.	placed on permanent foundation;

2.	elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least two and one half (2 ½) feet above base flood elevation;

3.	anchored to resist floatation, collapse, or lateral movement; and

4.	have all ductwork and utilities including HVAC/heat pump elevated to the Regulatory Flood Elevation.

B.	Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with the manufacturers’ installation instructions as provided by the manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 “International Residential Building Code” or the “U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development’s
 
Permanent Foundations for Manufactured Housing,” 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto and 34 PA Code Chapter 401-405 shall apply.

C.	Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the 2009 IBC, and the 2009 IRC or the most recent revisions thereto and 34 PA Code, as amended where appropriate and/or applicable to units where the manufacturers’ standards for anchoring cannot be provided or were not established for the proposed unit(s) installation.

Section 5.07 Special Requirements for Recreational Vehicles

Recreational vehicles in Zones A and AE must be either:

A.	on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or

B.	fully licensed and ready for highway use.

ARTICLE VI. PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES

Section 6.01 Prohibited Activities

In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, the following activities shall be prohibited within any Identified Floodplain Area:

A.	The commencement of any of the following activities; or the construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or intended to be used, for any of the following activities:

1.	Hospitals

2.	nursing homes

3.	jails or prisons

B.	The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision. ‘

ARTICLE VII. EXISTING STRUCTURES IN IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREAS

Section 7.01 Existing Structures

The provisions of this Ordinance do not require any changes or improvements to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement is made to any existing structure, the provisions of Section 7.02 shall apply.

Section 7.02 Improvements

The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:

A.	Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement, of any kind to an existing
 
structure, to an extent or amount of fifty (50) percent or more of its market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance.

B.	The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 35 PA Code, as amended and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.

C.	Within any Floodway Area/District (Refer Section 4.02 A), no new construction or development shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.

D.	Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to an existing structure, in an extent or amount of less than fifty (50) percent of its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest extent possible.

ARTICLE VIII. VARIANCES

Section 8.01 General

If compliance with any of the requirements of this Ordinance would result in an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner, Haycock Township may, upon request, grant relief from the strict application of the requirements.

Section 8.02 Variance Procedures and Conditions

Requests for variances shall be considered by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the procedures contained in Section 3.12 and the following:

A.	No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or activity within any floodway area that would cause any increase in the BFE. In A Area/District, BFEs are determined using the methodology in Section 4.02 C.

B.	No variance shall be granted Prohibited Activities (Article VI) or Development Which May Endanger Human Life (Section 5.04).

C.	If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary to provide relief.

D.	In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall attach whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and to achieve the objectives of this Ordinance.

E.	In reviewing any request for a variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider, at a minimum, the following:

1.	That there is good and sufficient cause.

2.	That  failure  to  grant  the  variance  would  result  in  exceptional  hardship  to  the applicant.

3.	That the granting of the variance will

a.	neither  result  in  an  unacceptable  or  prohibited  increase  in  flood  heights,
 
additional threats to the public safety, or extraordinary public expense;

b.	nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public, or conflict with any other applicable state or local ordinances and regulations;

c.	that the granting of a variance is consistent with requirements of Section 910.2 Zoning Hearing Board’s  Functions;  Variances, of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of 1968, P.L 805, No 247 as amended.

F.	Whenever a variance is granted, the Haycock Township shall notify the applicant in writing that:

1.	The  granting  of  the  variance  may  result  in  increased  premium  rates  for  flood insurance.

2.	Such variance may increase the risks to life and property.

G.	A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be maintained by Haycock Township. In addition, a report of all variances granted during the year shall be included in the annual report to the FEMA.

Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the one-percent (1%) annual chance flood.

ARTICLE IX DEFINITIONS

Section 9.01 General

Unless  specifically  defined  below,  words  and  phrases  used  in  this  Ordinance  shall  be interpreted so as to give this Ordinance its most reasonable application.

Section 9.02 Specific Definitions

ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE – A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principle use or structure.

BASE FLOOD - A flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood" or one-percent (1%) annual chance flood).

BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE - The volume of water resulting from a Base Flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in cubic feet per second (cfs).

BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) - The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1-percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT – Any area of the building having its floor below ground level on all sides. BUILDING - A combination of materials to form a permanent structure having a roof which is
used  for  the  shelter  or  enclosure  of  persons,  animals  or  property.  Included  shall  be  all
manufactured homes and trailers to be used for human habitation.
 
CONSTRUCTION (NEW) - Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after March 16, 2015 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. Any construction started after April[LR1] 15, 1977 and on or before March 16, 2015 is subject to the Ordinance in effect at the time the permit was issued, provided that start of construction was within 180 days of permit issuance.

DEVELOPMENT - Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures; the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities; filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations; storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.

FLOOD - A temporary inundation by surface water of normally dry land areas.

FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) - The official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) - The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR - Person appointed by the Board of Supervisors to administer and enforce this Ordinance.

FLOODPLAIN AREA (FLOODPLAIN) - A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or watercourse; and any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of surface waters from any source.

FLOODPLAIN VIOLATION - The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's flood plain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR §60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

FLOODPROOFING - Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.

FLOODWAY - The channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE - The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

HISTORIC STRUCTURES – Any structure that is:

A.	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; or
 

B.	certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; or

C.	individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or

D.	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that have been certified either:

1.	By an approved state program determined by the Secretary of the Interior or

2.	Directly by the interior in states without approved programs.

IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA – this term is an umbrella term that includes all of the areas within which the community has selected to enforce floodplain regulations. It will always include the area identified as the Special Flood Hazard Area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Insurance Study, and additional areas identified by the Township.  Refer Section 4.01 and
4.2	for the specifics on what areas the Township has included in the Identified Floodplain Area.

LOWEST FLOOR - The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished, flood resistant partially enclosed area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the structure is in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this Ordinance.

MOBILE HOME (MANUFACTURED HOME) - A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days.

MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION (NEW) – A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading for the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.

MANUFACTURED (MOBILE) HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION (EXISTING) – A manufactured
(mobile) home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which  the  manufactured  (mobile)  homes  are  to  be  affixed  (including,  at  a  minimum,  the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations
adopted by Haycock Township.

MANUFACTURED  HOME  PARK  OR  SUBDIVISION  EXPANSION  –  The  preparation  of
additional sites at an existing manufacture home park or subdivision by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
 

MINOR REPAIR - The replacement of existing work with equivalent materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent, or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety.

PERSON - An individual, partnership, public or private association or corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.

POST-FIRM STRUCTURE - A structure for which construction or substantial improvement occurred after September 3, 1980 and, as such, would be required to be compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.

PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE - A structure for which construction or substantial improvement occurred on or before September 3, 1980 and, as such, would not be required to be compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.

RECREATIONAL VEHICLE - A vehicle which is:

A.	built on a single chassis; and

B.	not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal projections; and

C.	designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and

D.	not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION - The base flood elevation (BFE) or estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a freeboard safety factor of one and one-half (1 ½) feet.

SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) - An area in the floodplain subject to a 1 percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or, AH.

START OF CONSTRUCTION - Includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the Permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of the permit and shall be completed within twelve (12) months after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
 
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first, alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

STRUCTURE – A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.

STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY - Refer Use, Accessory.

STRUCTURE (EXISTING) – A structure for which the “start of construction” commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975 for FIRMs effective before that date. “Existing structure” may also be referred to as “existing construction”.

SUBDIVISION - The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs, or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development.

SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE - Damage from any cause sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent or more of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT - Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.

UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) – The statewide building code adopted by The Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality, a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to residential and commercial buildings, The Code adopted The International Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by reference, as the construction standard applicable with the State floodplain construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.

USE, ACCESSORY OR STRUCTURE - A use or structure located on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, a principal use or structure and clearly incidental or subordinate to, and in connection with, the principal use or structure.

VARIANCE – A grant of relief by the Haycock Township Zoning Hearing Board from the terms of a floodplain management regulation.

VIOLATION – The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s flood plain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
 
§60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (c)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

Section 10.01 Repealer

Any Ordinance or Ordinance provision of the municipality inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Ordinance is hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
 

ENACTED and ORDAINED at a regular meeting of the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors on the	th  day of	, 2015.	This Ordinance shall take effect on March 16, 2015.[LR2]


BOARD OF SUPERVISORS


Kathleen M. Babb, Chairwoman



Michael Lennard, Vice Chairman



Henry DePue, Member


ATTEST:



Nancy M. Yodis, Township Secretary/Treasurer
 
ORDINANCE NO.  	

AN ORDINANCE OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 86, SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE, SECTION 202, TERMINOLOGY TO REVISE THE DEFINITION OF FLOODPLAIN.

Haycock Township Board of Supervisors upon review by the Bucks County Planning Commission and Haycock Township Planning Commission hereby enacts and ordains the following Ordinance:

ARTICLE I Section 202 Terminology is revised to delete the definition for Floodplain (General Floodplain), Flood-proofing, Floodway, Floodway Fringe and Identified Floodplain Area and add the definition of Floodplain as follows:

Floodplain - Any areas of Haycock Township, classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated March 16, 2015 and issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof, including all digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study and,

For areas abutting streams and watercourses where the one hundred year floodplain (one percent [1%] annual chance flood) has not been delineated by the Flood Insurance Study, the applicant shall submit a floodplain identification study. The study prepared by a registered professional engineer expert in the preparation of hydrologic and hydraulic studies shall be used to delineate the one hundred year floodplain. The floodplain study shall be subject to the review and approval of the Township. All areas inundated by the one-hundred year flood shall be included in the Floodplain Area.

ARTICLE II Repealer. This Ordinance hereby repeals any  provision  inconsistent  with  the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance now in effect or of other Ordinances, to the extent of such inconsistency. All other provisions of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of Haycock Township, not inconsistent herewith, shall remain in full force and effect.

ARTICLE III Severability. The provisions of this Ordinance are declared to be severable. If any provision of this Ordinance is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such determination shall have no effect on the remaining provisions of this Ordinance.

ORDAINED AND ENACTED into Ordinance at a regular meeting of the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors on this	day of	_, 2014. This Ordinance shall take effect on March 16, 2015.

Attest:                                                                                                         Haycock Township
Board of Supervisors



Nancy M. Yodis, Secretary	Kathleen M. Babb, Chairwoman



Michael Lennard, Vice Chairman



Henry DePue, Member
 

ORDINANCE NO.  	

AN ORDINANCE OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS AMENDING THE TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE of 1975, AS AMENDED, TO ADD A DEFINITION FOR FLOODPLAIN, FLOODPLAIN PROTECTION STANDARDS AND REVISED SITE CAPACITY CALCULATIONS

Haycock Township Board of Supervisors upon review by the Bucks County Planning Commission and Haycock Township Planning Commission hereby enacts  and ordains the following Ordinance:

ARTICLE I	Section 229 Flood Fringe is deleted in its entirety.
ARTICLE II	Section 229 Definitions, Floodplain is revised to read as follows: FLOODPLAIN - Any areas of Haycock Township, classified as special flood
hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated March 16, 2015 and issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof, including all digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study and,

For areas abutting streams and watercourses where the one hundred year floodplain (one percent [1%] annual chance flood) has not been delineated by the Flood Insurance Study, the applicant shall submit a floodplain identification study. The study prepared by a registered professional engineer expert in the preparation of hydrologic and hydraulic studies shall be used to delineate the one hundred year floodplain. The floodplain study shall be subject to the review and approval of the Township. All areas inundated by the one-hundred year flood shall be included in the Floodplain Area.

ARTICLE III	Section 231 Floodway is deleted in its entirety.

ARTICLE IV	Section 504 Environmental Performance, Standards, paragraph a, is revised to read as follows:

a.	Floodplain - Any areas of Haycock Township, classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated March  16, 2015 and issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof, including all digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study and,

For areas abutting streams and watercourses where the one hundred year floodplain (one percent [1%] annual chance flood) has not been delineated by the Flood Insurance Study, the applicant shall submit a floodplain identification study. The study prepared by a registered professional engineer expert in the preparation of hydrologic and hydraulic studies shall be used to delineate the one hundred year floodplain.    The  floodplain  study  shall  be  subject  to  the  review  and
 

approval of the Township. All areas inundated by the one-hundred year flood shall be included in the Floodplain Area.

Floodplain shall be permanently protected and undeveloped, except that utilities, roads and driveways may cross floodplain where design approval is obtained from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and as permitted within the Haycock Township Floodplain Ordinance.

ARTICLE V	Section 504 Environmental Performance Standards, paragraph b is revised to read as follows:

b.	Floodplain Soils – Such areas shall remain undeveloped, except that utilities, roads and driveways may cross floodplain soils where design approval is obtained from the Township and the PA Department of Environmental Resources (where applicable) and  where no  other reasonable access is available. Floodplain soils shall not be used for Site Capacity Calculations (Section 501) protected where the one-hundred year floodplain is established pursuant to Section 504, paragraph a.

ARTICLE VI		Section 507 Floodplain Regulations, is revised to read as follows: Section 507 Floodplain Use Regulations
a.	Uses Permitted by Right

The following uses and activities are permitted in floodplain provided that they are in compliance with the provisions of the underlying zoning district, conform to all requirements of the Haycock Township Floodplain Ordinance, are not prohibited by any other ordinance and do not require structures, fill or storage of materials or equipment.

(1)	Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.

(2)	Public and private recreational uses and activities such as parks, day camps, picnic grounds, golf courses, boat launching and swimming areas, hiking, bicycling and horseback riding trails, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, tennis courts and hunting and fishing areas.

(3)	Yard areas for residential and non-residential uses.

(4)	Temporary uses such as circuses, carnivals, and similar activities.

(5)	Stream crossings for utilities, driveways and streets.

b.	Uses permitted by Special Exception
 


The following uses and activities are permitted in floodplain by special exception provided that they are in compliance with the provisions of the underlying district, conform to all requirements of the Haycock Township Floodplain Ordinance and are not prohibited by any other ordinance:

(1)	Utilities, public facilities and improvements such as streets, bridges, transmission lines and pipe lines.               .

(2)	Water related uses and activities.

(3)	Storage of materials and equipment provided they are not buoyant, flammable or explosive, and are not subject to major damage by flooding, and provided such material and equipment is firmly anchored to prevent flotation or movement. Storage or materials and equipment listed in Section 5.04 of the Haycock Township Floodplain Ordinance shall be prohibited.

(4)	Pervious parking areas.

ARTICLE VII Repealer. This Ordinance hereby repeals any provision inconsistent with the Zoning Ordinance now in effect or of other Ordinances, to the extent of such inconsistency. All other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of Haycock Township, not inconsistent herewith, shall remain in full force and effect.

ARTICLE VIII Severability. The provisions of this Ordinance are declared to be severable. If any provision of this Ordinance is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such determination shall have no effect on the remaining provisions of this Ordinance.

ORDAINED AND ENACTED into Ordinance at a regular meeting of the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors on this	day of	_, 2015. This Ordinance shall take effect on March 16, 2015.



Attest:                                                                                               Haycock Township
Board of Supervisors



Nancy M. Yodis, Secretary	Kathleen M. Babb, Chairwoman



Michael Lennard, Vice Chairman



Henry DePue, Member
 
ORDINANCE NO.  	


AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, COUNTY OF BUCKS, COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA, TO MANAGE ITS RIGHTS OF WAY; ESTABLISHING A RENTAL FEE; REQUIRING INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION; AND CREATING MECHANISMS FOR ENFORCEMENT.

WHEREAS, pursuant to its powers and under the Second Class Township Code, the general supervision of the affairs of the Township of Haycock, County of Bucks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, is in the hands of its Board of Supervisors; and,

WHEREAS, pursuant to Section 2322 of the Second Class Township Code, the Township of Haycock has authority to provide for conditions, restrictions and regulations concerning the use of any portion of the Township’s roads; and,

WHEREAS, said Board of Supervisors deems it necessary and advantageous to adopt the within Ordinance.

NOW THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED, the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Haycock, County of Bucks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, hereby enacts this Rights of Way Ordinance as provided herein.

SECTION 1 SHORT TITLE

This Ordinance shall be known as the “Haycock Township Rights of Way Ordinance”

SECTION 2 DEFINITION OF TERMS

2.1	TERMS.  For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following terms phrases, words and abbreviations shall have the meanings ascribed to them below. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number.

A.	“Affiliate” means a Person (i) with a direct or indirect ownership interest in the subject entity of five (5%) percent or more or which controls such interest, including forms of
ownership such as general, limited, or other partnership interests, direct ownership interests, limited liability companies and other forms of business organizations and entities but, not including
corporations, (ii) with a stock interest in the subject entity where the subject entity is a corporation and such stockholder or its nominee is an officer or director of the Grantee or who directly or indirectly owns or controls five (5%) percent   or more of the outstanding stock, whether voting or
non-voting; or (iii) which controls Grantee and/or, is controlled by, or is under common control with such Person or entity.

B.	“Cable Service” shall have the same meaning as used in the Communications Act.
 
C.	“Communications Act” means the Communications Act of 1934, as amended as of the time of enactment of this Ordinance.

D.	“Communication Antenna” means any device used for the transmission of radio, television, wireless telephone, pager, commercial mobile radio service or any other wireless communications signals.

E.	“Equipment” means any tangible asset used to install, repair, or maintain a Facility in the Public Way.

F.	“Exempt” means a service which is provided to residences or businesses within the Service Area, but which is exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance under Section 4.2 of this Ordinance.

G.	“Facility” means any tangible asset in the Public Way used or required to provide a Non Exempt service to residences or businesses within the Service Area. Facility includes poles, conduits, pipe and other structures or devices in a Public Way.

H.	“Grantee” means a person who enjoys a non-exclusive privilege to occupy or use a Public Way to provide Non Exempt service under this Ordinance and who is in continuous compliance with this Ordinance.

I.	“Gross Revenue” means all gross revenue of Grantee or any Affiliate of Grantee derived from the use or occupancy of Public Ways for the provision of Non Exempt services to Persons having a residence or place of business in the Service Area. “Gross Revenue” shall include amounts earned, regardless of: (i) Whether the amounts are paid in cash, in trade, or by means of some other benefit to Grantee or its Affiliates; (ii) whether the services with which the revenue is associated are provided at cost or the revenue amount can be matched against an equivalent expenditure; and/or (iii) how the amounts are initially recorded by Grantee or its Affiliates. “Gross Revenue” shall not be a net of: (a) expense, including but not limited to any operating expense; capital expense; sales expense; or commission; (b) any accrual, including, without limitation, any accrual for commissions; or (c) any other expenditure, regardless of whether such expense, deduction, accrual, or expenditure reflects a cash payment.  “Gross Revenue” shall not be
double counted, viz., “Gross Revenue” which has been included as Gross Revenue of both Grantee and an Affiliate but which sum is included in Gross Revenue due solely to a  transfer of funds between Grantee and the Affiliate shall not be counted for purposes of determining Gross Revenue.

J.	“Non Exempt” means a service which is provided to residences or businesses within the Service Area, but which is not exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance under Section 4.2 of this Ordinance.

K.	“Person” means (i) any natural person, sole proprietorship, partnership, association, limited liability company, corporation or other form of organization authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and (ii) provides or seeks to provide one or more Non Exempt services to residences or businesses in the Service Area. A governmental entity or a municipal authority is not a “Person”.
 
L.	“Public Way” means the surface of, and the space above and below, any public street, unopened right of way, highway, turnpike, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard, sidewalk, parkway, way, lane, public way, drive, circle, or other public right- of-way held by the Township in the Service Area.  Public Way shall also mean any easement now or hereafter held by the Township within the Service Area for the purpose of public travel and/or for utility and/or public service use dedicated for compatible uses.

M.	“Right-of-Way” means the land set aside for use as a street, alley, or other means of travel as established by the Commonwealth or other appropriate governing authority and currently in existence.

N.	“Service Area” means the present municipal boundaries of the Township, and shall include any additions thereto by annexation or other legal means.

O.	“Street” a public or private way used or intended to be used for passage or travel by motor vehicles. Streets are further classified by the functions they perform:

1.	Thoroughfares

a.	Expressway – designed for large volumes of high-speed traffic with access limited to grade-separated intersections.

b.	Arterial Highways – designed for large volumes of high speed traffic with access to abutting properties restricted.

c.	Collector Highways – designed to carry a moderate volume of fast- moving traffic from primary and secondary streets to arterial highways, with access to abutting properties restricted.



2.	Local Streets
a.	Primary Streets – designed to carry a moderate volume of traffic, to intercept rural roads and secondary streets, to provide routes to
collector highways, and to provide access to abutting properties.

b.	Rural Roads and Secondary Streets – designed to provide access to abutting properties and to primary streets.

c.	Marginal Access Street – a secondary street parallel to and adjacent to an expressway, arterial highway, or collector highway and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through- traffic.

3.	New development streets are classified as local streets unless a Traffic Impact Study determines that they are streets of a higher order.

P.	“Township” means the Township of Haycock, County of Bucks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or the lawful successor, transferee, or assignee
thereof
 



SECTION 3 REGISTRATION

Each Person, other than on a transitory basis, who occupies or uses or seeks to occupy or use a Public Way to provide a Non Exempt service to residences or businesses within the Service Area, or places any Equipment or Facility in a Public Way other than on a transitory basis, including Persons with installation and maintenance responsibilities by lease, sublease or assignment, must register with the Township. Registration is accomplished by filing with the Township a completed Provider Certification in the form shown at Appendix “A” to this Ordinance. [we will have to prepare the Appendix “A” later]

SECTION 4
GRANT OF ORDINANCE; EXEMPTIONS

4.1	GRANT. It shall be unlawful for any Person to construct, repair, remove, relocate or perform any work on or use any Facilities or any part thereof in a Public Way unless in compliance with this Rights of Way Ordinance. Continuous compliance with this Rights of Way Ordinance grants to Grantee a non-exclusive privilege to construct, repair, remove, relocate or perform any work on or use any Facilities or any part thereof in the Public Ways within the Service Area and to occupy or use the Public Ways for the purpose of providing Non Exempt service to residences or businesses within the Service Area.

4.2	EXEMPTIONS. Except as noted in 4.2.11 and 4.2.12 below, this Rights of Way Ordinance shall not apply to occupation or use of the Public Ways to provide:

1.	The transportation of passengers or property or both as a common carrier by   means of elevated street railway, inclined plane railway, railroad, street railway or underground street railway, trackless-trolley omnibus or by any combination of such means.

2.	The transportation of artificial or natural gas, electricity, petroleum or petroleum products or water or any combination of such substances for the public.

3.	The production, generation, manufacture, transmission, storage, distribution or furnishing of natural or artificial gas, electricity, steam, air conditioning or refrigerating service or any combination thereof to or for the public.
4.	The diverting, developing, pumping, impounding, distributing or furnishing of water from either surface or subsurface sources to or for the public.

5.	The collection, treatment or disposal of sewage for the public.

6.	The conveyance or transmission of messages or communications except as set forth in paragraph 4.3, by telephone or telegraph for the public.

7.	The diverting, pumping or impounding of water for the development or furnishing of hydroelectric power to or for the public.
 
8.	The transportation of oxygen or nitrogen, or both, by pipeline or conduit for the public.

9.	Any ancillary service reasonably necessary or appropriate for the accomplishment of services specified in one (1.) through eight (8.) above.

10.	Cable Service.

11.	Occupation or use of the Public Ways by persons or entities identified above shall be required to post a security bond or other cash surety in the amount of one hundred ten percent (110%) of the construction costs associated with repair and restoration of the Public Ways as determined by the Township Engineer.

4.3	WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES NOT EXEMPT.  This Ordinance
does not exempt any person or corporation who or which furnishes, installs or maintains wireless telecommunication facilities, including the installation of communications antenna which are regulated pursuant to the Haycock Township Zoning Ordinance (“Zoning Ordinance”) as may further be revised in the future.

4.4	NOT A CABLE SYSTEM. This Ordinance does not authorize a Person to provide Cable Service. A Person seeking to provide Cable Service must obtain permission from the Township under separate legislation of the Township.

4.5	NOT A POLE ATTACHMENT AGREEMENT. This Ordinance does not authorize the Grantee to attach to any pole or other structure in a Public Way, devices for the intentional transmission or radiation of radio frequency emissions or energy through the ether by any means now known or hereafter developed.

SECTION 5 LOCATION OF FACILITIES

5.1	INSTALLATION OF NEW FACILITIES. Subsequent to the enactment of this ordinance all new facilities services shall be installed underground with the exception of those facilities described in Sections 5.2 and 5.3 of this Ordinance.

5.2	CO-LOCATION OF FACILITIES.  Facilities may be co-located on facilities, including poles that exist on or before the enacted date of this ordinance including above ground facilities. Specifically, facilities may be co-located within the rights-of-way of those roads described as arterial highways, collector highways, primary streets, rural roads and secondary roads and marginal access streets in paragraph 2.1.N of this Ordinance.

5.3	INSTALLATION OF NEW FACILITIES ON MAJOR ROADS.  Facilities, including poles, may be installed above ground subsequent to the enactment of this Ordinance if they are installed within the right-of-way of those roadways described as arterial highways or collector highways in paragraph 2.1.N. above.  No new poles shall be installed closer than one hundred and fifty feet (150’) to an existing or proposed pole location.
 
5.4	COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER ORDINANCE REQUIREMENTS.  The authorization
of the installation of facilities hereunder shall not exempt an Applicant from compliance with the requirements of any other Ordinance of Haycock Township, including the Zoning Ordinance.

SECTION 6 STANDARDS OF SERVICE

6.1	CONDITIONS OF STREET OCCUPANCY.  All Facilities and Equipment installed or erected by the Grantee pursuant to the terms hereof shall be located so as to cause a minimum of interference with the proper use of Public Ways and with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who own property that adjoins any of said Public Ways.

6.2	RESTORATION OF PUBLIC WAYS.  If during the course of Grantee’s construction, operation, and/or maintenance of its Facilities and Equipment there occurs a disturbance of any Public Way by Grantee, Grantee shall, at its expense, replace and restore such Public Wayin accord with the specifications set forth in Section 506 of the Haycock Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.. If Grantee excavates the surface of any Public Way, Grantee shall be responsible for restoration of the Public Way and its surface within the area affected by the excavation. The Township reserves the right, after providing notice to Grantee, to remove and/or repair any work done by Grantee which is inadequate. The reasonable cost thereof, including the cost of inspection and supervision, shall be paid by the Grantee.  All excavations made by Grantee in the Public Way shall be properly safeguarded for the prevention of accidents.

6.3	TREES AND SHRUBBERY.  The Grantee shall notify Township and all affected property owners regarding Grantee’s need to trim trees or other natural growth upon and overhanging Public Ways so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with its Facilities or Equipment. Trimming shall be limited to the area required to clear its Facilities or Equipment.

6.4	SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.  All such work in the Public Ways shall be performed in accordance with applicable safety codes and technical requirements.

6.5	MAPS.  Prior to beginning any construction of Facilities, Grantee shall provide the Township with a construction schedule for work in the Public Ways which schedule shall be updated as changed. Upon completion of initial construction and upon completion of construction of any modification to its Facilities, Grantee shall provide the Township with a map showing the location of its installed Facilities, in the Public Ways.  Such maps shall be provided in both paper forms, as well as in an electronic format for placement on the Township’s GIS system.  Annually thereafter, Grantee shall provide a map to the Township showing the location of Grantee’s Facilities in the Public Ways on a scale of one hundred fifty feet (150’) per inch or whatever standard scale the Township adopts for general use.

6.6	EXCAVATIONS.  Grantee may make excavations in Public Ways for any Facility subject to obtaining approval from the Bucks County Conservation District for design of erosion and sedimentation control measures to be implemented during construction activity for those projects which involve 1,000 square feet or more of earth disturbance. Prior to doing such work, Grantee must apply for, and obtain, appropriate permits from the Township, and give appropriate notices to any other licensees and/or permittees of the Township, and/or other units of government owing or maintaining facilities which may be affected by the proposed excavation.
 
6.7	RESERVATION OF TOWNSHIP PUBLIC WAYS. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to prevent the Township or other agency of government or municipal authority from constructing sewers, grading, paving, repairing and/or altering any street and/or laying down, repairing and/or removing water mains and/or constructing and/or establishing any other public work or improvement.  If any of the Grantee’s Facilities or Equipment interferes with the construction or repair of any street or public improvement, including construction, repair or removal of a sewer or water main, the Grantee’s Facilities or Equipment shall be removed or replaced in the manner the respective Township or other agency of government or municipal authority shall direct. Any and all such removal or replacement shall be at the expense of the Grantee.  Should Grantee fail to remove, adjust or relocate its Facilities by the date established by the Township or other agency of government or municipal authority, the Township or other agency of government or municipal authority may cause and/or effect such removal, adjustment or relocation, and the expense thereof shall be paid by Grantee, including all reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the Township or other agency of government or municipal authority due to Grantee’s delay.

	SECTION 7	
RENTAL	[SAM1]

7.1	RENTAL

A.	In consideration of occupying or using the Public Ways under this Ordinance, Grantee shall pay to Township a rental equal to five (5%) percent of Gross Revenue.

B.	The rental shall be assessed on a calendar quarterly basis and shall be payable to the Township no later than forty-five (45) days after the expiration of the calendar quarter for which payment is due.  Grantee shall file with the Township a complete and accurate statement, under notarial seal, at the end of each calendar year quarter certified as true and correct by a representative notarial seal, at the end of each calendar year quarter certified as true and correct by a representative of Grantee, authorized to make such certification, explaining how the payment was calculated. In connection with the rental payment due on February 14th, the Grantee shall also submit to the Township, on that date or no later than six (6) months thereafter, a detailed statement by an officer of the Grantee certified by the Grantee’s independent certified public accountant verifying the accuracy of the Gross Revenue and rental payments for the previous calendar year, with a detailed breakdown and explanation of the calculation by each month.

C.	Grantee shall keep accurate books of account which shall clearly support the calculation of rentals and describe in sufficient detail the amounts attributable to each specific component of Gross Revenue. Such books of account and all supplemental information and source documents in support thereof including, but not limited to, third party remittances and contract documents, shall be made available to the Township and its authorized representatives for examination at a location in Bucks County, Pennsylvania, at any time during regular business hours on ten (10) days’ prior written notice and from time to time for the purpose of verifying or  identifying rentals owed to the Township. Grantee shall exercise its best efforts to obtain financial records of Affiliates for the Township for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of the rental payments.  Township shall have the right to examine and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under this Ordinance provided, however, that such examination shall take place within forty- eight (48) months following the close of each year. Any additional amount due to Township as a result of the examination and recomputation shall be paid within thirty (30) days following written notice to Grantee by the Township, which notice shall include a copy of the examination report.  In
 
the event that said examination determines that funds are owed to the Township in an amount in excess of two (2%) percent, the cost of said examination shall be borne by the Grantee and reimbursed to Township within thirty (30) days following written notice to Grantee.

D.	In the event that any rental or other payment is not made or the requisite documentation and certification is not provided on or before the applicable dates heretofore specified, interest shall be compounded daily and set at the one-year United States Treasury Bill rate existent on the date payment was due, plus three (3) percentage points. Any amount recomputed to reflect correct payment due shall bear interest as described from the date such payment was originally due.

SECTION 8
INSURANCE, INDEMNIFICATION AND BONDS OR OTHER SURETY

8.1	INSURANCE, INDEMNIFICATION AND BONDS OR OTHER SURETY.

A.	Grantee shall save the Township, its agents, employees and elected and appointed officials, harmless from and against all claims, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney’s fees, sustained on account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or demand whatsoever arising out of the construction, leasing, operation or maintenance of the Grantee’s Equipment, Facilities, and services specified by this Ordinance, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed and/or prohibited by the Ordinance and the rights granted thereunder.

B.	(1)	Grantee shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect throughout the term of this Ordinance insurance with an insurance company licensed to do business and	doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and acceptable to the Township. All companies will be required to be rated A-VII or better by A.M. Best or A better by Standard and Poors.  Grantee shall provide Township with proof of such insurance so required.




(2)	Grantee shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect, at Grantee’s sole expense, insurance coverage in the following types and minimum amounts:

Type	Amount

a.	Worker’s Compensation &
Statutory Employers Liability	$100,000/$500,000/$100,000

b.	Commercial General (public) - liability to include coverage for the following where the exposure exists:

Premises operations	Combined single limit for
Independent Contractors	Bodily injury and property Products/completed operations	Damages $2,000,000 per Contractual liability	Occurrence or its equivalent Explosion, collapse and
Underground property damage
 
c.	Comprehensive Vehicle insurance coverage for loading and unloading hazards for:

Owned/leased vehicles	Combined single limit of bodily injury Non-owned vehicles	and property damage $1,000,000 per Hired vehicles	occurrence or its equivalent

(3)	The Township shall receive without expense copies of certificates of insurance evidencing coverage stated above.

(4)	Grantee agrees that with respect to the above-required insurance, all insurance certificates will contain the following required provisions.

a.	Name the Township and its officers, employees, board members and elected and appointed officials as additional insured parties (as the interests of
each insured may appear) as to all applicable coverage (except worker’s compensation);

b.	Provide for sixty (60) days written notice to the Township for cancellation, non-renewal, or material change;
c.	Provide that all provisions of this Ordinance concerning liability, duty, and standard of care, including the Indemnity provisions, shall be underwritten by
contractual coverage sufficient to include such obligations within applicable
policies, subject to policy terms and conditions.

(5)	Companies issuing the insurance policies shall have no recourse against the Township for payment of any premiums or assessments which all are set at the sole risk of the Grantee. Insurance policies obtained by Grantee shall provide that the issuing company waives all right of recovery by way of subrogation against the Township in connection with any damage covered by these policies.

C.	(1)	Grantee shall obtain and maintain, at its sole cost and expense, and file with the Township, a corporate surety bond with a surety company authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in the amount of fifteen percent (15%) of Grantee’s estimated costs to secure Grantee’s performance of its obligations and faithful adherence to all requirements of this Ordinance.

(2)	No action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to such bond shall affect the Township’s rights to demand full and faithful performance under this Ordinance or limit Grantee’s liability for damages.

(3)	The bond shall contain the following endorsement: “It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be cancelled by the surety nor any intention not to renew be exercised by the surety until sixty (60) days after receipt by the Township of Haycock, by registered mail, of written notice of such intent.”




D.	All expenses of the above-noted insurance and bond shall be paid by the Grantee.
 

E.	The insurance policies mentioned herein shall contain an endorsement stating the following:

Should any policies of insurance be cancelled or coverages be reduced, before the expiration date of said policies of insurance, the issuer shall deliver sixty (60) days advance written notice to the Township.

F.	Neither the provisions of this Ordinance nor any insurance accepted by the Township pursuant hereto, nor any damages recovered by the Township thereunder, shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the Grantee and/or limit the liability of the Grantee under the Ordinance issued hereunder and/or for damages, either to the full amount of the bond or otherwise.

SECTION 9
ENFORCEMENT AND TERMINATION OF ORDINANCE

9.1	GENERAL.  In addition to all other rights, remedies and powers reserve and/or retained by the Township under this Rights of Way Ordinance or otherwise, the Township reserves the right to bring a civil action to collect any sums due to Township by Grantee and/or forfeit or revoke all privileges of Grantee under this Ordinance in the event of willful or repeated violation of this Ordinance.

9.2	PENALTIES.  Any Person which commits or suffers the violation of this Ordinance, shall, upon being found liable in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a fine  of Six Hundred Dollars ($600) plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Township.  A separate offense shall arise for each day or portion thereof in which a violation is found to exist or for each section of this Ordinance which is found to have been violated. In addition, the Township also may enforce this Ordinance by an action brought in equity.

SECTION 10 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

10.1	COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAWS AND ORDINANCES. The Grantee shall
at all times be subject to the exercise of the police power of the Township. The Grantee shall comply with all lawful ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations of the Township, County of Bucks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and the United States of America which are now in effect or hereafter enacted.

10.2	CONFLICT.  Whenever the requirements of this Ordinance are in conflict with other requirements of the ordinances of the Township of Haycock, the most restrictive, or those imposing the highest standards shall govern.  Privileges granted by this Ordinance do not constitute a waiver or impairment of the rights of the Township at law or equity now or henceforth existing to proceed versus Grantee for enforcement of the Ordinance or violation of this Ordinance or ordinances of the Township.

10.3	EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall become effective five (5) days after the date of its enactment.
 
10.4	SEVERABILITY. The provisions of this Ordinance are severable. If any section, clause, sentence, part or provision thereof shall be held illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision of the court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining sections, clauses, sentences, parts of provisions of this Ordinance. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Supervisors that this Ordinance would have not been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional section, clause, sentence or part of a provision had been included herein.

DULY ADOPTED THIS	DAY OF	, 2015.

ATTEST:	BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP
 
ORDINANCE NO.  119



AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AUTHORIZING THE BOARD OF SUPERVISORS TO PROHIBIT COMMERCIAL TRUCK TRAFFIC ON WOODCOCK LANE IN HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP AND PRESCRIBING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF THIS ORDINANCE



WHEREAS, pursuant to Section 1506 of the Second Class Township Code, the Board of Supervisors may make and adopt any ordinances necessary for the health and welfare of the Township and its citizens; and


WHEREAS, pursuant to Section 1527 of the Second Class Township Code, the Board of Supervisors may adopt ordinances to secure the safety of persons or property within the Township; and


WHEREAS, pursuant to 75 Pa. C.S. §6109(a)(7), the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township has the authority to prohibit or restrict the use of highways by particular classes of vehicles whenever the highway or portion of the highway may be seriously damaged by the use of such vehicles or when the movement of the vehicles would constitute a safety hazard; and


WHEREAS, pursuant to 67 Pa. Code §212.117(c), Haycock Township’s Engineer, C. Robert Wynn Associates, Inc. performed an engineering evaluation of Woodcock Lane and determined that due to sight obstructions, inadequate street width, and inadequate turning radii, truck traffic should be prohibited on Woodcock Lane; and


WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors finds it is in the interests of the Township and of its citizens to prohibit truck traffic on Woodcock Lane in Haycock Township for the safety of motorists and preservation of the road.
 
NOW THEREFORE, the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, in consideration of the foregoing, and the exercise of the police power, and in order to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, does hereby ENACT and ORDAIN as follows:


Section 1.	Definitions and Interpretations

a.	Words and phrases contained within this Ordinance, except where otherwise specifically provided, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, 75 Pa. C.S. §101 et. seq.
b.	In this Ordinance, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include the singular and masculine shall include the feminine.
Section 2.	Regulation of Length of Vehicles Utilizing Woodcock Lane

It shall be unlawful for any trucks or truck/trailer combinations in excess of 22 feet in length  to utilize Woodcock Lane within Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, with the exception of local deliveries and pickups.
Section 3.	Temporary and Emergency Suspensions.

The Township Supervisors or the Pennsylvania State Police shall have the power to temporarily suspend this Ordinance in the time of an emergency.
Section 4.	Signage

Haycock Township shall, upon the passage of this Ordinance and prior to enforcement, ensure that proper signage is installed to provide proper notification to all vehicular traffic of this size/length limitation on Woodcock Lane.
Section 5.	Authority of Police

The Pennsylvania State Police shall have authority to enforce this Ordinance.

Section 6.	Violations

Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than Twenty-Five Dollars ($25) and not more than Three Hundred Dollars ($300) together with any court costs associated with the case.
 
Section 7.	Severability

The provisions of this Ordinance are severable. Should any part of the Ordinance be declared by final court order to be illegal or otherwise invalid, the balance of the Ordinance shall be unaffected by such declaration.
Section 8.	Effective Date.

This Ordinance shall become effective five (5) days following its enactment.



ORDAINED AND ENACTED this	day of	, 2016.


 



ATTEST:
 
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP
 


 
Chris Bauer
 
Kathleen M. Babb, Chair
 




Michael Lennard, Vice Chair




Henry H. DePue, Member

















U:\TWC Clients\HAYCOCK\Ordinances\No Trucks\Ordinance.FINAL.07.28.16.doc
 
Revised 6/3/08



ORDINANCE NO.  	

AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, WHICH AMENDS ARTICLE IV, SECTIONS 404 AND 405, AND ARTICLE XI, SECTION 1108 OF THE HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE OF 1975 AS AMENDED SEPTEMBER 26, 1994, TO ESTABLISH STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS FOR WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS WITHIN THE TOWNSHIP.


WHEREAS, Section 1516 (53 P.S. Section 66516) of the Pennsylvania Second Class Township Code provides that the corporate powers of the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township (the “Board of Supervisors”) include the ability to plan for the development of the Township through Zoning, Subdivision, and Land Development Regulations under the Act of July 13, 1968 (P.L. 805, No. 247), known as the “Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code”;

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors on or about September 26, 1994, duly adopted Ordinance No. 71, revising and restating the Haycock Zoning Ordinance as adopted in 1975;

WHEREAS, Section 1601 of the Second Class Township Code provides that the Board of Supervisors may adopt Ordinances in which general or specific powers of the Township may be exercised, and, by the enactment of subsequent Ordinances, the Board of Supervisors may amend, repeal, or revise existing Ordinances (53 P.S. Section 66601);

WHEREAS, since its adoption, the Zoning Ordinance has from time to time been amended;

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors finds it is in the interest of the Township and its citizens to amend the Zoning Ordinance to make provisions for the establishment of standards and regulations for wind energy systems within the Township;

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors finds and determines that this Zoning Ordinance Amendment is consistent with the Township Comprehensive Plan and the Community Development Objective stated therein and in the Zoning Ordinance.

NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the forgoing, be it ENACTED and ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, as follows:

SECTION 1:	Article IV, Section 403, Table of Use Regulations is hereby amended by adding Use H18, Wind Energy System, which is permitted by right in all zoning districts, as follows:

	R
P	R
A	R
D	F
C	VC-
1	SR
C	SR
L	SR
M	SR
H	VC-
2	UR
L	P
C	CC	S
C	PI	EX
T
H18 Wind Energy
System	
P	
P	
P	
P	
P	
P	
P	
P	
P	
P	
P	
P	
P	
P	
P	
P

SECTION 2:	Article IV, Section 404 of the Zoning Ordinance is hereby amended to add Use H18, Wind Energy System:

H18  Wind Energy System

A device, which includes a structure and associated mechanism(s) and supporting components, which is installed above ground for the purpose of generating electrical energy, and may include, but not be limited to, wind driven turbines, and wind mills.
 
Revised 6/3/08



a.	Such use shall be accessory to Use  B1,  Single  Family  Detached  Dwelling, only.

b.	Minimum lot area: two (2) acres.

c.	Wind energy system shall be located no less than 100 feet (or 1.1 times the height of the device, whichever is greater) from a side or rear property line, no less than 100 feet (or 1.1 times the height of the device, whichever is greater) from overhead utility lines, and no less than 100 feet (or 1.1 times the height of the device, whichever is greater) from a street line. A device may be located within the front yard, provided that it is located to the side of the dwelling.

d.	There shall be a maximum of one device on a single parcel, or multiple parcels in same ownership, and shall not exceed that which will produce 10 KW of output, as determined by the public utility providing electric service to Haycock Township.

e.	Maximum height of the structure, including all moving and rotating parts, shall be 72 feet, measured from the undisturbed ground elevation at the base of the device, to the highest point of the arc of the blade, or to the top of the tower, whichever is greater.  If a device is attached to an existing structure, then the maximum height of the attached wind energy device shall not exceed 72 feet, including the height of the existing structure. Exceptions to building height, as specified in Section 529, do not apply to wind energy systems.

f.	Minimum distance between the undisturbed ground at the base of the device and any protruding blade shall be 15 feet, as measured at the lowest point of arc of the blades.

g.	All ground mounted electrical and control equipment shall be labeled or secured to prevent unauthorized access. The tower shall not provide steps or a ladder readily accessible to the public for a minimum height of 8 feet above the ground surface.

h.	Operation of a device shall comply with nuisance standards of Article V of the Zoning Ordinance.

i.	No artificial lighting (unless  required  by  the  Federal  Aviation  Administration), signage, or any forms of advertising shall be utilized or attached to the wind energy system.

j.	Design and location of a wind energy system shall consider, to the greatest extent possible, the aesthetics of the surrounding environment. In no case shall a device be attached to a structure listed on the Registry of Historic Structures. Township may require submission of illustrations and photos depicting the color, size, shape, and architectural features of the proposed device; and submission of color photographs of the proposed tower location taken from view of all adjoining properties and roads. All utility lines, including electrical wires other than wires necessary to connect the wind generator to the tower wiring, the tower wiring to the disconnect junction box, and the grounding wires, must be installed underground in accordance with the prevailing standards of the servicing utility company.

k.	Any wind energy system that is defective, or has been abandoned, that is deemed to be  unsafe by the Township Building  Code  Official  shall  be  required  to  be repaired by  the owner to meet federal, state, and local safety standards, or be removed by the  property owner within six months of written notification from the Township.  If the owner fails to remove or repair the defective or abandoned wind energy system, the  Township may pursue a legal action to have the  system removed at the owner’s expense.
 
Revised 6/3/08


l.	A plot plan of the parcel on which the facility will be located shall be submitted, which identifies property lines, lot area, location of existing natural and manmade features, location of the proposed wind energy device, ownership information for adjoining properties, and setback measurements from property and street lines.

m.	A wind energy system, including tower, shall comply with all applicable state construction and electrical codes, and the National Electrical Code. Prior to issuance of a building/zoning permit for installation of the device, applicant must submit to the Township all documentation required by the Township Building Code Official to verify that the design of the device complies with the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code (UCC), including, but not limited to, documentation of the structural integrity of the foundation, base, tower, and all appurtenant structures; and electrical design. Design information must be certified by a licensed professional engineer in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and/or equipment manufacturer.

SECTION 3:	Partial Repealer

All other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, as amended, shall remain in full force and effect. All other Ordinances or provisions of the Zoning Ordinance inconsistent herewith or in conflict with any of the terms hereof are, to the extent of said inconsistencies or conflicts, hereby specifically repealed.

SECTION 4:	Savings Clause

In event any portion of this Ordinance is determined by a Court of Jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or unenforceable, it should not affect any of the other provisions of this Ordinance or of the Zoning Ordinance. All other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and this Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.

SECTION 5:	Effective Date

All provisions of this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect five (5) days after the approval and adoption.

ORDAINED AND ENACTED this	day of	, 2008.

BOARD OF SUPERVISORS



Kathleen M. Babb, Chairwoman



Michael Lennard, Vice Chairman



Henry DePue, Member

ATTEST:


Nancy M. Yodis, Township Secretary/Treasurer
 
Revised 6/3/08
 
Revised 3/19/08


ORDINANCE NO. 109

AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA AMENDING ARTICLE II, DEFINITIONS AND ARTICLE V SECTION 502, OF THE HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE OF 1975, AS AMENDED SEPTEMBER 26, 1994, TO REVISE REGULATIONS FOR MINIMUM LOT AREA AND MINIMUM BUILDING ENVELOPE AREA.

WHEREAS, Section 1516 (53 P.S. Section 66516) of the Pennsylvania Second Class Township Code provides that the corporate powers of the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township (the “Board of Supervisors”) include the ability to plan for the development of  the Township through Zoning, Subdivision, and Land Development Regulations under the Act of July 13, 1968 (P.L. 805, No. 247), known as the “Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code”;

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors on or about September 26, 1994, duly adopted Ordinance No. 71, revising and restating the Haycock Zoning Ordinance as adopted in 1975;

WHEREAS, Section 1601 of the Second Class Township Code provides that the Board of Supervisors may adopt Ordinances in which general or specific powers of the Township may be exercised, and, by the enactment of subsequent Ordinances, the Board of Supervisors may amend, repeal, or revise existing Ordinances (53 P.S. Section 66601);

WHEREAS, since its adoption, the Zoning Ordinance has from time to time been amended;

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors deems it in the best interest of the citizens of the Township to amend the Zoning Ordinance to revise provisions associated with minimum lot area and minimum building envelope area, to ensure that newly created lots have sufficient area to permit reasonable development of the property while protecting natural resources.

NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the forgoing, be it ENACTED and ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, as follows:

SECT ION 1:	Article II, Section 204 is hereby amended to add Subsection c, as follows:

c.	Building E nvelope Area: The two dimensional area of a lot within which a principal structure is permitted to be built, and which is defined by the required yards of the lot.

SECT ION 2:	Article V, Section 502 is hereby amended to revise Subsection e, and add a new Subsection f as follows:

e.	Minimum lot area – This column refers to the minimum area of land on which a use can be located. All uses, activities, and buildings on lots with natural features shall comply with the requirements of Section 504 (E nvironmental Performance Standards).

f.	Minimum building envelope area – For all new single family detached dwelling lots having a minimum lot area of two acres or greater created in the RP and RA Zoning Districts after the adoption of this Ordinance, each lot shall have a minimum contiguous building envelope area of 15,000 square feet, which does not contain
 
Revised 3/19/08



any resources requiring 100% protection (including floodplains, floodplain soils, lakes, ponds, watercourses, wetlands, and tree protection zone),  easements, buffer yards, or any other restrictions from development. For new residential lots in the SRH Zoning District created after adoption of this Ordinance, and new residential lots created in conjunction with a cluster or performance standard subdivision after adoption of this Ordinance, no portion of the minimum lot area shall contain resources requiring 100% protection (including floodplains, floodplain soils, lakes, ponds, watercourses, wetlands, and tree protection zone), easements, buffer yards, or any other restrictions from development. On all residential lots that contain resources requiring 100% protection (including floodplains, floodplain soils, lakes, ponds, watercourses, wetlands, and tree protection zone), the minimum building envelope area shall be measured from the limit of these resource protected lands, rather than from the lot line, so that required minimum yard areas are free of resources requiring 100% protection.

SECT ION 3:	Partial Repealer

All other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, as amended, shall remain in full force and effect. All other Ordinances or provisions of the Zoning Ordinance inconsistent herewith or in conflict with any of the terms hereof are, to the extent of said inconsistencies or conflicts, hereby specifically repealed.

SECT ION 4:	Savings Clause

In event any portion of this Ordinance is determined by a Court of Jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or unenforceable, it should not affect any of the other provisions of this Ordinance or of the Zoning Ordinance. All other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and this Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.

SECT ION 5:	Effective Date

All provisions of this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect five (5) days after the approval and adoption.

ORDAINED AND ENACTED this	day of	, 2008.

BOARD OF SUPERVISORS


 		_ Kathleen M. Babb, Chairwoman


 		_ Michael Lennard, Vice Chairman


 



ATTEST:
 
 	_
Henry DePue, Member
 


Nancy M. Yodis, Township Secretary/Treasurer
 
Revised 3/19/08
 
Revised 3/19/08
 
Revised 3/19/08


ORDINANCE NO. 108

AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AMENDING REQUIREMENTS OF ARTICLE IV, SECTION 403, TABLE OF USE REGULATIONS OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE OF 1975, AS AMENDED SEPTEMBER 26, 1994, TO PERMIT FORESTRY BY-RIGHT IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS, ADD DEFINITIONS, AND REVISE FORESTRY REGULATIONS.



WHEREAS, Section 1516 (53 P.S. Section 66516) of the Pennsylvania Second Class Township Code provides that the corporate powers of the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township (the “Board of Supervisors”) include the ability to plan for the development of the Township through Zoning, Subdivision, and Land Development Regulations under the Act of July 13, 1968 (P.L. 805, No. 247), known as the “Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code”;

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors on or about September 26, 1994, duly adopted Ordinance No. 71, revising and restating the Haycock Zoning Ordinance as adopted in 1975;

WHEREAS, Section 1601 of the Second Class Township Code provides that the Board of Supervisors may adopt Ordinances in which general or specific powers of the Township may be exercised, and, by the enactment of subsequent Ordinances, the Board of Supervisors may amend, repeal, or revise existing Ordinances (53 P.S. Section 66601);

WHEREAS, since its adoption, the Zoning Ordinance has from time to time been amended;

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors on, or about, September 5, 1995, duly adopted Ordinance No. 72, amending the Zoning Ordinance to permit Use A4, Forestry, by-right in all zoning districts, except in the VC-1 and VC-2 Districts where the use is prohibited;

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors finds and determines that Section 403 should be amended to permit forestry by-right in the VC-1 and VC-2, to comply with current requirements of Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code; and use regulations and definitions should be amended to more appropriately reflect preservation of a healthy forest environment, and to conform with the State Forest Management Program developed by Pennsylvania Bureau of Forestry.

NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the forgoing, be it ENACTED and ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, as follows:

SECTI ON 1:	Article II.  Definitions is revised to add the following definitions in alphabetical order (section numbering of Article II is revised accordingly):
 
Revised 3/19/08





Basal Area

The cross sectional area of the stem of a tree measured 4½ feet above grade (dbh).



Basal Area Per Acre

The sum of each tree’s basal area in a woodland divided by the number of acres within the woodland.

Even-age Management

Management of a forest stand where the range in tree age does not exceed 20% of the rotation length resulting in a forest consisting of trees of the same or nearly the same age.

Forest Management Plan

A written description with a map of a specific forestry operation prepared before the operation commences, which meets the requirements of Section 403.A4 of this Ordinance.

Forest Plan Preparer

A forester who has a minimum of four years experience in the field of forestry including the preparations of forestry plans.

Forest Technician

A person who is, at a minimum, a graduate of a two-year forest technician program established by the Society of American Foresters.

Forester

A person who is, at a minimum, a graduate of a four year college or university forestry curriculum accredited by the Society of American Foresters.

Skid Road

Main route for skidding logs from woods to the landing. Skid Trail
A temporary trail used for skidding logs from the site of felling to the main skid road.
 
Revised 3/19/08


Skidding

Dragging trees on the ground, by any means, from the stump to the landing. Slash
Debris left after  logging, including logs, chunks, bark, branches, stumps, and broken understory trees or brush.



Snags

A standing dead tree without branches or the standing portion of a broken off tree.  Snags may provide feeding and/or nesting sites for wildlife.

Uneven-age Management

Management of a forest stand to maintain or create and regenerate a forest that has three or more distinctly different age classes including regeneration.



SECTI ON 2:	Article IV, Section 403.A of the Zoning Ordinance is hereby amended as it applies to Use A4, Forestry, as follows:

	RP	RA	RD	FC	VC-1	SRC	SRL	SRM	SRH	VC-2	URL	PC	CC	SC	PI	EXT
A4	FORESTRY	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P

SECTI ON 3:	Article IV, Section 403.A4 is revised to read as follows: A4 Forestry
Forestry  is  the  management  of  forests  and  timberlands  through  developing,
cultivating, harvesting, transporting, and selling trees for commercial purposes, beyond tree cutting that is necessary and approved as part of development of land or uses. These provisions are intended to ensure that forestry occurs in accordance with accepted silvicultural practices, as provided in Section 107 of the State Municipalities Planning Code.

a.	Forestry is permitted by-right, provided that a Zoning Permit shall be required for forestry. The following activities shall not require a zoning permit and are not required to comply with Subsections b. or c.:

(1)	Removal of diseased or dead trees;

(2)	Removal of trees that are in such a condition or physical position as to constitute a danger to the structure or occupants of properties or a public right-of-way;
 
Revised 3/19/08



(3)	Removal of trees with a trunk diameter of less than 6 inches;

(4)	Removal of up to 5 trees with a trunk diameter greater than 6 inches on each acre of land per calendar year, provided such does not exceed 20 trees with a trunk diameter of 6 inches or more per lot per calendar year, and provided that such tree removal does not involve trees: a) on slopes of greater than 25 percent or b) on areas within 50 feet from the centerline of a perennial stream/watercourse or intermittent stream/watercourse.

(5)	For removal of trees as part of development, requirements of Section 504, Environmental Performance Standards, shall apply in place of this subsection.

(6)	Christmas Tree Farms in which trees are regularly replanted. This exception shall only apply to trees that were planted for harvest.

(7)	Tree nurseries in which live trees are removed for replanting on another site. This exception shall only apply to trees that were planted for harvest.

b.	A zoning permit application for forestry shall be accompanied by a forestry plan prepared by a Forester, Forest Technician, or Forest Plan Preparer.  The Zoning Officer shall consult with the Township Engineer or a forester retained by the Township to determine the adequacy of the forestry plan. Each plan must contain the following components:

(1)	The criteria for selection of trees to be removed must be clearly stated and must conform to a plan for sustainable use of the forest resource. Such plan shall describe how the health and diversity of the forest will be protected and the potential for future timber harvests maintained.

(2)	The forestry plan shall address all applicable erosion and sedimentation control and stream crossing regulations under Chapter 102, Erosion Control Rules and Regulations and Chapter 105, Dam and Waterway Management Rules and Regulations.

(3)	Forestry activities located within or discharging to any exceptional value or high quality watershed as classified by PADEP shall comply with all requirements of the PA Code, Chapters 92 and 93. The forestry plan shall specifically state how the applicant intends to comply with these regulations, and shall show the location of all perennial creeks and perennial watercourses.
 
Revised 3/19/08


(4)	The forestry plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:

	(a)	Design, construction, maintenance, and retirement of the access system, including haul roads, skid roads, skid trails, and landing;
	(b)	Design,  construction,  and  maintenance  of  water  control
		measures and structures such as culverts, broad-based dips,
		filter strips, and water bars;
	(c)	Design,  construction,  and  maintenance  of  stream  and
		wetland crossings;
	(d)	Property boundary for the tract on which the logging will occur and boundary of the proposed harvest area.
	(e)	A stand description for each stand located in the proposed
		harvest area  including number, species, and diameter of
		trees to be removed.
	(f)	Copies of  all required  permits shall be  submitted  as  an
		Appendix to the forestry plan.

(5)	
Each	
Forestry  Plan  shall  include  a  site  map  containing  the
following information:

(a)	Site location and boundaries, including both the boundaries of the property on which the timber harvest will take place and the boundaries of the proposed harvest area within the property;

(b)	Significant topographic features related to potential environmental problems;

(c)	Location of all earth disturbance activities such as roads, landings, and water control measures and structures;

(d)	Location of the crossings of all water bodies, including but not limited to, Waters of the Commonwealth/Waters of the United States; and

(e)	The general location of the proposed operation to municipal and state highways, including any accesses to those highways.

(6)	Proof of current general liability and/or worker’s compensation insurance.

(7)	Proof of PennDOT Highway Occupancy Permit or Township Driveway Permit for temporary access, as applicable. The application shall only be approved if the applicant demonstrates to
 
Revised 3/19/08


the satisfaction of the Township that the area street system is suitable in terms of structure, cartway width, geometry, safety, and capacity to accommodate the additional truck traffic.

(8)	Copy of County Conservation District “Letter of Adequacy” for the proposed erosion control facilities, including associated plans, reports, and other permits as required.

c.	The  following  requirements  shall  apply  to  all  forestry  operations,  in addition to the requirements for a zoning permit:

(1)	The landowner shall notify the Township at least five (5) working days prior to the commencement of operations and upon completion of all work prescribed under the forestry plan.

(2)	The forestry plan and all related permits shall be available at the forestry operation site.

(3)	Before any permitted logging operation begins, all trees which are to be felled in connection therewith, shall be clearly marked on the trunk and stump.

(4)	General operational requirements: The following requirements shall govern all forestry operations:

(a)	A “No Logging” buffer zone with a width of 25 feet shall be maintained on the property on which the logging operation is to be conducted along all public streets. The buffer shall be measured from the legal right-of-way. No trees shall be cut, removed, skidded or transported within the “No Logging” buffer zone except as necessary for access to the site from the public street.

(b)	A “Limited Logging” zone with a width of 50 feet shall be maintained on the boundary of the site on which the logging operation is to be conducted along abutting properties. Uneven-age management shall be practiced within the Limited Logging Zone where the residual stand must contain at least 70 square feet of basal area per acre consisting of trees 10 inches or greater in diameter at breast height.

(c)	A “No Logging” buffer zone with a width of 50 feet shall be maintained from the centerline of all perennial streams/watercourses. All earth disturbance related to forestry within this buffer zone shall be prohibited with the
 
Revised 3/19/08


exception of temporary stream/watercourse crossings permitted by PADEP. No equipment, skidders, dozers, or tracked or tired machines or vehicles shall be permitted within a no logging buffer zone except to permit crossing of watercourses. No trees shall be felled into a no logging buffer zone.

(d)	All temporary stream/watercourse crossings of a perennial or intermittent stream/watercourse shall be made with a temporary bridge. Skidding of trees, and the operation of any vehicle and equipment thru a perennial or intermittent stream/watercourse shall be prohibited.

(e)	Felling or skidding on, or across, any public street is prohibited without written approval of the Township or Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, whichever is responsible for maintenance of said street.

(f)	No tops or slash shall be left within 25 feet of any public street.

(g)	All tops and slash shall be lopped to a maximum height of 6 feet above the surface of the ground.

(h)	No tops or slash shall be left on or across a property boundary without the consent of the adjoining landowner.

(i)	Litter (trash) resulting from any forestry operation shall be cleaned up and removed from the site before it is vacated by the operator.

(j)	Any soil, stones and/or debris carried onto a public street must be removed immediately.

(k)	On slopes of greater than 25%, uneven-age management shall be practiced where the residual stand must contain 70 square feet of basal area per acre consisting of trees 10 inches or greater in diameter at breast height. No equipment, skidders, dozers, or tracked or tired machines or vehicles shall be permitted on slopes greater than 25%.

(l)	When the harvest is completed, both dirt roads used by the trucks and skid roads used to drag the logs from the woods to the loading area must be graded approximately to the original contours, and be seeded and mulched (hardwood or straw mulch) as necessary to establish stable groundcover.
 
Revised 3/19/08



(m)	Temporary stone tire cleaning entrance (when required as part of an approved erosion and sedimentation control plan) must be removed, topsoil replaced, and area graded to approximate original contour, and be seeded and mulched to establish stable groundcover.

(n)	The no logging buffer zone required by Subsection c.(4)(c) above along streams/watercourses shall be marked with survey tape, temporary non-destructive fencing or similar demarcation to prevent accidental incursion into the buffer zone with heavy equipment.

(n) Snags shall not be cut down unless the snag is a potential hazard to improvements (e.g. dwelling, outbuilding, etc.) on the property.

(5)	No tops or slash shall be left within a drainage swale.

(6)	The use of clear-cutting must be fully justified by a forestry plan prepared by a qualified professional, and shall comply with Subsection b. Detailed information concerning increased stormwater runoff, erosion control, and a plan to assure regeneration shall be provided. Clear-cutting shall not be allowed on contiguous areas greater than ½ acre. A full set of stormwater calculations shall be submitted to show that postdevelopment peak runoff will not exceed predevelopment peak runoff.

(7)	If forestry involves more than 2 acres, a minimum of 30 percent of the forest cover (canopy) shall be kept and the residual trees shall be well distributed to promote reforestation. The forestry plan shall provide for replanting where necessary to continue proper forest management.

(8)	Financial Security – Financial security shall be established in a manner acceptable to the Township to guarantee repair of all damage that may occur to public streets due to the forestry/logging operations, and to guarantee compliance with erosion and sedimentation control plans, compliance with stormwater management plans and restoration of the site upon completion of logging operations. Pursuant to 67 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 189, the Township may also require the landowner or operator to furnish a bond to guarantee the repair of roads. Financial security shall not be released until the Zoning Officer issues a written notification that all provisions of this Ordinance and the permit have been completed.
 
Revised 3/19/08



d.	Enforcement

(1)	Inspections. The Township Zoning Officer or other Township designated employee or consultant, may go upon the site of any forestry/logging operation before, during or after active forestry to:
1) review the Forestry Plan or any other required documents for compliance with this Ordinance; and 2) inspect the operation for compliance with the Forestry Plan and other onsite requirements of this Ordinance.

(2)	Violation Notices; Suspensions. Upon finding that a forestry/logging operation is in violation of any provisions of this Ordinance, the Township Zoning Officer shall issue the operator and landowner a written notice of violation describing each violation and specifying a date by which corrective action must be taken. The Township Zoning Officer may order the immediate suspension of any operation upon finding that: 1) corrective action has not been taken by the date specified in a notice of violation; 2) the operation is proceeding without a Forestry Plan; or 3) the operation is causing an environmental risk. Suspension orders shall be in writing, shall be issued to the operator and the landowner, and shall remain in effect until, as determined by the Township Zoning Officer, the operation is brought into compliance with this Ordinance, or other applicable statutes or regulations. The landowner or the operator may appeal an order or decision of the Zoning Officer in accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.

(3)	Penalties. Any landowner or operator who: 1) violates any provision of this Ordinance, or who fails to comply with a notice of violation or suspension order issued under Paragraph 2 of this subsection, shall be subject to a fine of not less than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00), nor more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), plus costs and attorney fees, in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. Each day of continued violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall constitute a separate offense.

(4)	Any operator who knowingly and willfully removes trees not designated for removal in the approved Forestry Plan or removes trees outside of the areas designated for removal by the Forestry Plan shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) per tree removed in violation of the provisions of the Forestry Plan and this Ordinance.
 
Revised 3/19/08


SECTI ON 4:	Partial Repealer

All other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, as amended, shall remain in full force and effect. All other Ordinances or provisions of the Zoning Ordinance inconsistent herewith or in conflict with any of the terms hereof are, to the extent of said inconsistencies or conflicts, hereby specifically repealed.

SECTI ON 5:	Savings Clause

In event any portion of this Ordinance is determined by a Court of Jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or unenforceable, it should not affect any of the other provisions of this Ordinance or of the Zoning Ordinance. All other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and this Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.

SECTI ON 6:	Effective Date


All provisions of this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect five (5) days after the approval and adoption.

ORDAINED AND ENACTED this ___     day of _	_	, 2008.

BOARD OF SUPERVISORS


__	_ Kathleen M. Babb, Chairwoman


__	_ Michael Lennard, Vice Chairman

 




ATTEST:

__ 	 Nancy M. Yodis, Township Secretary/Treasurer
 
__	_
Henry DePue, Member
 
ORDINANCE  NO. -'-'/0'--'lc 	

AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 71, THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP TO PERMIT NO-IMPACT HOME­ BASED BUSINESSES IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS; AND TO REVISE THE TIME PERIODS FOR PRESENTATION OF AND DECISIONS ON ZONING APPLICATIONS BEFORE THE HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP ZONING HEARING BOARD AND THE HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS

B AC KG R 0 U N D:

A. On or about September  26, 1994, by Ordinance No. 71, as amended, Haycock Township Board of Supervisors ("Board") enacted a zoning ordinance ("Zoning Ordinance") pursuant to its statutory authority, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code ("MPC"), Act 247 of 1968, as amended (53 P.S. §10101 et seq.);

B.  Act 43 of 2002 ("Act 43"), the Pennsylvania General Assembly amended the MPC requiring that a municipality's zoning ordinance permit no-impact home-based business in all residential zones as a use permitted by right (53 P.S. §10603);

C. Act 43 also amended the time periods for presentation and conclusions of applications and hearings before the municipal zoning hearing board and governing body (53 P.S. §10908(1.2); 10908(9) and 10913(2)(b)(1));

D.  Through careful study, the Board, with the assistance of its committees, has recognized that certain provisions of the Zoning Ordinance should be amended to comply with Act 43 and to permit no-impact home-based business in all zones as a use permitted by right; and

E. The proposed amendments have· been advertised, considered and reviewed in accordance with MPC Section 609 (53 P.S. §10609).

NOW, THEREFORE,  BE  IT ENACTED  AND  ORDAINED,  and  it is  hereby
ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, as follows:

Section 01:  A  new  subsection  H1b.(8)  is  added  to Section  H-1 Accessory  Home Occupation, and shall read in full as follows:.

"Use H1h No-Impact Home Based Business. A business or commercial activity administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client or patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the premises, in excess of those
 
normally associated with residential use. Where the provisions of this subsection conflict  with the general standards pertaining to home occupations (Section  H1) of this ordinance, the provisions of this subsection shall control.

(a)	The no-impact home-based business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the property and the surrounding uses, residential and non-residential.

(b)	A no-impact home-based business is only permitted on the same lot with and must be clearly incidental and accessory to a permitted residential dwelling that is the bona fide residence of the principal practitioner of the business activity.

(c)	A no-impact home-based business must be conducted within a single-family detached dwelling which is the bona fide residence of the principal practitioner or in an accessory building thereto which is normally associated with the residential use. The no-impact home-based business shall be carried on wholly indoors.


(d)	The maximum amount of floor area devoted to a no-impact home- based business shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the gFOt111d	-  rtllil/l­
--r area of the principal residential dwelling structure (excluding the   Ali
ground  area  covered  by  an  attached  garage  or  such  other  similar
building), or six hundred (600) square feet, whichever is less.

(e)	The no-impact home-based business shall employ no employees, contractors, agents or representatives other than family members of the principal practitioner, who also must reside in the dwelling unit.

(f)	Any display or sale of retail goods or stockpiling of inventory of a substantial nature is prohibited.

(g)	There shall be no outside appearance of a business use or activity, including but not limited to signs, parking, lights, and waste disposal.

(h)	The no-impact home-based business activity may not use any equipment or process that creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic interference, including interference with radio or television reception, which is detectable in the neighborhood.

(i)	The no-impact home-based business may not involve any illegal activity.








2
 
G) The no-impact  home-based  business  may not generate  any solid waste or sewage discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with a residential use.

(k)	A no-impact home-based business use is not permitted where prohibited by a deed restriction, covenant or agreement restricting the use of land, master deed, bylaw or other document applicable to a common interest ownership community.

(I)	A zoning permit shall  be required for all no-impact home-based business uses."

Section 02: Subsection 403, the Table of Use Regulations, is hereby amended to insert use H1h, No-Impact Home-Based Business, under Accessory Uses. Columns headed by the following are amended to insert a "P" in the corresponding boxes with the H1h No-Impact Home-Based Business use as a use permitted by right:

"RP" - Resource Protection "RA" - Rural-Agricultural "RD" - Rural Development "FC" - Future Commercial 'VC-1" - Village Center - 1
"SRC" - Suburban Residential Conservation
"SRL" - Suburban Residential Low "SRM" - Suburban Residential Medium "SRH" - Suburban Residential High "VC-2" - Village Center - 2
"URL" - Urban Residential Low "PC"-PlannedCommercial "CC" - Central Commercial "SC" - Select Commercial
"Pl" - Planned Industrial
"Ext" - Extraction.

Section 03: Subsection c. of Section 1109, Hearings, of the Zoning Ordinance is amended in full to read as follows:

"c.	The  first  hearing  before  the  Board  or  hearing  officer  shall  be commenced  within	sixty  (60)  days  from  the  date  of  receipt  of  the applicant's  completed  application,  unless the applicant  has  agreed  in writing to an extension  of time.	Each subsequent  hearing before the Board or hearing officer shall be held within forty-five (45) days of the prior hearing, unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant in writing or on the record.  An applicant shall complete the presentation of his case-in-chief within one hundred (100) days of the first hearing.	Upon the request of the applicant, the Board or hearing officer shall assure that the applicant




3
 
receives at least seven (7) hours of hearings within the one hundred (100) days, including the first hearing. Persons opposed to the application shall complete the presentation of their opposition to the application within one hundred (100) days of the first hearing held after the completion of the applicant's case-in-chief. An applicant may, upon request, be granted additional hearings to complete his case-in-chief provided the persons opposed to the application are granted an equal number of additional hearings. Persons opposed to the application may, upon the written consent or consent on the record by the applicant and Haycock Township, be granted additional hearings to complete their opposition to the application provided the applicant is granted an equal number of additional hearings for rebuttal."

Section 4:	Subsection  k. of Section  1109, Hearings, of the  Zoning  Ordinance is amended in full to read as follows:

"k. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing before the Board or hearing officer. Where the application is contested or denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon together with the reasons therefore. Conclusions based on any provisions of this section, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, or any other applicable rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the facts found. If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer and there has been no stipulation that his decision or findings are final, the Board shall make his report and recommendations available to the parties within forty-five (45) days and the parties shall be entitled to make written representations thereon to the Board prior to final decision or entry of findings, and the Board's decision shall be entered no later than thirty (30) days after the report of the hearing officer.

Except for challenges filed under section 916.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code or Section 1112 of the Zoning Ordinance, where the Board fails to render the decision within the period required by this subsection k. or fails to commence, conduct or complete the required hearing as provided in subsection c. hereof, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time. When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of the failure of the Board to meet or render a decision as hereinabove provided, the Board shall give public notice of said decision within ten (10) days from the last day it could have met to render a decision in the same manner as provided in subsection a. If the Board shall fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing in this subsection k. shall prejudice the right




4
 

of any party opposing the application to appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction."

Section 5:	Subsection i. of Section 1108, ·Governing Body: Powers and Duties - Conditional Uses, of the Zoning Ordinance is amended in full to read:

"Administration. The Board of Supervisors shall commence, conduct and complete the required hearing in the manner provided in Section 1109 of this Ordinance and Section 908(1.2) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. The Board of Supervisors shall render a written decision on the application and communicate it to the applicant in the manner provided in Section 1109.k. of this Ordinance and Section 913.2(b)(1) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. Where the Board  of Supervisors fails to render the decision within the period required by this subsection or fails to commence, conduct or complete the required hearing as provided in this subsection, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time. When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of the failure of the Board of Supervisors to meet or render a decision as hereinabove provided, the Board of Supervisors shall give public notice of the decision within ten (10) days from the last day it could have met to render a decision in the same manner as required by Section 1109.a. of this Ordinance. If the Board of Supervisors shall fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do so."

Section 6: In addition, all inconsistent provisions of other ordinances or resolutions are repealed to the extent of the inconsistency. All other provisions of the ordinances of Haycock Township shall remain in full force and effect.

Section 7: The provisions of this ordinance are declared to be severable.  If any provision of this ordinance is declared to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall have no effect on the remaining provisions of this ordinance.

Section 8: This ordinance shall be effective five (5) days after adoption by the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors.
















5
 


ORDAINED and ENACTED this	, A.D., 2005.



 


ATTEST:
 
HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS

/J	;hfe	K{-d :' ;r





Mi	hai'
 







































U:\TWC Clients\HAYCOCK\Ordinance\Zoning-No  Impact Home Based Business\No lmpact  Homes Based Businesses{all
districts).11.22.04.doc







6
 

ORDINANCE NO. I i>O



AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP  OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA,  MERGING AND RESTATING IN FULL ORDINANCE  NO 95 AND ITS AMENDMENT,  ORDINANCE  NO. 96, WHICH AMENDED ARTICLE  IV SECTION 404 OF THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, ESTABLISHING STANDARDS  AND  REGULATIONS  FOR TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES WITHIN  HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP



WHEREAS, Section 1516 (53 P.S. §66516) of the Pennsylvania Second Class Township Code provides that the corporate powers of the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township (the "Board of Supervisors") include the ability to plan for the development of the township through zoning, subdivision and land development regulations. under the act of July 13, 1968 (P.L. 805, No. 247), known as the "Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code."

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors on or about September, 26, 1994, duly adopted Ordinance No. 71, revising and restating the  Haycock Zoning Ordinance  as adopted in 1975;

WHEREAS, Section 1601 of the Second Glass Township Code provides that the Board of Supervisors may adopt ordinances in which general or specific powers of the township may be exercised, and, by the enactment of subsequent ordinances, the Board of Supervisors may amend, repeal or revise existing ordinances (53 P.S. Section 66601);

WHEREAS, the since its adoption, the Zoning Ordinance has from time to time been amended;

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors on or about December 1, 2003, duly adopted Ordinance No. 95, amending the Zoning Ordinance to make provisions for the establishment of standards and regulations for telecommunications facilities within the Township and on or about May 3, 2004, duly adopted Ordinance No. 96, amending Ordinance No. 95 regarding exemptions to the Ordinance and regarding the location on which a telecommunications facility may be located in Haycock Township;

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors finds and determines that Ordinance No. 95 and its Amendment, Ordinance No. 96 should be merged and restated in full for ease and better efficiency of use.

NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing, be it ENACTED and ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, as follows:

Section 01: Article IV section 404 of the Zoning Ordinance is amended by merging Ordinance 95 and its Amendment, Ordinance No. 96 and the same is restated in full as follow:
 




I.	TELECOMMUNICATIONS   FACILITIES

11  PURPOSE

The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Haycock  Township and of those who visit this community, while accommodating the telecommunication needs of residents, visitors, community services and businesses. This section shall:

A.	P eserve the character and appearance of Haycock Township, while allowing adequate telecommunications services to be developed;

B. Protect the scenic, historic, environmental, and natural resources of Haycock Township, and property values therein;

 
C. Provide standards and requirements appearance, construction, monitoring, telecommunications facilities;
 
for  the  operation,  siting,  design, modification,	and	removal	of
 

D.  Minimize tower  and antenna  proliferation  by encouraging the sharing of existing telecommunications facility sites where possible and appropriate;

E.	Facilitate the provision of telecommunications  services to the residences and businesses of Haycock Township;

F.	Require, through performance standards, the location of telecommunication
. facilities  in nonresidential  areas and  away from other sensitive  areas  such  as
schools, hospitals, senior centers, and child care facilities.

I2 AUTHORITY TO HIRE INDEPENDENT CONSULTANTS

A.  Upon review of an application for use by special exception and/or Site Plan Review  for  a  telecommunications	facility,  the	Haycock  Township  Zoning Hearing  Board  (hereinafter  "Zoning  Board") and/or  the  Haycock Township Planning Commission (hereinafter "Planning Commission") may determine that it needs the assistance of an independent consultant or consultants to evaluate the application.  Upon making such a determination,  it may hire independent consultants, the reasonable costs of whose services shall be paid for by the applicant  from  escrow  funds  held with  the Township  pursuant  to  the  fee schedule set by the Board of Supervisors via Resolution.	These consultants shall be qualified  professionals with  an appropriate combination  of training, record of service, and/or certification in one or more of the following areas of expertise:  1) telecommunications/radio  frequency  engineering;  2) structural engineering; 3) assessment of electromagnetic fields; 4) legal issues; 5) other



2
 

areas, if determined necessary by the Zoning Board or the Planning Commission.
B. The  Zoning   Board  and   Planning  Commission   may  provide  the  full
application to any independent consultant(s) hired pursuant to this section for their analysis and review. Consultants shall report directly to the Zoning Board and/or the Planning Commission.

13	CONSISTENCY WITH FEDERAL LAW

The Zoning Board's decision regarding an application is intended to be in agreement with federal law, particularly the Telecommunications Act of 1996 as it may be amended. This section is not intended to:

A.	Prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services;

B.	Unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services; or

C. Regulate personal wireless services on  the basis of the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions, to the extent that the regulated services and facilities comply with the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulations concerning such emissions.

14	EXEMPTIONS

The following telecommunications facilities and uses are exempt from the requirements of this section: police, fire, ambulance, and other emergency dispatch; amateur (ham) radio, citizens-band radio, single-use local business radio dispatch, television antennas for home use, or temporary mobile facilities for television or radio broadcasts ("Exempt Facilities").

No FCC-licensed telecommunications facility or use, except applicants for telecommunications facilities permits that received Zoning Hearing Board approval prior to the date of the enactment of Ordinance 95, shall be considered exempt from this section for any reason, whether or not said facility or use is proposed to share a tower or other structure with Exempt Facilities

15	DEFINITIONS

Definitions contained in this section shall be applicable to this section only, and do not pertain to the remainder of the Haycock Township Zoning Ordinance. Definitions in the Haycock Township Zoning Ordinance  will pertain to this section unless the term is specifically defined herein.

ANTENNA: A device for transmitting and/or receiving electromagnetic signals.





3
 
APPLICANT: A person who applies for a telecommunications facility siting. An applicant can be the landowner of record, or the telecommunications service provider or agent of record, with the landowner's (or other legally designated representative)  written  permission.

BASE STATION: The primary sending and receiving site in a telecommunications facility. More than one base station and/or more than one variety of telecommunications provider can be located on a single tower or structure.

CELLULAR TELECOMMUNICATIONS: A commercial Low Power Mobile Radio Service bandwidth licensed by the FCC to providers in a specific geographical area in which the radio frequency spectrum is divided into discrete channels which are assigned in groups to geographic cells within a service area and which are capable of being reused in different cells within the service area.

CHANNEL: The segment of the radiation spectrum to or from an antenna which carries one signal. An antenna may radiate on many channels simultaneously.

CO-LOCATION: Locating wireless telecommunications equipment from more than one provider at a single site or structure.

FCC: Federal Communications Commission. The government agency responsible for regulating telecommunications in the United States.

LOCATION: References to site location shall be the exact longitude and latitude, to the nearest tenth of a second. Bearing or orientation should be referenced to true north.

MODIFICATION  OF  AN  EXISTING TELECOMMUNICATIONS   FACILITY:
Any change, or proposed change, in power input or output, number of antennas, change in antenna type(s) or model(s), repositioning of antenna(s), or change in number of channels per antenna above the maximum number approved under an existing permit.

MODIFICATION OF AN EXISTING TOWER OR STRUCTURE:  Any change,
or proposed change, in dimensions pf an existing and permitted tower or other
structure designed to support telecommunications transmission, receiving and/or relaying antennas and/or equipment.

MONITORING: The measurement, by the use of instruments in the field, of non-ionizing radiation exposure at a telecommunications facility site as a whole, or from the towers, antennas or repeaters.

MONITORING PROTOCOL: The testing protocol, such as the Cobbs Protocol or the FCC Regulations (Title 47, Part 1, Section 1.1307 referenced as IEEE C95.3 1991), or one substantially similar, including compliance determined in


4
 

accordance with the National Council on Radiation Protection  and Measurements, which is to be used to monitor the emissions and determine exposure risk from existing and new telecommunications facilities.

MONOPOLE: A single self-supporting vertical pole with no guy wire anchors, usually consisting of a galvanized or other unpainted metal or a wooden pole with below-grade foundations.

PERMIT: An official action which sets forth the rights and obligations extended by Haycock Township to an operator to own, construct, maintain, and operate its telecommunications facility within the boundaries of the township.            ·

PERMITTEE: An applicant who is granted a permit for a telecommunications facility by Haycock Township.

RADIAL PLOTS: Radial plots are the result of drawing equally spaced lines (radials) from the point of the antenna, calculating the expected signal and indicating this graphically on a map. The relative signal strength may be indicated by varying the size or color at each point being studied along the radial. A threshold plot uses a mark to indicate whether that point would be strong enough to provide adequate coverage i.e., the points meeting the threshold of adequate coverage. The draw back is the concentration of points close to the antenna and the divergence of points far from the site near the ends of the radials.

REPEATER: A small receiver/relay transmitter and antenna of relatively low power output designed to provide service to areas which are not able to receive adequate coverage directly from a base or primary station.

ROOF AND/OR BUILDING MOUNT TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY:  A
telecommunications	facility where antennas are mounted to an existing structure on the roof (including rooftop appurtenances) or a building face.

STRUCTURALLY ABLE: The determination that a tower or structure is capable of safely carrying the load imposed by the proposed new antenna(s) under all reasonably predictable conditions as determined by professional structural engineering analysis including the wind load or any other structural requirements.

STRUCTURE: Any pole, telescoping mast, tripod or the like which supports a device used in the transmitting and/or receiving of electromagnetic signals.

TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING: A structure located at a base station designed principally to enclose equipment used in connection with telecommunications transmissions including any foundation that may be required.





5
 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY: All equipment, including any tower, structure, building, antenna, repeater and other related device which a telecommunications provider needs to broadcasts and receives radio frequency signals which carry their services.

TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY SITE: A property, or any part thereof, which is owned or leased by one or more telecommunications providers and upon which one or more telecommunications facility(ies) and any required landscaping are located.

TELECOMMUNICATIONS	PROVIDER: An entity licensed by the FCC to provide telecommunications services to individuals or institutions.                  ··

TEMPORARY  WIRELESS   TELECOMMUNICATIONS   FACILITIES:     Any
telecommunications facility designed for use while a permanent wireless telecommunications facility is under construction, rehabilitation or restoration.

TILED COVERAGE PLOTS: Tiled plots result from calculating the signal at uniformly spaced locations on a rectangular grid, or tile, of the area of concern. Tiled plots (in comparison to radial plots) 1) provide a uniform distribution of points over the area of interest, 2) usually allow the same grid to be used as different sites are examined, and 3) do not necessitate the transmitter site be within the grid or area of interest. As with radial plots, the graphic display or plot can be either signal strength or adequate threshold. Tile plotting require more topographic data and longer (computer) execution time than radial plotting, but is preferable for comparative analysis.

TOWER: A permanent guyed, monopole, or self-supporting free standing mount, or in association with a building, other permanent designed to accommodate one or more antennas intended for transmitting and/or receiving television, AM/FM radio, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, or similar forms of electronic telecommunication.

16	PERMITS

No permit shall issue to an applicant for the construction, alteration, modification, installation or operation of any telecommunication facility prior to a completed application being received by the Township; site plan approval from the Planning Commission; the granting of a special exception from the Zoning Board when applicable; a letter of intent to allow co-location of telecommunications facilities being received by the Township, the removal bond (or other financial security) being received by the Township; proof of telecommunications facility insurance; the deposit of escrow funds and payment of all fees due to the Township.

An applicant for a telecommunications facility shall be a telecommunications provider, or must have a letter of intent or an executed contract to provide land or facilities to such an entity. A permit shall not be granted for a facility built on

6
 

speculation of a future letter of intent or contract with a telecommunications provider. A permit shall be granted only for a telecommunications facility with a user that has a current FCC license.



16.1	TELECOMMUNICATIONS   USE

Telecommunications use shall be considered a principal use of the property and, notwithstanding the provision of Section 400 of the Zoning Ordinance, is also permitted as an additional use on the property so long as the existing principal use on the property is a permitted use or in the district or a lawful nonconforming use. The existing principal use need not be affiliated with the telecommunications provider.

16.2	USE PERMITTED BY RIGHT

A new telecommunications facility attached to an existing telecommunication facility is a permitted use by right and may be located in any zoning district.

16.3	USE PERMITTED  BY SPECIAL  EXCEPTION

Telecommunications facilities are a use permitted by special exception upon compliance with the provisions of this section on parcels of land located on land owned by a government agency and located within 500 feet of the centerline of Old Bethlehem Road and Route 563. If it is demonstrated by an applicant that the telecommunication service needs of Haycock Township cannot be met by locating on land as referred to above, then a telecommunications facility may be located on land owned by a nonprofit entity located within 500 feet of the centerline of Old Bethlehem Road and Route 563. If it is demonstrated by an applicant that the telecommunication service needs of Haycock Township cannot be met by locating on land as referred to above, then a telecommunications facility may be located on land having a total acreage of five or more acres located within 500 feet of the centerline of Old Bethlehem Road and Route 563. Regardless of the parcel of land, the telecommunication facility must be located and constructed so that the greatest possible distance exists from the facility to the centerline of the referenced roadways.

16.4	APPLICATION

All applicants for telecommunications  facilities  permits  shall  include  the following information, as it applies to the specific type of telecommunications facility applied for, in addition to requirements of the Zoning Ordinance for uses by special exception:

A. The legal name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, tower or structure owner (if other than applicant), and landowner(s) of record. If the applicant, tower or structure owner or landowner is not a natural person, the



7
 

name and address of the company, the type of business entity, the state in which the company is incorporated and has its principal office. Written permission of the tower or structure owner and landowner(s) to apply for the special exception use permit shall be submitted along with written permission from the tower or structure owner and landowner(s) allowing the Township's independent consultant(s) to conduct any necessary site visit(s).
B.	The name, address and telephone number of the person to be contacted
with regard to the application. Notice, orders, and other papers may be served upon the person so named, and such service shall be deemed to be service upon the applicant's registered agent.

C.	The name, address, and telephone number of someone who is available on a  24-hour basis that is authorized to act in the event of·an emergency regarding the structure or safety of the telecommunications facility.

D.	A copy of the applicant's letter of intent or executed contract with the telecommunication service provider if the applicant is not the provider.

E.	The names and addresses of the landowners of record of all  abutting property.

F.	A report from qualified and Pennsylvania-licensed professional engineer(s) that:

1.	Describes the telecommunications facility height, design, elevation, width, support system and reasons and design implications for use or non­ use of guy wires.

2.	Documents the height above grade for all proposed mounting positions for antennas to be co-located on a tower or structure and the minimum separation distances between antennas.

3.	Describes the tower or structure's proposed capacity, including the number, height, and type(s) of antennas that the applicant expects the tower or structure to accommodate.

4.	Provides evidence of need, as described in Section I7.herein.

5.	Describes the output frequency, number of channels and power output per channel for each proposed antenna.

6.	For each antenna, describes the antenna gain (projected and maximum), polarization and radiation pattern (composite pattern for an antenna array), the power input to  antenna(s), including power input in normal use and at maximum output for each antenna and all antennas as an aggregate if tower is fully utilized.

7.	Describes the output frequency of the transmitter( s).


8
 



8.	For a telecommunications facility with multiple emitters, describes the results of an intermodulation study to predict the interaction of the additional equipment with existing equipment.

9.	Demonstrates the tower or structure's compliance with accepted structural engineering standards and if an existing tower or structure, that it is structurally able to receive the proposed addition. Any tower or structure shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the most current Telecommunications Industries Association (TIA) - Electronic Industries Association (EIA) Standard 222-F "Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures" and all applicable requirements of the Haycock Township Building Code. The proposed tower or structure must be designed and constructed so as to be able to withstand wind gusts of at least one hundred (100) miles per hour with no ice and 78 mile per hour basic wind speed with .5-inch radial ice.

10.	Provides proof that at the proposed site the applicant will be in at least minimum compliance with all federal, state, and local regulations, standards and requirements, the basis for such representation and a statement that the applicant commits to continue to maintain such compliance with both radio frequency interference (RFI) and radio frequency radiation (RFR) standards (including all Environmental Assessments and Historic Preservation requirements) and that such compliance is within the limitations of the latest standards set by the following oversight organizations:

The	American	National	Standards	Institute	(ANSl-C95-1,	as amended);

The Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE-C95.1, as amended);

The  National  Council on Radiation  Protection and  Measurements (CRP);

The International Radiation Protection Association  (IRPA) and the FCC.

11.	Describes any foundations to be built upon which telecommunications facilities are located. Identifies any blasting and earth movement that may be required, and provides plans and elevations of the area to be blasted or affected and describes the steps to be taken to reduce or eliminate potential effects of the blasting including vibrations and impacts to foundations, wells and other structures in the area. Provides a plan to identify abutters prior to blasting. The Zoning Board may, in its discretion, require the Applicant to notify additional property owners prior to blasting



9
 

that may be sufficiently close to the proposed location and may reasonably require additional information related to such site preparation.

12.	Provides a soil report for the site, which provides verification that the areas of land, where the foundation of the tower, any buildings and any anchors for guy wires will be located, are appropriate for constructing those structures thereon.

13.	Includes other information required by the Zoning Board that is necessary to evaluate the request and its impact upon the health and safety of the residents of Haycock Township.

G.	For a tower or structure, a Jetter of intent committing the tower or structure owner and future tenant(s) to permit shared use of the tower or structure by other telecommunications providers, without discrimination, if the additional users agree to meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use, including	compliance with all applicable FCC regulations, standards, and requirements and provisions provided herein.

H.	For a telecommunications facility to be installed on an existing tower or structure, a copy of the applicant's letter of intent or executed contract with the owner of the existing tower or structure.

I.	To the extent required by the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and as administered by the FCC, a complete Environmental Assessment (EA) draft or final report describing the expected impacts of the proposed telecommunications facility. To the extent the applicant claims that an EA is not required, it should provide an explanation as to why an EA is not required in the form of an opinion, ruling, or other certification from the FCC.

J. Proof of compliance with Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act, as amended, and with the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation's regulations under the Act.

K.	Detailed plans for emergency power generation, including:

1.	Demonstration of percent of electrical demand being proposed in event of loss of commercial power.

2.	Type of fuel, storage method, and expected means and frequency of fuel delivery to the site for power generation.

3.	Amount of generator time, based on historical power reliability for the area of the telecommunications facility, proposed frequency and duration of tests, and description of muffler system and methods for noise abatement.

4.	Feasibility of wind and/or solar power in conjunction  with storage batteries.


10
 


L. Two cross-sections of proposed telecommunications facility, drawn at right angles to each other, showing any guy wires or supports. This shall show the proposed height of the tower or structure above the average grade at the base. This shall also show all proposed antennas, including their location on the tower or structure as well as all electrical wires, cables, and support equipment.

M. A professional structural engineer's written description of the proposed tower or structure and its capacity to support additional antennas or equipment at different heights and the ability of the tower or structure to be shortened if future telecommunications facilities no longer require the original height.

N. An Existing Conditions Plan and Proposed Site Plan as defined in Section
I6.5.C. and D. herein.

0. All pertinent submittals and showings pertaining to: FCC permitting/ licensing;	Environmental Assessments and Environmental Impact Statements; FAA Notice of Construction or Alteration; aeronautical studies; all pertinent data, assumptions, and calculations relating to service coverage; and all pertinent calculations and/or measurement data related to non-ionizing radiation emissions and exposure, regardless of whether categorical exemption from routine environmental evaluation under the FCC rules is claimed.

P. An emergency plan to be implemented in the event that the tower or structure is deemed unsafe after inspection as described in section I9.E. and F. herein. The plan shall include measures to warn abutting landowners of an unsafe situation, to evacuate a zone where injury or property damage may occur, and to notify local authorities.

Q. Details of proposed method of financial surety as required in section I12. (Abandoned, Unused, Obsolete, Damaged, or Dangerous Telecommunications Facility or Portions of Telecommunications Facility) herein.

16.5.  SITE PLAN REVIEW

Site plan applications  for telecommunications  facilities  shall  include the following information:

A. Location Map: a copy of a portion of the most recent USGS Quadrangle map showing the area within at least a two-mile radius of the proposed telecommunications facility site, including the exact latitude and longitude (degrees, minutes, seconds to the nearest tenth).





11
 
B.	Vicinity Map at a scale of no smaller than 1 inch = 416 feet (or metric equivalent 1:5,000) with contour intervals no greater than 10 feet (or 3 meters) showing the entire vicinity within a 2,500-foot radius of the telecommunications facility site, topography, public and private roads and driveways, buildings and structures, water bodies, wetlands, landscape features, historic sites, and habitats for endangered species. It shall indicate the property lines of the proposed telecommunications facility site parcel and all access easements or rights of way needed for access from a public way to the site, and the names of all abutters or property owners along the access easement or who have deeded rights to the easement.

C.	Existing Conditions Plan: A recent survey of the area within 500 feet of the telecommunications facility site at a scale no smaller than 1 inch = 40 feet (1:480 or metric equivalent 1:500) with topography drawn with a minimum of
5 feet  (1.5  meters) contour  intervals, showing existing  utilities,  property
lines, existing buildings or structures, wooded areas, existing water wells and springs. It shall show the boundary of any wetlands or flood plains or watercourses, and of any bodies of water included in the Official  Flood Hazard Area  within 500 feet from the tower or any related facilities or access ways or appurtenances. The survey plan shall have been completed, on the ground, by a Pennsylvania-registered land surveyor no more than two years prior to the application date.

D.	Proposed Site Plans of the entire telecommunications facility site, indicating all improvements at the same scale as or larger than the .Existing Conditions Plan showing the following:

1.	Proposed tower or structure location and any appurtenances, including supports and guy wires, if any, and any accessory building(s). It shall indicate property boundaries and setback distances to the base(s) of the tower or structure and the nearest corners of each of the appurtenant structures to those boundaries, and . dimensions of all proposed improvements. Where protective fencing is proposed, it shall indicate setback distances from the edge of the fencing.

2.	Proposed spot elevations at the base of the proposed tower or structure and at the base of any guy wires, and the corners of all appurtenant structures.

3.	Proposed utilities, including distance from source of power, sizes of service available and required, locations of any proposed utility or telecommunications lines.

4.	Any direct or indirect wetlands alteration proposed.

5.	Detailed plans for drainage of surface and sub-surface water, to control erosion and sedimentation both during construction and as a permanent measure.


12
 


6.	Plans indicating locations and specifics of proposed screening, landscaping, grading, ground cover, fencing, and additional information that may be required; any exterior light(s) or sign(s).

7.	Plans of proposed access driveway or roadway and parking area at the telecommunication facility site. This shall include grading, drainage, and traveled width. This shall also include a cross-section of the access drive indicating the width, depth of gravel, paving or surface materials.

8.	Plans showing any changes to be made to an existing telecommunications facility's landscaping, screening, fencing, lighting, drainage, wetlands, grading, driveways or roadways, parking or other infrastructure as a result of a proposed modification of said facility.

9.	Horizontal and radial distances of proposed antenna(s) to nearest point on property line, and to the nearest primary or secondary residence, school, hospital, senior center, child care facility, religious structure, or any other public building.

E.	Proposed details of the telecommunications facility including the following:

1.	Ground attachments, specifications for anchor bolts and other anchoring hardware for tower or structure.

2.	Proposed exterior finish and color of the tower or structure, building(s) and other portions of the telecommunications facility.

3.	The relative height of the tower or structure to the tops of surrounding trees, as they presently exist and the height to which they are expected to grow in 10 years.

F.	Proposed  plans  of  telecommunications	facility  building(s)  showing  the following:

1.	Floor plans and cross sections at a scale of no smaller than 3 inch =
1 foot (1:48) of any proposed appurtenant stnucture.

2.	Elevation views, indicating exterior appearance and materials.


G.	Proposed equipment  plan elevations, sections  and details at a scale no smaller than 1 inch = 10 feet showing the following:

1.	Number of antennas and repeaters, as well as the exact locations of antenna(s) and of all repeaters (if any) located on a map, as well as by degrees, minutes, and seconds to the nearest tenth of latitude and longitude.



13
 

2.	Mounting locations on tower or structure, including height above ground.

3.	Identification of all mounting frames, arms, brackets or other devices or equipment used to hold antennas and other equipment in place.

4.	Identification of all equipment or devices either attached to the structure or on the ground.

H. Visibility Maps ·and Visual Analysis: The applicant shall provide photographs with a simulation of the proposed telecommunication facility. Photographs shall show views towards the proposed site, from a two-mile radius around the site, at forty-five-degree intervals. A minimum of eight views should be presented.

The applicant shall also develop and submit to the Planning Commission a written analysis of the visual impact of the proposed tower by a registered landscape architect. This analysis shall include photographs of the balloon test, as described in section 16.I., taken from at least 10 different perspectives within Haycock Township and any other visual analysis it may have developed or processed.

I.		Balloon Test: Within thirty-five days of submitting an application, applicant shall arrange to fly, or raise upon a temporary mast, a three-foot-diameter, brightly colored balloon at the maximum height of the proposed tower and within fifty horizontal feet of the center of the  proposed  tower.  The date, time, and location of this balloon test shall be advertised  by the applicant at 7 and 14 days in advance of the test date in the local newspaper. The applicant shall inform the Zoning Board, the Planning Commission, and abutting property owners in writing of the dates and times  of the  test,  at least 14 days in advance. The balloon shall be flown for at least six consecutive hours, between 7 a.m. and 5 p.m. (and/or at least two hours before sunset as posted for the lest dates by the National Weather Service) on the dates chosen. In the event of application for co-location at an existing telecommunications facility, the applicant shall be exempt from this balloon test. The applicant shall record the weather during the balloon test including the wind velocity and direction.

J. Construction sequence and time schedule for completion of each phase of the entire project.

17.	EVIDENCE OF NEED

A.	Existing Coverage: Applicant shall provide written documentation to the Zoning Board demonstrating that existing telecommunications facility sites within a 30-mile radius of the proposed site cannot reasonably be made to provide adequate coverage and/6r adequate capacity to areas within the



14
 

Haycock Township which lack such coverage and/or capacity. The documentation shall include, for each telecommunications facility site listed which is owned or operated by the applicant, the exact location (in longitude and latitude, to degrees, minutes and seconds to the nearest tenth), ground elevation, height of tower or structure, type of antennas, antenna gain, height of antennas on tower or structure, output frequency, number of channels, power input and maximum power output per channel. Potential adjustments to these existing telecommunications facility sites, including changes in antenna type, orientation, gain, height or power output shall be specified. Tiled coverage plots showing each of these telecommunications facility sites, as they exist, and with adjustments as above, shall be provided as part of the application.

8. Repeaters: The applicant shall demonstrate that it is not reasonably able to create adequate coverage in Haycock Township from wireless base stations located in other townships or to fill holes within the area of otherwise adequate coverage by use of repeaters. Applicants shall detail the number, location, power output, and coverage of any proposed repeaters in their systems and provide engineering data to justify their use.

C.	Towers: The applicant for new telecommunications facility utilizing a tower shall demonstrate that it has made a good faith effort to obtain permission to mount communications antenna(s) on an existing building, structure or tower. A good faith effort shall require that the applicant contact all owners of potentially suitable structures (such as, but not limited to, smoke stacks, water towers/tanks, tall buildings, other towers or poles, church steeples, or other natural or manufactured tall structures or features) within a minimum one-half (1/2) mile radius of the proposed tower site and that one or more of the following reasons, supported by engineering and other related support data, for not selecting such structure apply:

1.	The proposed antenna(s) and related equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing structure and its reinforcement cannot be accomplished  at a reasonable cost.

2.	The proposed antenna(s) and related equipment would cause radio frequency interference with other existing equipment for that existing structure and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.

3.	Such existing structures do not have adequate location, space, access or height to accommodate the proposed equipment or to allow it to perform its intended function.

4.	Addition of the proposed antenna(s) and related equipment would result in electromagnetic radiation from such structure exceeding applicable standards established by the FCC and/or other industry standards governing human exposure to electromagnetic radiation.



15
 

5.	A commercially reasonable agreement could not be reached with the owner(s) of such existing structure(s).

D. Five-Year Plan: All applications shall be accompanied by a written five-year plan for the utilization of the proposed facilities. This plan should include justification for capacity in excess of immediate needs, as well as plans for any further development within the Township.

IS GENERAL PROJECT REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS

A.	Access Roads and Utilities: Where new telecommunications facilities require construction of, or improvement to, access roads, roads shall follow the contour of the land, be constructed or improved at the edge of fields. and/or forests, and where feasible, access shall be over existing driveways and easements. Applicant shall maintain the access and shall ensure that no mud or dirt is conveyed onto public roads. Utility or service lines shall be underground, and designed and located so as to minimize disruption  to wildlife habitat, agricultural lands, and scenic areas.

B.	Landscaping/Screening: Natural or planted evergreen screening shall be located at the perimeter of the site to ensure that ground equipment and structures associated with the telecommunications facility are hidden from adjacent public roadways. The evergreen screening shall consist of either a hedge, planted 3 feet on center maximum, or a row of evergreen trees planted 10 feet on center maximum. Existing on-site vegetation outside the immediate site for the telecommunications facility shall be preserved. Disturbance	to existing topography shall be minimized, unless the disturbance	is demonstrated to result in less visual impact on the telecommunications facility from surrounding properties and other vantage points.

C. Fencing: The area around the telecommunications facility site shall be completely fenced and gated for security to a height of eight feet by means of chain link fencing. Use of razor wire is not permitted. In addition, all towers and support structures shall be fitted with anti-climbing devices, as approved by industry standards.

D. Signs: A sign no greater than two (2) square feet indicating the name of the telecommunications facility owner(s) and a 24-hour emergency telephone number, either local or toll-free, shall be posted adjacent to the entry gate. In addition, radio frequency radiation (RFR) warning signs, and the federal tower registration plate, where applicable, shall be posted on the fence or as required to meet federal requirements. "No Trespassing" signs  may be posted at the discretion of the telecommunications facility owner(s). No commercial signs shall be placed on any telecommunications facility.






16
 

E.	Building Design:

·1. Telecommunications facilities buildings shall not exceed 250 square feet, shall be designed to be architecturally similar and compatible with each other, and shall be no more than 12 feet high. The buildings shall be used only for the housing of equipment related to this particular site. Whenever possible, the buildings shall be joined or clustered so as to appear as one building.

2.	Except as provided herein, the only lighting on the exterior of the telecommunications facility may be a fixture on the communications equipment building not greater than 100 watts and activated by a monitor sensor. Manually operated emergency lights are permitted for use only when telecommunications facility operating personnel are on site.

Towers shall not be illuminated by artificial means and shall not display lights unless such lighting is specifically required by the FAA, FCC or other federal or state authority. In the event that any lighting is required solely as a result of tower height, the tower owner(s) shall submit for review by the Planning Commission (under Site Plan Review or Site Plan Amendment, as applicable). The Planning Commission may 1) require that the tower height be reduced to eliminate the need for lighting, 2) require another suitable location be utilized, or 3) make selection among lighting alternatives.

3.	The owner(s) of the facilities shall take reasonable measures to minimize noise from the operation of any machinery or equipment, as detected at the site perimeter. The noise level of the machinery shall be no louder than 40 decibels.

F.	Height of Towers and  Telecommunications  Facilities  Combined  with Existing Structure: New towers shall not exceed the minimum height necessary to provide adequate coverage for the telecommunications use proposed for the tower and shall not exceed 200 feet in height measured from the ground. · Roof and/or building mount  telecommunications  facility shall be permitted to exceed the height limitations of the applicable zoning district by no more than forty-five (45) feet.

Antennas:	Omni directional or whip communications antennas shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height and seven (7) inches in diameter. Directional or panel communications antennas shall not exceed five (5) feet in height and three (3) feet in width. No microwave dish antennas shall be attached to a telecommunications tower.

G.	Guy Wires: All guy wires associated with guyed towers shall be clearly marked so as to be visible at all times and shall be located within the fenced enclosure.




17
 

H.	Co-location:	Co-location of telecommunications  facilities  is encouraged.
Owners of new towers shall agree to and allow for co-location consistent with the provisions of section I6.4.G., and at usual and customary rates for co-locators.

I.	Visual Impact: Towers, antennas, and any necessary support structures shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment. New towers shall have a galvanized finish unless otherwise required. The Zoning Board may require the tower(s) to be painted or otherwise camouflaged to minimize the adverse visual impact except in cases in which the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or other state or federal authorities have dictated color.

Proposed facilities shall not unreasonably interfere with the view from any public park, conservation area, natural scenic vista, historic building or district, or major view corridor. Narrow structures with guyed supports may be preferred for aesthetic purposes.

J. Staff: The telecommunications facility shall be fully automated, unstaffed and visited only for periodic maintenance, and there shall be no water or sewage facilities connected to the compound.

K. Building Permit: Applicant shall make application for and have evidence of a Haycock Township building permit prior to construction or installation of any portion of the telecommunications facility.

L.	Zoning Compliance: All telecommunications facilities shall be located on lots which meet the minimum size requirement and other regulations for the zoning district in which they are to be located, in addition to the setback requirements as provided in herein.

M.	Setback and Height Requirements:  No telecommunications facility or tower, including guy-wire anchors and protective fencing, if any, shall be located:

1.	Closer than 200 feet horizontally to any property boundary of the site on which the tower is located, or the height of the tower, whichever is greater.

2.	Closer than 200 feet horizontally to any structure existing at the time of application which is used as a primary or secondary residence, school property (both public and private), a hospital, senior center, child care facility, building used for religious worship, or to any other building used regularly by the public. Primary or secondary residences are those dwelling units that include toilet facilities and facilities for food preparation and sleeping.

3.	Within the habitat of any state-listed rare or endangered  wildlife or
plant species.


18
 


4.	Within 200 feet horizontally of any Pennsylvania or federally regulated wetland.

5.	Within the 200 feet horizontally of the outer riparian zone, measured horizontally from any river or perennial stream.

6.	Within the Township, state or federal setback requirements of an archeological site or historic structure. No telecommunications facility shall be located on a building or structure that is listed on an historic register or is in an historic district.

N. Parking: One (1) off-street parking space shall be provided within or outside the fenced telecommunications facility site.

0. At the completion of building, and/or installation, the owner shall provide the Township	with a certification issued by a  Pennsylvania-registered professional structural engineer  that  the  telecommunications  facility  has been built in accordance with the plans submitted to the Township.

19.	MONITORING PROTOCOL

A.	Monitoring Protocol: The Zoning Board may, as the technology changes, amend this section to require the use of testing protocols other than the approved monitoring protocol. A copy of the currently approved monitoring protocol shall be on file with the Township Secretary.

B. Pre-transmission Testing: After the granting of a. permit and before applicant's telecommunications facilities begin transmission, the applicant shall submit a report, prepared by a qualified telecommunications or radio frequency engineer, on the cumulative background levels of non-ionizing radio frequency radiation around the proposed telecommunications facility site	and/or any repeater locations to be utilized for applicant's telecommunications	facilities. The engineer shall use the monitoring protocol, or one substantially similar. This report shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer, who may verify the results using an independent consultant.

C. Post-transmission Testing: After transmission begins, the owner of the telecommunications facility shall provide testing of the site as follows:

There   shall   be  routine   annual   monitoring   of   emissions/exposure	by  a qualified  engineer  using actual field  measurement  of  radiation,  utilizing  the Monitoring  Protocol.  This  monitoring  shall  measure  levels  of  non-ionizing radio frequency  radiation (RFR) exposure at the telecommunications  facility site and any repeaters. Each permittee shall provide a list of the most recent RFR readings  at or near the site, their distances from the facility, dates  of the  readings,  and  the  name  of  the  person  and  company  who  took  the readings  and  verify  the   operational   levels  of   each  telecommunications


19
 

transmitter at the time of testing. In addition, each permittee shall provide additional RFR readings taken at sensitive areas within 3 miles of the facility. A report should indicate whether other permittees at the facility were notified prior to testing that RFR monitoring would occur. The notification should be attached to the report.                            ·

A report of the monitoring results shall be prepared by the engineer and submitted to the Zoning Officer, who may verify the results using an independent consultant. In the case of co-located telecommunications facility, permittee may bill all telecommunications providers and the telecommunications facilities owner(s) equally or according to a predetermined proportionality.

In the event of any major modification of existing telecommunications facility, or the activation of any additional channels, the telecommunications facility owner(s) shall immediately perform new monitoring, as described in this section. Minor changes, such as slight changes in frequency, shall not require additional monitoring.

Permittees shall have the opportunity to demonstrate reasons for inability to comply with these provisions.

D.	Excessive Exposure: Should the monitoring of a telecommunications facility site reveal that the site exceeds fhe current FCC standard and guidelines in existence at the time of the violation, the owner(s) of all telecommunications facilities utilizing that site shall be so notified. In accordance with FCC requirements, the telecommunications facility owner(s) shall immediately reduce power or cease operation as necessary to protect persons having access	to the site, tower, and/or antennas. Additionally, the telecommunications facility owner(s) shall submit to the Township a plan for the correction of the situation that resulted in excessive exposure. Failure to act as described above shall be a violation of this Zoning Ordinance and subject to fines and other sanctions consistent with this Ordinance.

E.	Structural Inspection: Tower owner(s) shall arrange for an qualified consultant	(a licensed professional structural engineer) to conduct inspections of the tower's structural integrity and safety. Guyed towers shall be inspected every three years unless there is cause to conduct an inspection more frequently. Monopoles and non-guyed lattice towers shall be inspected every five years unless there is cause to conduct an inspection more frequently. A report of the inspection results shall be prepared by the consultant, and a copy shall be sent to the Zoning Officer within 10 business days. In the event of any major modification of the existing tower, which includes changes to tower dimensions, increase in number or types of antennas or other devices or structural modifications, the tower owner(s) shall immediately perform a new structural inspection. The Township has the right to enter onto the property and conduct inspections during the construction phase and at all times thereafter.


20
 


F.	Unsafe Towers: Should the inspection required in section I9.E. reveal any structural defect(s) which, in the opinion of the qualified consultant (a licensed professional structural engineer}, render(s) that tower unsafe, the tower owner(s) shall undertake the following actions:

1.	Immediately upon notification of any structural defect(s) which render(s) a tower unsafe, post warnings of same at access points to the tower; notify appropriate emergency authorities; notify the Zoning Officer, and notify the landowner and owners of record of the abutting properties within the unsafe area (minimally a 360-degree area the radius of the height of the tower); when appropriate, in consultation with emergency authorities, restrict access to the unsafe area and/or encourage evacuation of residents.

2.	Within 10 business days of notification of any structural defect(s) which render(s) a tower unsafe, submit to  the Zoning Officer a plan to correct the structural defect(s) as soon as reasonably possible. The Township shall review and make any changes if needed to the remediation plan within 10 days. The tower owner(s) shall implement the remediation plan upon Township approval.

110.	AMENDMENTS TO EXISTING TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY PERMIT

In the event of an alteration or addition to a previously approved telecommunications facility, the facility owner(s) shall submit to the Zoning Board an application for a permit amendment when any of the following are proposed:

A.	Change in the number of buildings or other telecommunications facilities permitted on the site;

8. Material change in technology used by the telecommunications facility; or

C. Addition or change of any equipment resulting in greater visibility or structural wind-loading, or additional height of the tower, including profile of additional antennas, not specified in the original application.



111.	TEMPORARY WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS  FACILITIES

Temporary wireless telecommunications facilities are subject to the following:

A.	Use of a temporary wireless telecommunications facility requires a special exception use permit from the Zoning Board.

8. Temporary wireless telecommunications facilities are allowed for no longer than five days use during a special event.



21
 


C. The maximum height of a temporary telecommunications facility is 50 feet from grade.

D. Temporary wireless telecommunications facilities shall comply with all applicable sections herein.
112.	ABANDONED, UNUSED, OBSOLETE, DAMAGED,  OR DANGEROUS TELECOMMUNICATIONS	FACILITY OR PORTIONS OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS   FACILITY

Abandoned	or	unused	telecommunications	facilities	or	portions	of telecommunications facilities shall be removed as follows:

A.	The owner of a telecommunications facility shall annually, on January 15, file a declaration with the Zoning Officer certifying the continuing safe operation of every telecommunications facility installed subject to this Zoning Ordinance. Failure to file a declaration shall mean that the telecommunications facility is no longer in use and considered abandoned.

B.	Abandoned or unused facilities shall be removed within 180 days  of cessation of operations at the site, unless a time extension is approved by the Zoning Board within the 180-day period. In the event the facility is not removed within 180 days of the cessation of operations at a site, the Zoning Officer shall send the owner(s) of the facility a Notice of Zoning Violation and, following the expiration of the period for remediation of the violation, shall request Haycock Township to remove the facilities. Costs of removal shall be assessed against the facility owner, including any regulatory costs, disposal costs, clean up, and final landscaping costs.

C. Unused portions of facility shall be removed by facility owner(s) within 180 days of the time that such portion is no longer used for antennas. The replacement of portions of a facility previously removed shall require the issuance of a new telecommunications facility permit by the Zoning Board.

D. An owner who has failed to file an annual declaration with the Zoning Officer by January 15 may, by February 15, file a declaration of use or intended use and may request the ability to continue use of the telecommunications facility.

E. At the time of filing an application for a building permit for the construction of the telecommunications facility, a bond or other financial security, in the amount of $20,000.00 wherein a tower is proposed as part of the facility and
$5,000 otherwise, in the form approved by the Township Solicitor shall be deposited with the Township to assure the removal of the facility when it ceases to be used as a telecommunications facility or is found in violation of the Township's code or ordinance as provided herein. At the time of filing an application for a building permit, applicant shall also enter into a written



22
 

agreement with the Township, in a form approved by the Township Solicitor, to ensure that the Removal Bond remains continuously in effect.

113.	TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY INSURANCE

The owner of a telecommunications facility shall provide evidence to the Township of liability, property damage and personal injury insurance in the minimum amount of One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and Three Million Dollars ($3,000,000.00) in the aggregate covering all portions of the telecommunications facility, naming Haycock Township as an Additional Insured thereon. The owner(s) shall arrange with the insurance carrier(s) for original certificates of insurance for all renewals or cancellations of said insurance coverage to be delivered to the Zoning Officer. At a minimum the following insurance requirements shall be satisfied:

A.	The required insurance must be obtained and maintained for the entire period the telecommunications facility is in existence from pre-construction through	final decommissioning and rehabilitation. If the operator, its contractors or subcontractors do not have the required insurance, the Township will order such entities to cease operation of the facility until such insurance is obtained.

B. Certificate(s) of insurance verifying such insurance shall be filed with the Zoning Officer at the time of application. For entities that are entering the market, the certificate(s) shall be filed prior to the commencement of construction and once a year thereafter, and as provided below in the event of a lapse of coverage. Such certificate(s) should provide the name, address and phone number of the insurance carrier and identify an agent in case of inquiries.

C. The certificate(s) of insurance shall contain a provision that coverages afforded under such policies shall not be canceled until at least thirty (30) days prior written notice had been given to the Township. All insurance policies shall be issued by companies authorized to do business under the Jaws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

114.	INDEMNIFICATION AND HOLD HARMLESS

The telecommunications facility shall, at its sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Township, its officers, public officials, boards and commissions, agents and employees from and against any and all lawsuits, claims, causes of action, actions, liability and judgments for injury or damage (includirig but not limited to expenses for reasonable attorney fees and disbursements of the Township  in connection therewith) arising out of the construction or operation of the cell tower or arising in any way out of any failure by any locator to comply with the provisions of any federal, state or local laws, rules or regulations.



23
 

Section 02:  Partial Repealer

All other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, as amended, shall remain in full force and effect. All other ordinances or provisions of the Zoning Ordinance inconsistent herewith or in conflict with any of the terms hereof are, to the extent of said inconsistencies or conflicts, hereby specifically repealed.

Section 03:  Savings Clause

In the event any portion of this Ordinance is determined by a court of jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or unenforceable, it shall not affect any of the other provision of this Ordinance or of the Zoning Ordinance. All other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and this Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.

Section 04:  Effective Date

All provisions of this Ordinance shall be in force and effect five days after approval and adoption.

 


ORDAINED AND ENACTED this
 
rd.	'I
_;_a_1_•_c,L_cu:-_·
 


l1-/
l
 

J-DoS
;-"2:004./}/11f
 


ATTEST:
 

HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
 

 























U:\1WC Clients\HAYCOCK\Ordinance\Cell  Tower Telecommunications.dir\Tele.  Fae. Ord. Amend\Tele.Fac.Merged and Restated Ordinance.12.15.04.doc




24
 
ORDINANCE  NO.	q•C/

AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA AMENDING HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP ORDINANCE NO. 97 ADOPTING THE PENNSYLVANIA UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE AS THE HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BUlLDING CODE TO APPLY THE CONSTRUCTION CODE TO UTILITY AND MISCELLANEOUS USE STRUCTURES GREATER THAN OR EQUAL TO 1,000 SQUARE FEET IN BUILDING AREA; TO CORRECT A TYPOGRAPHCIAL ERROR IN THE PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE CODE'S APPLICABLITY TO CERTAIN RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY

BACKGROUND:

A.	The Haycock Township Board of Supervisors r'Board") has, by Ordinance No. 97, eI)acted on June 28, 2004 and effective on July 2, 2004, adopted by reference the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code (34 Pa. Code §401.! et seq.] (tbe "Code") as the building code of Haycock Township;

B.	On July 15, 2004, the Pennsylvania General Assembly enacted Act 93 of 2004 ("Act 93"), which amended the Code to re-define ''utility and miscellaneous use structures" as specific accessory structures having a building area of less than 1,000 square feet. Such structures were previously defined as having a building area ofless than 500 square feet;

c'\		C.	Act  93  allows  municipaliti.es  that  enact  ordinances  electing  to  administer  and enforce the Code in their jurisdiction  to adopt stricter Code standards and regulations  pertaining
. : to "utility and miscellaneous  use  structures" regardless  of size;

D.	Ordinance No. 97 exempted utility and miscellaneous use structures from the Code and from the requirement of obtaining a building permit only if the structure had a building area of less than 500 square feet. The Board wishes to set the square foot exemption limitation for utility and miscellaneous use structures at less than 1,000 square feet;

E.	The Board also wishes to amend Schedule A to Ordinance No. 97 to correct a typographical error to accurately reflect that certain activity is exempt  from the Code's  scope; and

F.	This ordinance is enacted pursuant to the legislative authority set forth in the Pennsylvania Second Class Township Code (53 P.S. §53101 et seq.] and the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, as amended (the "Act").

Section 01:	Section 08 of Ordinance 97, relating to Modifications to the Code, is amended to add the following subsection a:

"a.	In accordance with §503.C of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, as amended, the provisions of the Code, this Ordinance and Schedule "A" as adopted
 
 
 
by Haycock Township do not apply to utility and miscellaneous use structures that have a building area ofless than 1,000 square feet. Utility and miscellaneous use structures equaling or exceeding 1,000 square feet in building area must comply with the provisions of the Code, this Ordinance and Schedule "A."

Section 02:	The introductory sentences of Section 403.62(c), Permits and Exemption - Residential Construction, of Schedule A, Modifiable Provisions, to Ordinance No. 97 are amended in full to read as follows:

"Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Ordinance, this Schedule "A" or the Code, a permit is not required for  the exceptions listed  in §403.1(b) (relating to scope). A permit is not required for the following construction if the work does not violate a law or ordinance:"

Section 03: The Haycock Township Secretary and Haycock Township Building Code Official are hereby directed to forward a certified copy of this Ordinance to the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry.

Section 04: In addition, all inconsistent provisions of other ordinances or resolutions are repealed to the extent of the inconsistency. All other provisions of the ordinances of Haycock Township not governed by this Ordinance, the Code or the Act shall remain in full force and effect.

Section 05: The provisions of this Ordinance are declared to be severable. If any provision of this Ordinance is declared to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall have no effect on the remaining provisions of this Ordinance.

Section 06: This Ordinance shall be effective five (5) days after the date it is adopted at a public hearing by the Haycock Township Board of upervisors.
ADOPTED this	1 #i	day of	;L J:A.--	,2004.
/	3'

BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
 
Attest:
 
HAYCOCK  TOWNSHIP
 


'
NancyM. Yo_dis
Township Secret








U:\TWC Clients\HAYCOCK\Unifonn Construction Code\Amendment Ordinance.Misc Use Structures.typo.advertised verslon.07-28-2004.doc
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO.	tf 1

AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSIDP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY,
. PENNSYLVANIA ADOPTING THE PENNSYLVANIA UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (ACT 45 OF 1999, 35 P.S. §§7210.101 ET SEQ.) AND THE REGULATIONS PROMULGATED THEREUNDER (34 PA. CODE §401.1 ET SEQ.) AS THE HAYCOCK TOWNSIDP BUILDING CODE; ESTABLISHING MINIMUM REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION,		ALTERATION, ENLARGEMENT, REPAIR, DEMOLITION, REMOVAL, CONVERSION, USE AND MAINTENANCE OF ALL BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND PROPERTIES IN HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP; PRESERVING AND SAVING FROM REPEAL HAYCOCK TOWNSIDP ORDINANCES IN EFFECT ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 1999 RELATING		TO BUILDING CONSTRUCTION THAT EXCEED THE MINIMUM	REQUIREMENTS OF THE PENNSYLVANIA UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION	CODE; PROVIDING FOR THE ISSUANCE OF PERMITS,. EXEMPTIONS, COLLECTION OF FEES, MAKING OF INSPECTIONS AND PRESCRIBING PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS OF THE	BUILDING CODE; AND ELECTING TO ADMINISTER AND ENFORCE	THE PROVISIONS OF THE PENNSYLVANIA UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE IN HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA

BACKGROUND:

A.	The Haycock Township Board of Supervisors ("Board") has, by Ordinance No. 93, enacted on March 3, 2003 and effective on March 8, 2003, as amended, adopted by reference the 1999 BOCA National Building Code as the building code of Haycock Township pursuant to its statutory authority, the Pennsylvania Second Class Township Code, as amended  (53 P.S.
§65101 et seq.);

B.	The standards referenced in paragraphs A and B above are collectively referred to
in this Ordinance as the "Local Building Code."

C.	By Act 45 of 1999 ("Act 45"), the Pennsylvania General Assembly enacted the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act to provide uniform statewide construction standards; and to require that all municipalities in Pennsylvania timely adopt the uniform construction standards once the standards were promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry ("L&I").

D.	L&I promulgated the uniform construction standards (the "Code") on January 10, 2004, and Act 45 requires municipalities to adopt the Code by ordinance as the municipality's building code no later  than July 8, 2004, and to elect whether  the municipality  will  enforce and/or administer the Code within the municipality;
 
 
 
E. Act 45 and the Code preempts and rescinds the Local Building Code, unless provisions of the Local Building Code exceeding the minimum requirements of the Code were in effect on or before July 1, 1999. Haycock Township has no such "grandfathered" provisions of the Local Building Code or other ordinances;

F.	The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Haycock Township and to conform to the requirements of Act 45 and the Code; and to reflect Haycock Township's election to enforce and administer the provisions of the Code and the Act within Haycock Township; and

G.	Act 45 and the Code require the enactment of this Ordinance by Haycock Township electing to administer and enforce the building code provisions of the Code.

NOW,  THEREFORE,  BE  IT  ENACTED  AND  ORDAINED,  and  it  is  hereby
ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, as follows:

Section 01:	Administration  and Enforcement  of Code.	Subject to the prov1s1ons of this Ordinance and applicable law, Haycock Township hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §§7210.101- 7210.1103, as amended from time to time (the "Act"), and the regulations promulgated thereunder.

Section 02:	Adoption of Building Code. The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401-405, as amended from time to time (the "Code"), is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as the municipal building code of Haycock Township.

Section 03:	Approved Means of Administrating and Enforcing the Code. Administration and enforcement of the Code within Haycock Township shall be undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors from time to time by Resolution:

a.	By designating an employee of Haycock Township to serve as the municipal code official to act on behalf of Haycock Township;

b.	By retaining of one or more construction code officials or third party agencies to act on behalf of Haycock Township;

c.	By  agreeing  with  one  or  more  municipalities   for  the joint  administration  and enforcement of the Act and the Code through an inter-municipal agreement; or

d.	By entering into a contract with  another municipality  for the administration  and enforcement of the Act and the Code on behalf of Haycock Township.

Section 04:  .!3oard of Appeals.
 
 
 
A.	Creation of Appeals Board. A Building Code Board of Appeals (the "Board of Appeals") is established in confomrity with the requirements of the Act and the Code. The Board of Appeals shall hear and rule on  appeals, requests for variances and requests for extensions of time arising under the Code.

B.	Appointment of Members. The Board of Appeals shall consist of no fewer than three (3) and no more than five (5) members appointed by the Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors shall appoint the initial Board of Appeals members to terms of varying length to establish staggered terms.  After the initial appointments, each new member shall serve for five
(5)	years or until a successor has been appointed.

C.	Qualifications of Members. The members of the Board of Appeals shall, in the discretion of the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors, be qualified by training and experience to pass on matters pertaining to building construction. Training and experience may consist of licensure as an architect or engineer, experience in the construction industry, or training or experience as an inspector or plan reviewer. No member of the Board of Supervisors nor any code inspector employed by Haycock Township may serve on the Board of Appeals. If the Board of Supervisors is unable to find a sufficient number of qualified individuals who reside within Haycock Township, it may appoint a qualified person(s) who resides outside of Haycock Township to fill a position.

D.	Alternate Members. The Board of Supervisors may appoint up to two (2) alternate members who may be called by the Chair of the Board of Appeals to hear appeals in the event of the absence or disqualification of a member. Alternate members shall possess the qualifications required for membership, and shall be appointed for five (5) years or until a successor has been appointed.

E.	Intergovernmental Cooperation. If at any  time  enforcement  and administration is undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, the Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized to enter into an intergovernmental cooperation agreement with one or more municipalities to create a Board of Appeals.

F.	Chairperson and Secretary. The Board of Appeals shall annually select one of its members to serve as Chair and Secretary. The Secretary of the Board of Appeals shall file a detailed record of all proceedings with the Township.

G.	Disqualification of Member. No member of the Board of Appeals may hear an appeal in which that member has any personal, professional or financial interest.

H.	Operation of Board of Appeals. The procedure for conducting hearings and notices of hearings shall be established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors and shall be consistent with Act, the Code and all other applicable laws and regulations.

Section 05:	Preservation  of Existing Ordinances. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances w!J_ich were adopted by Haycock Township on or before July  1, 1999, and which equal  or exceed the requirements  of the  Code  shall continue in full force and effect  until  such
 
 
 
time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the minimum requirements of the  Code,  as amended from time to time.   Haycock Township has no such ordinances.

Section 06:	Repeal of Certain Prior Ordinances. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances, including without limitation ordinance no. 93, which either (a) exceed the minimum requirements of the Code but were enacted after July 1, 1999; or (b) are in effect as of the effective date of this Ordinance and whose requirements are less than the minimum requirements of the Code, are hereby amended and/or repealed to conform to the comparable provisions of the Code and the Act.

Section 07:	Changes to Amendable Sections of Code. In accordance with §403.102(1) of the Code, Haycock Township, by virtue of its election to enforce an administer the provisions of the Code and the Act within Haycock Township, hereby amends the provisions of the Code identified below as set forth in Schedule "A" attached hereto. The provisions of Schedule "A" attached to this Ordinance shall control over the corresponding provisions of the Code. Section 403.102(1) of the Code allows the following provisions of the Code to be amended:

a.	Section	403.42(b)	and	(c)	(relating	to	permit	requirements	and exemptions);
b.	Section 403.42a(a)-(e) and (g)-(n) (relating to permit application);
c.	Section 403.43(b), (c), (g), (h) and (k) (relating to grant, denial and effect
of permits);
d.	Section 403.44 (relating to alternative construction material and methods).
e.	Section 403.45 (relating to inspections);
f.	Section 403 .46 (relating to certificate of occupancy);
g.	Section 403.47 (relating to public utility connections);
h.	Section 403 .62(a)-(e) (relating to permit requirements and exemptions);
L	Section 403.64 (relating to inspections);
J.	Section 403.65 (relating to certificates of occupancy);
k.	Section 403.66 (relating to public utility connections);
I.	Section 403.81(a) and (b) (relating to stop work order);
m.	Section 403.82 (relating to notice of violations);
n.	Section 403.83 (relating to order to show cause/ order to vacate);
o.	Section 403.84(a)-(e) (relating to unsafe building structure or equipment); and
p.	Section  403.85(a)-(c)	(relating  to  release,  retention  and  sharing  of commercial construction records).

Section 08:	Modifications to the Code. Haycock Township may enact construction standards that exceed the minimum requirements of the Code in accordance with the provisions and procedures set forth in the Act and the Code.

Section 09:	Fees. The Haycock Township Board of Supervisors may by resolution adopted from time to time prescribe reasonable fees for the administration and enforcement of the Code undertaken pu·r-s. uant to this Ordinance and the Code.
 
 
 
Section 10:  The Haycock Township Secretary and Haycock Township Building Code Official are hereby directed to forward a certified copy of this Ordinance along with the Municipal Election Form to the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry properly completed within the time period provided by applicable law.

Section 11: In addition, all inconsistent provisions of other ordinances or resolutions are repealed to the extent of the inconsistency. All other provisions of the ordinances of Haycock Township not governed by this Ordinance, the Code or the Act shall remain in full force and effect.

Section 12: The provisions of this Ordinance are declared to be severable.  If any provision of this Ordinance is declared to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such detennination shall have no effect on the remaining provisions of this Ordinance.

Section 13: This Ordinance shall be effective five (5) days after the date it is adopted at a public hearing by the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors.

ADOPTED this	,;( J Iii	day of	JLL./)g,	,2004.

 


Attest:
 
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS HAYCOCK  TOWNSHIP
 

r


NancyMOdis	J,
Township Secretary


















U:\TWC  Clients\HAYCOCK\Uniforrn   Construction  Code\Ordinance.05-18-2004.doc
 
 
 
SCHEDULE "A"

UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE - MODIFIABLE PROVISIONS

§402.42       Permit Requirements and Exemptions - Commercial Construction

§402.42(b) Emergency repairs or replacement of equipment may be made without first applying for a permit if a permit application is submitted to the building code official within seventy-two (2) hours of the discovery of the even or occurrence necessitating the emergency repairs and/or replacement.

§402.42(c)    A permit is required for the exceptions listed in § 403.1 (b) (relating to scope).  A permit is not required for the following construction as long as the work does not violate a law or ordinance:

(1)	Building construction for the following:
(i)	Fences  that  are  not  over  four  (4) feet  high,  provided,  however,  that  a fence
permit is required under other applicable Haycock Township ordinances.
(ii) through (v) - DELETED
(vi)	Painting,  papering, tiling, carpeting,  cabinets,  counter tops  and similar finishing
work.
(vii)	Temporary motion picture, television, and theater stage sets and scenery.
(viii) - DELETED
(ix)	Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes that do not include service systems.
(x)	Swings  and  other  playground  equipment  accessory  to  one-  or  two-family dwellings that do not require a footer.
(xi)	Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not project more than 54
inches from the exterior wall and do not require additional support of group R-3 as applicable in the "International Building Code," and Group U occupancies.
(xii)	Movable cases and counters.
(xiii)	Window replacement without structural change; provided, however, that all other applicable permits required under Haycock Township ordinances must be obtained.

(2)	Electrical work for the following:
(i)	Minor repair and maintenance work that includes the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed  receptacles.
(ii)	Interior  electrical  equipment  used  for  radio  and  television  transmissions.  The
provisions of the Uniform Construction Code apply to and a permit must be acquired for equipment and wiring for power supply and the installation of towers and antennas.
(iii)	The installation of a temporary system for the testing or servicing of electrical equipment or apparatus.

(3)	The following gas work:
(i)	A portable heating appliance.
(ii)	Replacement of a minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make the equipment unsafe.

(4)	The following mechanical work or equipment:
(i)	A portable heating appliance.
(ii)	Portable ventilation equipment.
(iii)	A portable cooling unit.
·{iv) - DELETED
(v)	Replacement of any part that does not alter its approval or make it unsafe.
(vi)	A portable evaporative cooler.
 
 
 
(vii)	A self-contained refrigeration system containing 10 pounds or less of refrigerant and placed into action by motors that are not more than 1 horsepower.

(5)	The following plumbing repairs:
(i)	Stopping leaks in a drain. The Uniform Construction  Code applies  if a concealed or visible trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and is
removed and replaced with new material.
(ii)	Clearing stoppages or repairing leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures, and the removal and installation of water closets, faucets and lavatories if the valves or pipes are not replaced or rearranged.

§402.42a            Permit Application

§402.42a(a) Applications for a permit required under § 403.42 (relating to permit requirements and exemptions) shall be submitted to the building code official in accordance with this section.

§402.42a(b) A permit applicant shall submit an application to the building code official and attach construction documents, including plans and specifications, and information concerning special inspection and structural observation programs, Department of Transportation highway access  permits and  other data required by the building code official with the permit application. The applicant shall submit THREE
(3)	copies of all required documents and pay all required fees prior to or before the epplication will be considered complete and submitted by Haycock Township. The applicant shall submit three sets of documents when the Department conducts the review.

§402.42a(c) A licensed architect or licensed professional engineer shall prepare the construction documents under the Architects Licensure law (63 P. S. §§ 34. 1--34.22), or the Engineer, Land Surveyor and Geologist Registration Law (63 P. S. §§ 148--158.2).

§402.42a(d) A building code official may require submission of additional construction  documents  in special circumstances.

§402.42a(e) The permit applicant shall submit construction documents in a format approved by the building code official. Construction documents shall be clear, indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed, and show in detail that the work will conform to the Uniform Construction Code.

§402.42a(g) Construction documents shall contain the following information related to the exterior wall envelope:

(1)	Description   of   the   exterior   wall   envelope   indicating  compliance   with   the   Uniform Construction  Code.
(2)	Flashing details.
(3)	Details relating to intersections with dissimilar materials, corners, end  details,  control joints, intersections at roof, eaves, or parapets, means of drainage, water-resistive membrane and details around openings.

§402.42a(h) Construction documents shall contain a site plan that is drawn to scale. The building code official may waive or modify the following site plan requirements if the permit application does not impact or touch upon these requirements. Site plan requirements include but are not limited to  all of the following:

(1)	The size and location of new construction and existing structures on the site.
(2)	Accurate boundary lines.
(3)	Distances from lot lines.
(4)	·The established street grades and the proposed finished grades.
 
 
 
(5)	If the construction involves demolition, the site plan shall indicate construction that is to be demolished and the size and location of existing structures and construction that will remain on the site or plot.
(6)	Location  of  parking  spaces,  accessible  routes,  public  transportal'lon   stops  and  other
required accessibility features.

§402.42a(i) A permit applicant shall submit certifications required in the "International Building Code" for construction in a flood hazard area to the building code official.

§402.42a(j) A permit applicant shall identify, on the application, the name and address of the licensed architect or engineer in responsible charge. The permit applicant shall notify the building code official in writing if another licensed architect or engineer assumes responsible charge.

§402.42a(k) The permit applicant shall describe an inspection program, identify a person or firm who will perform special inspections and structural observations if section 1704 or 1709 of the "International Building Code" requires special inspections or structural observations for the construction or if the building code official, in his or her discretion, believes such special inspections and/or structural observations for the construction are required.  All such proposed programs  must satisfy the building code official.

§402.42a(I) A building code official may waive or modify the submission of construction documents, that are not required to be prepared by a licensed architect or engineer, or other data if the nature of the work applied for does not require review of construction documents or other data to obtain compliance with the Uniform Construction Code. The building code official may not waive the submission of site plans that relate to accessibility requirements.

§402.42a(m) An applicant for an annual permit under § 403.42{f) shall complete an epplication and provide information regarding the system that may be altered and the date that approval was previously provided for the approved electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing installation.

§402.42a(n) A permit applicant shall comply with the permit, certification or licensure requirements of the following laws applicable to the construction:

 
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
 
The Boiler and Unfired Pressure Vessel Law (35 P. S. §§ 1331.1--1331.19). The Propane and Liquefied Petroleum Gas Act (35 P. S. §§ 1329.1--1329.19). The Health Care Facilities Act.
The Older Adult Daily Living Centers Licensing Act (62 P. S. §§ 1511.1--1511.22).
 

§403.43            Grant, Denial and Effect of Permits

§403.43(b) A building code official shall examine the construction documents  and shall determine whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the Uniform Construction Code and other pertinent laws or ordinances as part of the application process.

§403.43(c) A building code official shall stamp or place a notation on each page of the set of reviewed construction documents that the documents were reviewed and approved for Uniform Construction Code compliance before the permit is issued. The building code official shall clearly mark any required nondesign changes on the construction documents. The building code official shall return a set of the construction documents with this notation and any required changes to the applicant. The permit holder shall keep a copy of the construction documents at the work site open to inspection by the construction code official or an authorized representative.

§403.43(g) A permit issued under the Uniform Construction Code becomes invalid unless the authorized construction work begins within 180 days after the permit's issuance or if the authorized construction work permit is suspe[ided or abandoned for 180 days after the work has commenced. A permit holder may submit a written request along with the required fee of 10% of the original permit fee to the building code official  for  an extension  of time to  commence  or to  suspend  construction  for just  cause for  up to  an
 
 
 
"

additional twelve (12) months. The building code official may grant extensions of time to commence or suspend construction in writing. A permit is valid for no more than 1 year from its issue date, and all construction must be completed within twelve (12) months from issue, unless extended as set forth in this section.

§403.43(h) The permit shall be kept on the work site until a final inspection is completed by the building code official and all work passes such final inspection.

§403.43(k) A building code official may allow deferred submittals of portions of the design of the building and structure from the time of the application until a specified time set by the building code official. All of the following apply to deferred submittals:

(1)	The building code official shall provide prior approval of the deferral of any submittal items.
(2)	A licensed architect or professional engineer in responsible charge shall list the deferred
submittals on the construction documents for review by the building code official.
(3)	A licensed  architect  or  professional  engineer  shall first  review submittal  documents  for deferred  submittal  items  and  place  a notation on  the documents  that  the  architect  or
engineer  reviewed  the documents  and that the documents  are· in general conformance with ·the design of the building or structure.
(4)	Deferred submittal items may not be installed until the building code official approves the design and submittal documents for the deferred submittal items.


§ 403.44. Alternative construction materials and methods.


§403.44(a) Materials, products and methods of construction that were evaluated as meeting codes enumerated in § 403.21 (relating to Uniform Construction Code) by the ICC Evaluation Service, Inc. or an evaluation service accredited under the "General Requirements for Bodies Operating Product Certification Systems" issued by the ISO (ISO Guide 65) are approved for use. The use shall conform with the evaluation.

§403.44(b) Materials, equipment and devices bearing the label or listed by a testing laboratory or quality assurance agency accredited by the International Accreditation  Service,  Inc.  or  another  agency accredited under the "Calibration  and Testing  Laboratory Accreditation  Systems-General  Requirements for Operation and Recognition' issued by ISO (ISO Guide 58) are approved for use if:

(1)	The testing laboratory or quality assurance agency deemed the material as meeting Uniform Construction Code-required standards.
(2)	The   scope   of   accreditation   is   applicable   to   Uniform   Construction   Code-required standards.

§403.44(c) A new building or remodeling, alteration, addition or change of use and occupancy of an existing building which complies with the International Perfonmance Code shall also be in compliance with the Uniform Construction Code.

§403.45            Inspections.

§403.45(a) A construction code official shall perform inspections to insure that the construction complies with the approved permit and the Uniform Construction Code. Required inspections are those set forth in Section 403.64(d).

§403.45(b) Before  issuing a permit, a building code official may examine, or cause to be examined, buildings, structures, facilities or sites related to the permit application.
 
 
 
§403.45{c) The permit holder or an authorized agent shall notify the construction code official when work is ready for inspection and provide access for the inspection. The work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection. A construction code official may inspect the construction and equipment only during normal hours at the construction site unless the permit holder or agent requests or agrees to another time. Inspections may be conducted under§ 403.86 (relating to right of entry to inspect). The failure of a permit holder to request timely inspections and provide access for the inspections constitutes a violation of the Uniform Construction Code and this Ordinance.

§403.45{d) A construction code official shall notify a permit holder if construction  complies with the Uniform Construction Code or fails to comply with the Uniform Construction Code.

§403.45(e) A construction code official shall conduct a final inspection of the completed construction work and file a final inspection report, which indicates that all of the following areas met Uniform Construction Code requirements after a final inspection of the completed construction work:

 











§403.46
 
(1)

(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
 
General building under  § 401. 7(6) (relating to certification  category specification  for building inspector).
Electrical  under§ 401.7(7).
Plumbing under§ 401.7(9).
Accessibility under§ 401.7.(11).
Fire protection under§ 401.7(13).
Mechanical under§ 401.7(8).
Energy conservation under§ 401.7(10).

Certificate of Occupancy
 

§403.46(a) A building, structure or facility, or any portion thereof, may not be used or occupied without a certificate of occupancy issued by a building code official certifying compliance with  all requirements  of the Uniform Construction Code and this Ordinance.

§403.46(b) A building code official shall issue a final certificate of occupancy within fifteen (15) business days after receipt  of a final inspection report that indicates compliance  with the  Uniform  Construction Code and that there are no outstanding fees, fines and/or violations against the permit holder or the building, structure  or facility at issue. The final certificate of occupancy shall contain the following information:

(1)	The permit number and address of the building, structure or facility.
(2)	The permit holder's name and mailing address.	·
(3)	A description of the portion of the building, structure or facility covered by the occupancy permit.
(4)	The name of the building code official who issued the occupancy permit.
(5)	The applicable construction code edition applicable to the occupancy permit.
(6)	The  use  and  occupancy   classification   under   Chapter   3  (Use  and  Occupancy Classification) of the "International Building Code," when designated.
(7)	The type of construction defined in Chapter 6 (Types of Construction) of the "International
Building Code," when designated.
(8)	Special stipulations and conditions relating to the permit and board of appeals' decisions and variances for accessibility requirements granted by the Secretary.
(9)	The date of the final inspection.

§403.46(c) A building code official may issue a temporary or partial final certificate of occupancy for a portion of a building, structure or facility if the portion independently meets the Uniform Construction Code. A temporary or partial final certificate of occupancy issued for an entire building, structure or facility shall be.l(_a/id for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days.
 
 
 
''

§403.46(d) A building code official may suspend or revoke a temporary, partial final or final certificate  of occupancy when the certificate was issued in error, on the basis of incorrect or incomplete information supplied by the permit applicant or their agent or in violation of the Uniform Construction Code or this Ordinance; and may revoke a temporary certificate of occupancy where a final certificate of occupancy is not timely obtained. Before a final certificate of occupancy is revoked, a building owner may request a hearing before the board of appeals under § 403.122 (relating to appeals, variances and extensions of time) and this Ordinance.

§403.47             Public Utility Connections

§403.47(a) A building code official may authorize the temporary connection of a building or system under construction lo a utility source of energy, fuel or power.

§403.47(b) Connection to a public electric or gas utility for the  completed  construction  may  not occur unless the permit holder provides written proof to the utility company that the building or structure passed inspections under this chapter.

§403.62     Permits and Exemptions - Residential Construction

§403.62(a) An owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish or change the occupancy of a residential building or erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace an electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system regulated by the UnWorm Construction Code shall first apply to the building code official and obtain the required permit under § 403.62a (relating to permit application).

§403.62(b) An emergency repair or replacement of equipment may be made without first applying for a permit if a permit application is submitted to the building code official within seventy-two (2) hours of the discovery of the even or occurrence necessitating the emergency repairs and/or replacement.

§403.62(c) A permit not required for the exceptions listed in§ 403.1 (b) (relating to scope). A permit is not required for the following construction if the work does not violate a law or ordinance:

(1)	The following building construction, replacement or repairs:
(i)	Fences that are no more than four (4) feet high; provided, however, that a fence
permit is required under other applicable Haycock Township ordinances.
(ii) through (iv) - DELETED
(v)     Exterior or interior painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, flooring, cabinets, counter tops and similar finishing work.
(vi) - DELETED
(vii)	Swings and other playground equipment accessory to a one- or two-family dwelling that do not require a footer.
(viii)	Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not project more than 54 inches from the exterior wall and do not require additional support.
(ix)	Replacement of glass in any window or door. The replacement glass shall comply with the minimum requirements of the International Residential Code.
{x) Installation and replacement of a window, door, garage door, storm window and storm door in the same opening if the dimensions or framing of the original opening are not altered. The installation of means of egress and emergency escape windows may be made in  the same opening, without altering the dimensions or framing of the original opening if the required height, width or net clear opening of the previous window or door assembly is not reduced. All other applicable permits and approvals required under Haycock Township ordinances must be obtained .
._(xi) Replacement of existing roof material that does not exceed 25% of the total roof area performed within any 12-month period, provided the required change does not inolve any structural elements.
 
 
 
[NO SECTION (xii) in REGULATIONS)
(xiii) - DELETED
(xiv)	Repair or replacement of any part of a porch or stoop which does not structurally support a roof located above the porch or stoop.
(xv)	Installation of additional roll or bat! insulation to the extent permitted by this
Ordinance and the Uniform Construction Code.
(xvi)	Replacement of exterior rain water gutters and leaders.

(2)	Minor electrical work for the following:
(i)	Replacement  of  lamps  or  the  connection  of  approved  portable  electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles
(ii)	Replacement of a receptacle, switch or lighting fixture rated at 20 amps or less and operating at less than 150 volts to ground with a like or similar item. This does  not include replacement  of receptacles  in locations where  ground-fault
circuit interrupter protection is required.
(iii)	Replacement of installed electrically  operated  equipment  such  as doorbells, communication systems and any motor operated device.
(iv)	Installation, alteration or rearrangement  of communications wiring.
(v)	Replacement of dishwashers;  provided, however, that all plumbing work  requires
a permit.
(vi)	Replacement of kitchen range hoods.
(vii)	Installation of battery-powered smoke detectors.

(3)	The following gas work:
(i)	Portable heating, cooking or clothes drying appliances.
(ii)	Replacement of a minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make
this equipment unsafe.
(iii)	A portable fuel cell appliance that is not connected to a fixed piping system and is
not interconnected to a power grid.

(4)	The following mechanical work or equipment:
(i)	A portable heating appliance.
(ii)	Portable ventilation appliances.
(iii)	A portable cooling unit.
(iv)	Steam,  hot or chilled water  piping within any  heating or  cooling  equipment
governed under the Uniform Construction Code.
(v)	Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment  or make the equipment unsafe.
(vi)	Self-contained refrigeration systems containing 10 pounds or less of refrigerant or that are put into action by motors 1 horsepower.
(vii)	Portable evaporative cooler.
(viii)	A portable fuel cell appliance that is not connected to a fixed piping system and is not interconnected to a power grid.

(5)	The following plumbing work:
(i)	Replacement of bib valves if the replacement hose bib valves are provided with an approved atmospheric vacuum breaker.
 
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
·• (viii)
(ix)
 
Refinishing of existing fixtures. Replacement of ball cocks.
Repair of leaks. Clearance of stoppages.
Replacement of faucets or working parts of faucets.
Replacement of valves other than shower or combination shower/bath valves. Replacement of traps.
Replacement of a water closet, lavatory or kitchen sink.
 
 
 
(x)		Replacement of domestic clothes washers and dishwashers; provided, however, that all plumbing work requires a permit.

(6)	The following heating, ventilation and air conditioning work:
(i)	Replacement of motors, pumps and fans of the same capacity.
(ii)	Repair  and  replacement  of  heating,  supply  and  return  piping  and  radiation elements which do not require rearrangement of the piping system.
(iii)	Repair and replacement of duct work.
(iv)	Repair and replacement of portable (not central) air conditioning equipment and
systems.
(v)	Repair  and  replacement  of  control  devices  for  heating  and  air  conditioning
equipment.
(vii)	Replacement of clothes dryers  if there  is no change in fuel type,  location or
electrical requirements.
(viii)	Replacement of stoves and ovens if there is no change in fuel type, location or
electrical characteristics.

§403.62(d) An ordinary repair does not require a permit. The following are not ordinary repairs:

(1)	Cutting away a wall, partition or portion of a wall.
(2)	The removal or cutting of any structural beam or load-bearing support.
(3)	The removal or change of any required means  of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure  affecting the egress requirements.
(4)	The addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical.

§403.62(e) A permit is not required for the installation, alteration or repair of generation, transmission, distribution, metering or other related equipment that is, by established right, under the ownership and control of a public utility as the term "public utility" is defined in 66 Pa.C.S.  § 102 (relating to the definitions).

§403.64             Inspections.

§403.64(a) A construction code official shall inspect all construction for which a permit was issued. The permit holder shall insure that the construction is accessible for inspection. An inspection does not bar prosecution or other legal action for violation of the Uniform Construction Code.

§403.64(b) The permit holder or an authorized agent shall notify the construction code official when work is ready for inspection and provide access for the inspection. The failure of a permit holder to request timely inspections and provide access for the inspections constitutes a violation of the Uniform Construction Code and this Ordinance.

§403.64(c) The construction code official shall notify a permit holder if construction complies with the Uniform Construction Code or fails to comply with the Uniform Construction Code.

§403.64(d) A construction code official shall make the following inspections and file inspection reports relating to Uniform Construction Code compliance in all of the following areas:

. (1)	Foundation and/or footer inspection.
(2)	Plumbing, mechanical and electrical rough and final inspections.
(3)	Frame and masonry inspection.
(4)	Wallboard inspection.
(5)	Wall Form inspection.
(6)	·Backfill inspection.
(7)	Slab and/or Deck inspection.
 
 
 
(8)	Insulation inspection.
(9)	Fire Suppression rough and final inspections.

§403.64(e) The construction code official may conduct other inspections to ascertain compliance with the Uniform Construction Code or municipal ordinances.

§403.64(1) A construction code official shall conduct a final inspection of the completed construction work and file a final inspection report that indicates compliance with the Uniform Construction Code.

§403.65             Certificate of Occupancy.

§403.65(a) Prior to it first being used, a single family residential building may not be used or occupied without a certificate of occupancy issued by a building code official. A certificate of occupancy is not required upon re-sale or other transfer of such dwelling unit. Residential units in a multi-family or other group assembly use groups require a certificate of occupancy upon every change of occupancy.

§403.65(b) A building code official shall issue a certificate of occupancy after receipt of a final inspection report that indicates compliance with the Uniform Construction Code within fifteen (15) business days. The certificate of occupancy shall contain all of the following infonnation:

(1)	The permit number and address of the residential building.
(2)	The name and mailing address of the owner of the residential building.
(3)	A description of the portion of the residential building covered by the occupancy permit.
(4)	A  statement  that the described  portion of the residential building was  inspected for compliance with the Uniform Construction Code.
(5)	The name of the building code official who issued the occupancy permit.
(6)	The construction code edition applicable to the occupancy permit.
(7)	If an automatic sprinkler system is provided.
(8)	Any special stipulations and conditions relating to the building permit.

§403.65(c) A building code official may issue a certificate of occupancy for a portion of a residential building if the portion independently meets the Uniform Construction Code.

§403.65(d) A building code official may suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy when the certificate was issued in error, on the basis of incorrect information supplied by the permit applicant, or in violation of the Uniform Construction Code. Before a certificate of occupancy is revoked, a building owner may request a hearing  before the board of appeals in accordance with § 403.122 (relating· to appeals, variances and extensions of time).

§403.66             Public Utility Connections

§403.66(a) A building code official may authorize the temporary connection of a building or system under construction to a utility source of energy, fuel or power.

§403.66(b) Connection to a public electric or gas utility for the completed construction may not occur unless the permit holder provides written proof to the utility company that the building or structure passed inspections under this chapter.

§403.81            Stop Work Order
§403.81(a) A building code official may issue a written stop work order when the official determines that construction violates the Uniform Construction Code or is being performed in a dangerous or unsafe manner. The stop work order is to contain the reasons for the order and list the required conditions for construction to resume.

-·-.
 
 
 
§403.81(b) The building code official shall serve the stop work order on the permit owner or the owner's agent by certified mail, regular mail and by posting at the property. Personal service shall be attempted where possible.

§403.82              Notice of Violations

A building code official shall follow the following procedures if an inspection reveals a violation of the Uniform Construction  Code:

(1)	A construction code official shall discuss the inspection results with the permit holder at the completion of the inspection.

(2)	The building code official may issue a written notice of violations to the permit holder. The notice is to contain a description of the violations and an order requiring correction of the violations within a reasonable period determined by the building code official. When a violation relates to an unsafe building, structure or equipment, a building code official shall act in accordance with § 403.84 (relating to unsafe building, structure or equipment).

(3)	After the compliance date contained in the order, the building code official shall inspect the building, structure or equipment to determine whether the violation was corrected. The building code official shall close the order if the violation was corrected. The building code official may issue an order to show cause under§ 403.83 (relating to order to show cause/order to vacate) to the owner for a violation that was not corrected.

§403.83             Order to Show Cause/Order to Vacate

§403.83(a) A building code official may initiate action to vacate or close a building, structure or equipment for violations of the Uniform Construction Code by issuin·g an order to show cause to the owner or owner's agent of a building or structure.

§403.83(b) The order to show cause shall contain a statement of the grounds for the action, the alleged violations of the Uniform Construction Code and notification that the building, structure or equipment may be closed or vacated. The order to show cause shall contain notification that the owner or owner's agent shall submit a written answer within twenty (20) days. The building code official shall serve the order to show cause upon the owner  or owner's agent by certified mail, regular mail and by posting at the property. Personal service shall be attempted where possible.

§403.83(c)  The owner  or  owner's  agent  may file a written  answer  to the order  to  show cause with the building code official within  twenty  (20) days following  service  of the  order to show cause. The  answer shall  contain  specific  admissions  or denials of the allegations  contained in the order to show cause and set forth the specific facts, matters of law or Uniform Construction Code interpretation relied upon by the owner. The answer  may contain  a  request for  a variance  or  an extension  of time  for compliance.  The building code  official  shall  forward  all requests  for  variances,  extensions  of time  or  appeals  regarding interpretations  of the Uniform Construction  Code to the board of appeals within ten (1O} business days. The  building  code  official  shall  send  a  request  for  variance,  extension  of  time  or  appeals  regarding interpretation  of the Uniform Construction  Code's accessibility requirements to the Department within ten
(10)	business days.

§403.83(d) If the owner or owner's agent files an appeal, the board of appeals or Department will assume jurisdiction and consolidate the answer with any pending request for variance, extension of time or appeal filed by the owner with the board of appeals. The Board of Appeals shall thereafter schedule a hearing in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Construction Code and this Ordinance.

§403.83(e) The.J:iuilding code official shall consider the pending request for variance or extension of time or appeal as a stay to an enforcement action.
 
 
 
•	1

§403.83(1) After receipt of the answer, the building code official may take the following actions if the owner or owner's agent did not previously file an appeal or request for variance or extension of time:

(1)	Issue a stop work order.
(2)	Vacate or close the building or structure or place equipment out of operation.
(3)	Abate or modify the alleged violation.
(4)	Order other action to protect persons or property.

§403.83(g) A construction code official shall inspect the construction at the expiration of an extension of time or other time period granted for compliance under this section. If the building, structure or equipment violates the Uniform Construction Code following inspection, the building code official may issue an order vacating or closing the building or structure or placing equipment out of operation. The building code official shall serve this order upon the owner or owner's agent by certified mail or personal service.

§403.83(h) Where an unsafe condition  exists, a building code official shall act in accordance with §
403.84 (relating to unsafe building, structure or equipment).

§403.84             Unsafe Building, Structure or Equipment

§403.84(a) A building code official may determine that a building, structure or equipment is unsafe because of inadequate means of egress, inadequate light and ventilation, fire hazard, other dangers to human life or the public welfare, illegal or improper occupancy or inadequate maintenance or for any other applicable reason under the Uniform Construction Code that threatens the health, safety or welfare of the building, any adjoining or nearby building or property, or any individual. A vacant building or structure that is not secured against entry is unsafe under this section.

§403.84(b) When a building code official determines the existence of an  unsafe condition,  the building code official shall order the vacating of the building or structure.

§403.84(c) A building code official shall serve a written notice on the owner or owner's agent of the building, structure or equipment that is unsafe under this section. The notice shall contain the order to vacate the building, structure or seal the equipment out of service and state the unsafe conditions, required repairs or improvements. The order shall be served by certified mail and regular mailto the owner or to the owner's agent's last known address or on the owner, agent or person in control of the building, structure or equipment. A building code official shall post the written notice at the entrance of the structure or on the equipment.  Personal service shall also be attempted.

§403.84(d) When a building or structure is ordered vacated under this section, the building code official shall post a notice at each entrance stating that the structure is unsafe and its occupancy is prohibited.

§403.84(e) A building code official may not rescind the order to vacate until the owner abates or corrects the unsafe condition.

§403.85            Release, retention and sharing of commercial construction records.

§403.BS(a) A building code official shall and Haycock Township may keep records of all applications received, permits issued, reviewed building plans and specifications, certificates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, notices and orders issued for all commercial buildings and structures under the Uniform Construction Code. These records shall be retained as long as the related building, structure or equipment remains in existence.

§403.BS(b) A building code official may reproduce records kept in an electronic format to a hard-copy format upon request. A building code official or Haycock Township, but not both, may charge for the reproduction costs.
 
 
 
§40.85(c) A municipality that discontinues enforcing the Uniform Construction Code shall keep records of previous Uniform Construction Code enforcement. A municipality shall make these records available to the Department.

U:ITWC Clienls\Haycock\Uniform Construction Code\Modifiable Provlsions.05-18-2004.doc
 
 
 
ORDINANCE   NO. 96




AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AMENDING ARTICLE IV SECTION 404, SECTION IOF THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, REGARDING TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES WITHIN HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP



.WHEREAS, Section 1516 (53 P.S. §66516) of the Pennsylvania Second Class Township Code provides that the corporate powers of the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township (the "Board of Supervisors") include the ability to plan for the development of the township through zoning, subdivision and land development regulations under the act of July 13, 1968 (P.L. 805, No. 247), known as the "Pennsylvania Municipalities Planping Code."

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors on or about September, 26, 1994, duly adopted Ordinance  No. 71, revising and restating the Haycock Zoning Ordinance as adopted in 1975;

WHEREAS, Section 1601 ofthe Second Class Township Code provides thatthe Board of Supervisors may adopt ordinances in which general or specific powers of the tqwnship may be exercised, and, by the enactment of subsequent ordinances, the Board of Supervisors may amend, repeal or revise existing ordinances (53 P.S.  Section 66601 );

WHEREAS, since its adoption, the Zoning Ordinance has from time to time been amended;

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors on or about December 1, 2003, duly adopted Ordinance No. 95, amending the Zoning Ordinance to make provisions for the establishment of standards and regulations for telecommunications facilities within the Township;	-

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors finds it is in the interests of the Township and of its citizens to amend the Zoning Ordinance standards and regulations for telecommunications facilities within the Township to clarify the location on which a new telecommunication facility may be permitted after the enactment date of Ordinance 95 and to specifically exempt those applicants for telecommunications facilities permits that
received Zoning Hearing Board approval prior to the date of the enactment of Ordinance
-	-
95;

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors finds and determines that this Zoning Ordinance amendment is consistent with the Township Comprehensive Plan and the Community Development Objective stated therein and in the Zoning Ordinance.
 
 
 

NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing, be it ENACTED and ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, as follows:

Section 01:  Article IV, section 404, section 14 of the Zoning Ordinance is amended to read as follows:

14   EXEMPTIONS

The following  telecommunications facilities and uses are exempt from the requirements of this section: police, fire, ambulance, and other emergency dispatch; amateur (ham) radio, citizens-band radio, single-use local business radio dispatch, television antennas for home Use, or temporary mobile facilities for television or radio broadcasts ("Exempt Facilities").

No FCC-licensed telecommunications facility or use, except applicants for telecommunications facilities permits that received Zoning Hearing Board approval prior to the date of the enactment of Ordinance 95, shall be considered exempt from this section for any reason, whether or not said facility or use is proposed to share a tower or other structure with Exempt Facilities.


Section 02:  Article 'IV, section 404, section I6.3 of the Zoning Ordinance is amended to read as follows:

16.3  USE PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION

Telecommunications facilities are a use permitted by special exception upon compliance with the provisions of this section on parcels of land located on land owned by a government agency and located within 500 feet of the centerline of Old Bethlehem Road and Route 563. If it is demonstrated by an applicant that the telecommunication service  needs of Haycock Township cannot be met by locating on land as referred to above, then a telecommunications facility may be located on land owned by a nonprofit entity located within 500 feet of the centerline of Old Bethlehem Road and Route 563. If it is demonstrated by an applicant that the telecommunication service needs of Haycock Township cannot be met by locating on land as referred to above, then a telecommunications facility may be located on land having a total acreage of five or more acres located within 500 feet of the centerline of Old Bethlehem Road and Route 563. Regardless of the parcel of land, the telecommunication facility must be located and constructed so that the greatest possible distance exists from the facility to the centerline of thareferenced  roadways.
 
 
 




Section 03:  Partial Repealer

All other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, as amended,  shall  remain  in full force and effect. All other  ordinances  or  provisions  of  the  Zoning  Ordinance inconsistent herewith or in conflict with any of the terms hereof are, to the extent of said inconsistencies  or conflicts,  hereby specifically  repealed.

Section 04:  Savings Clause

In the event any portion of this Ordinance is determined by a court of jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or unenforceable, it shall not affect any of the other provision of this Ordinance or of the Zoning Ordinance. All other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and this Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.

,
Section 05:  Effective Date

All provisions of this Ordinance shall be in force and effect five days after approval and adoption.


 
ORDAINED AND ENACTED this  .Ji<.-(day of	j;  Ia-c.,i...
ii
 

, 2004,
 

ATTEST:
 
HAYCOCK  TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
 

 




















U:\1WC	Clients\HAYCOCK\Ordlnance\Cell	Tower	Telecommunicatians.dir\Tele.	Fae.	Ord.	Amend\Tele.Fac.Ord. Amend.03.10.04.doc
 
 
 
ORDiNANCE  No...f.2




AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AMENDING ARTICLE IV SECTION 404 OF THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, ESTABLISHING STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS FOR TELECOMMUNICATIONS  FACILITIES WITHIN HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP



WHEREAS, Section 1516 (53 P.S. §66516) of the Pennsylvania Second Class Township Code provides that the corporate powers of the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township (the "Board of Supervisors") include the ability to plan for the development of the township through zoning, subdivision and land   developn:ient regulations under the act of July 13, 1968 (P.L. 805, No. 247), known as the "Pennsylvania  Municipalities Planning Code."

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors on or about September, 26, 1994,  duly adopted Ordinance No. 71, revising and restating the Haycock Zoning Ordinance as adopted in 1975;

WHEREAS, Section 1601 of the  Second Class Township Code provides that the Board of Supervisors may adopt ordinances in which general or specific powers of the township may be exercised, and, by the enactment of subsequent ordinances, the Board of Supervisors may amend, repeal or revise existing ordinances (53 P.S. Section 66601 );

WHEREAS, the since its adoption, the Zoning Ordinance has from time  to time been amended;

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors finds it is in the interests of the of the Township and of its citizens to amend the Zoning Ordinance to make provisions for the establishment of standards and regulations for telecommunications facilities within the Township;

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors finds and determines that this Zoning Ordinance amendment is consistent with the Township Comprehensive Plan and the Community Development Objective stated therein and in the Zoning Ordinance.

NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing, be it ENACTED and ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania, as follows:


Section 01:  Article  IV section  404 of the Zoning  Ordinance  is amended  by adding the following section I. as follow:
 
 
 
I.	TELECOMMUNICATIONS  FACILITIES

I1  PURPOSE

The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Haycock Township and of those who visit this community, while accommodating the telecommunication needs of residents, visitors, community services and businesses. This section shall:

A.	Preserve the character and appearance of Haycock Township, while allowing adequate telecommunications services to be developed;

B. Protect the scenic, historic,  environmental,  and  natural  resources  of Haycock Township, and property values therein;

 
C.	Provide standards and requirements appearance, construction, monitoring, telecommunications  facilities;
 
for  the  operation,  siting,  design, modification,	and	removal	of
 

D.	Minimize tower and antenna proliferation by encouraging the sharing of existing telecommunications  facility sites where possible and appropriate;

E.	Facilitate the provision of telecommunications services to  the  residences and businesses of Haycock Township;

F. Require, through performance standards, the location of telecommunication facilities in nonresidential areas and away from other sensitive areas such as schools, hospitals, senior centers, and child care facilities.

12 AUTHORITY TO HIRE INDEPENDENT CONSULTANTS

A.	Upon review of an application for use by special exception and/or Site Plan Review for a telecommunications facility,  the  Haycock  Township  Zoning Hearing Board (hereinafter "Zoning Board") and/or the Haycock Township Planning Commission (hereinafter "Planning Commission") may determine that it needs the assistance of an independent consultant or consultants to evaluate the application. Upon making such a determination, it may hire independent consultants, the reasonable costs of whose services shall be paid for by the applicant from escrow funds held with the Township pursuant to the fee schedule set by the Board of Supervisors via Resolution. These consultants shall be qualified professionals with an appropriate combination of  training, record of service, and/or certification in one or more of the following areas of expertise: 1) telecommunications/radio frequency engineering; 2) structural engineering; 3) assessment of electromagnetic fields; 4) legal issues; 5) other areas, · if determined necessary by the Zoning Board or the Planning Commission.





2
 
 
 
"


8. The Zoning Board and Planning Commission may  provide  the  full application to any independent consultant(s) hired pursuant to this section for their analysis and review. Consultants shall report directly to the Zoning Board and/or the Planning Commission.

13	CONSISTENCY WITH FEDERAL LAW

The Zoning Board's decision regarding an application is intended to be in agreement with federal law, particularly the Telecommunications Act of 1996 as it may be amended. This section is not intended to:

A.	Prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services;

8. Unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services; or

C. Regulate personal wireless services on the basis of the  environmental effects of radio frequency emissions, to the extent that the regulated services and facilities comply with the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulations concerning such emissions.

14	EXEMPTIONS

The following telecommunications facilities and uses are exempt from the requirements of this section: police, fire, ambulance, and other emergency dispatch; amateur (ham) radio, citizens-band radio, single-use local business radio dispatch, television antennas for home use, or temporary mobile facilities for television or radio broadcasts ("Exempt Facilities").

No FCC-licensed telecommunications facility or use  shall  be  considered exempt from this section for any reason, whether or not said facility or use is proposed to share a tower or other structure with Exempt Facilities.

15	DEFINITIONS

Definitions contained in this section shall be applicable to this section only, and do not pertain to the remainder of the Haycock Township Zoning Ordinance. Definitions in the Haycock Township Zoning Ordinance will pertain to this section unless the term is specifically defined herein.

ANTENNA:  A device for transmitting and/or receiving electromagnetic signals.

APPLICANT: A person who applies for a telecommunications facility siting. An applicant can be the landowner of record, or the telecommunications service provider or agent of record, with the  landowner's (or other legally designated representative) written permission.
 
 
 
•'




BASE STATION: The primary sending and rece1v1ng site in a telecommunications facility. More than one base station and/or more than one variety of telecommunications provider can be located on a single tower or structure.

CELLULAR TELECOMMUNICATIONS: A commercial Low Power Mobile Radio Service bandwidth licensed by the FCC to providers in a specific geographical area in which the radio frequency spectrum is divided into discrete channels which are assigned in groups to geographic cells within a service area and which are capable of being reused in different cells within the service area.

CHANNEL: The segment of the radiation spectrum to or from an antenna which carries one signal. An antenna may radiate ·on many channels simultaneously.

CO-LOCATION: Locating wireless telecommunications equipment from more than one provider at a single site or structure.

FCC: Federal Communications Commission. The government agency responsible for regulating telecommunications  in the United States.

LOCATION: References to site location shall be the exact longitude and latitude, to the nearest tenth of a second. Bearing or orientation should be referenced to true north.

MODIFICATION   OF  AN   EXISTING   TELECOMMUNICATIONS    FACILITY:
Any change, or proposed change, in power input or output,  number of antennas, change in antenna type(s) or model(s), repositioning of antenna(s), or change in number of channels per antenna above the maximum number approved under an existing permit.

MODIFICATION OF AN EXISTING TOWER OR STRUCTURE:  Any change,
or proposed change, in dimensions of an existing and permitted tower or other structure	designed to support telecommunications transmission, receiving and/or relaying antennas and/or equipment.

MONITORING: The measurement, by the use of instruments in the field, of non-ionizing radiation exposure at a telecommunications facility site as a whole, or  from the towers, antennas or repeaters.

MONITORING PROTOCOL: The testing protocol, such as the Cobbs Protocol or the FCC Regulations (Title 47, Part 1, Section 1.1307 referenced as IEEE C95.3 1991), or one substantially similar, including compliance determined in accordance with the National Council on Radiation Protection  and Measurements, which is to be used to monitor the emissions and determine exposure risk from existing and new telecommunications facilities.
 
 
 
"	' I



MONOPOLE: A single self-supporting vertical pole with no guy wire anchors, usually consisting of a galvanized or other unpainted metal or a wooden pole with below-grade foundations.

PERMIT: An official action which sets forth the rights and obligations extended by Haycock Township to an operator to own, construct, maintain, and operate its telecommunications facility within the boundaries of the township.

PERMITTEE: An applicant who is granted a permit for a telecommunications facility by Haycock Township.

RADIAL PLOTS: Radial plots are the result of drawing equally  spaced lines (radials) from the point of the antenna, calculating the expected signal and indicating this graphically on a map. The relative signal strength may be indicated by varying the size or color at each point being studied along the radial. A threshold plot uses a mark to indicate whether that  point would be strong enough to provide adequate coverage i.e., the points meeting the threshold of adequate coverage. The draw back is the concentration of points close to the antenna and the divergence of  points far from the site near the ends of the radials.

REPEATER: A small receiver/relay transmitter and antenna of relatively low power output designed to provide service to areas which are not able to receive adequate coverage directly from a base or primary station.

ROOF AND/OR  BUILDING MOUNT TELECOMMUNICATIONS  FACILITY:   A
telecommunications facility where antennas are mounted  to  an  existing structure on the roof (including rooftop appurtenances) or a building face.

STRUCTURALLY ABLE: The determination that a tower or structure  is capable of safely carrying the load imposed by the proposed new antenna(s} under all reasonably predictable conditions as determined by professional structural engineering analysis including  the wind load or any other structural requirements.

STRUCTURE: Any pole, telescoping mast, tripod or the like which supports a device used in the transmitting and/or receiving of electromagnetic  signals.

TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING: A structure located at a base station designed principally to enclose equipment used in connection with telecommunications transmissions including any foundation that may  be required.

TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY: All equipment, including any tower, structure, building, antenna, repeater and other related device which a telecommunications provider needs to broadcasts and receives radio frequency signals which carry their services.
 
 
 
"	"


TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY SITE: A property, or any part thereof, which is owned or leased by one or more telecommunications providers and upon which one or more telecommunications faci/ity(ies) and any required landscaping  are located.

TELECOMMUNICATIONS	PROVIDER: An entity licensed by the FCC to provide telecommunications services to individuals or institutions.

TEMPORARY   WIRELESS   TELECOMMUNICATIONS    FACILITIES:      Any
telecommunications facility designed for use while a permanent wireless telecommunications facility is under construction, rehabilitation or restoration.

TILED COVERAGE PLOTS: Tiled plots result from calculating the signal at uniformly spaced locations on a rectangular grid, or tile, of the area of concern. Tiled plots (in comparison to radial plots) 1) provide a uniform distribution of points over the area of interest, 2) usually allow the same grid to be used as different sites are examined, and 3) do not necessitate the transmitter site be within the grid or area of interest. As with radial plots, the graphic display or plot can be either signal strength or adequate threshold. Tile plotting require more topographic data and longer (computer) execution time than radial plotting, but is preferable for comparative analysis.

TOWER: A permanent guyed, monopole, or self-supporting free  standing mount, or in association with a building, other permanent designed to accommodate one or more antennas intended for transmitting and/or receiving television, AM/FM radio, digital, microwave, cellular, tele.phone, or similar forms of electronic telecommunication.

16	PERMITS

No permit shall issue to an applicant for the construction,  alteration, modification, installation or operation of any telecommunication facility prior to a completed application being received by the Township; site plan approval from the Planning Commission; the granting of a special exception from the Zoning Board when applicable; a letter of intent to allow co-location of telecommunications facilities being received by the Township,   the  removal bond (or other financial security) being received by the Township; proof of telecommunications facility insurance; the deposit of escrow funds  and payment of all fees due to the Township.

An applicant for a telecommunications facility shall be a telecommunications provider, or must have a letter of intent or an executed contract to provide land or facilities to such an entity. A permit shall not be granted for a facility built on speculation of a future letter of intent or contract with a telecommunications provider. A permit shall be granted only for a telecommunications facility with a user that has a current FCC license.
 
 
 
,•



16.1	TELECOMMUNICATIONS  USE  .

Telecommunications use shall be considered a principal use  of the  property and, notwithstanding the provision of Section 400 of the Zoning Ordinance, is also permitted as an additional use on the property so long as the existing principal use on the property is a permitted use or in the district or a lawful nonconforming use. The existing principal use need not be affiliated with the telecommunications  provider.

16.2	USE PERMITTED  BY RIGHT

A new telecommunications facility attached to an existing telecommunication facility is a permitted use by right and may be located in any zoning district.

16.3 USE PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION

Telecommunications facilities may be a permitted use  by special  exception upon compliance with the provisions of this section on parcels of land located on Bucks County Tax Map Parcel Nos. 14-7-196 and 14-7-65 and within the land corridors located within 500 feet of the center line of Old Bethlehem Pike and Route 563, which are owned by a government agency.  If such parcel is not available or cannot meet the needs of desired transmission, then a telecommunications facility may be located within  the  land  corridors  as indicated above which are owned by a non-profit agency. If such a parcel is not available or cannot meet the needs of desired transmission, then a telecommunications facility may be located within the  land  corridors  as indicated above on parcels having a total acreage of five or more acres. Regardless of the parcel, the telecommunication facility must be constructed on the given parcel so that the greatest possible distance exists from the facility to the center line of the referenced roadways.

16.4  APPLICATION

All applicants for telecommunications facilities  permits  shall  include  the following information, as it applies to the specific type of telecommunications facility applied for, in addition to requirements of the Zoning Ordinance for uses by special  exception:

A. The legal name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, tower or structure owner (if other than applicant), and landowner(s) of record. If the applicant, tower or structure owner or landowner is not a natural person, the name and address of the company, the type of business entity, the state in which the company is incorporated and has its principal office. Written permission of the tower or structure owner and landowner(s) to apply for the special	exception use permit shall be submitted along with written permission from the tower or structure owner and landowner(s) allowing the Township's  independent consultant(s) to conduct any necessary site visit(s).
 
 
 
..	,•



B. The name, address and telephone number of the person to be contacted with regard to the application. Notice, orders, and other papers may be served upon the person so named, and such service shall be deemed to be service upon the applicant's registered agent.

c. The name, address, and telephone number of someone who is available on a 24-hour basis that is authorized to act in the event of  an emergency regarding the structure or safety of the telecommunications facility.

D.	A copy of the applicant's letter of intent or executed contract with the telecommunication  service provider if the applicant is not the provider.

E.	The names and addresses of the landowners of record of all abutting property.

F.	A report from qualified and Pennsylvania-licensed professional engineer(s) that:

1.	Describes the telecommunications facility height, design, elevation, width, support system and reasons and design implications for use or non­ use of guy wires.

2.	Documents the height above  grade for all proposed mounting positions for antennas to be co-located on a tower or  structure and the minimum separation distances  between antennas.

3.	Describes the tower or structure's proposed capacity, including the number, height, and type(s) of antennas that the applicant expects the tower or structure to accommodate.

4.	Provides evidence of need, as described in Section 17.herein.

5.	Describes the output frequency, number of channels and power output per channel for each proposed antenna.

6.	For each antenna, describes the antenna gain (projected and maximum), polarization and radiation pattern (composite pattern for an antenna array), the power input to antenna(s), including power input in normal use and at maximum output for each antenna and all antennas as an aggregate if tower is fully utilized.

7.	Describes the output frequency of the transmitter(s).

8.	For a telecommunications facility with multiple emitters, describes the results of an intermodulation study to predict the interaction of the additional equipment with existing equipment.
 
 
 
·'	•'


9.	Demonstrates the tower or structure's compliance with accepted structural engineering standards and if an existing tower or structure, that it is structurally able to receive the proposed addition. Any tower or structure shall be designed and constructed  in accordance with the most current Telecommunications Industries Association {TIA) - Electronic Industries Association (EIA) Standard 222-F "Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures" and all applicable requirements of the Haycock Township Building Code. The proposed tower or structure must be designed and constructed so as to be able to withstand wind gusts of at least one hundred (100) miles per hour with no ice and 78 mile per hour basic wind speed with .5-inch radial ice.

10.	Provides proof that at the proposed site the applicant  will  be in at least minimum compliance with all federal, state, and local regulations, standards and requirements, the basis for such representation and a statement · that the applicant commits to continue to maintain such compliance with both radio frequency interference (RFI) and radio frequency radiation (RFR) standards (including all Environmental Assessments and Historic Preservation requirements) and that such compliance is within the limitations of the latest standards set  by the  following  oversight organizations:

The	American	National	Standards	Institute	(ANSl-C95-1,	as amended);

The  Institute of Electrical and Electronic  Engineers  (IEEE-C95.1, as amended);

The National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements (CRP);

The  International  Radiation  Protection  Association  (IRPA)  and  the FCC.

11.	Describes any foundations to be built upon which telecommunications facilities are located. Identifies any blasting and earth movement that may be required, and provides plans and elevations of the area to be blasted or affected and describes the steps to be taken to reduce or eliminate potential effects of the blasting including vibrations and impacts to foundations, wells and other structures in the area. Provides a plan to identify abutters prior to blasting. The Zoning Board may, in its discretion, require the Applicant to notify additional property owners prior to blasting that may be sufficiently close to the proposed location and may reasonably require additional information related to such site preparation.

12.	Provides a soil report for the site, which provides verification that the areas  of  land, where  the  foundation  of the  tower,  any  buildings  and  any
 
 
 
..



anchors for guy wires will be located, are appropriate for constructing those structures  thereon.

13. Includes other information required by the Zoning  Board that is necessary to evaluate the request and its impact upon the health and safety of the residents of Haycock Township.

G.	For a tower or structure, a letter of intent committing the tower or structure owner and future tenant(s) to permit shared use of the tower or structure by other telecommunications providers, without discrimination, if the addiiional users agree to meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use, including	compliance with all applicable FCC regulations, standards, and requirements and provisions provided herein.

H.	For a telecommunications facility to be installed on an existing tower or structure, a copy of the applicant's letter of intent or executed contract with the owner of the existing tower or structure.

I.	To the extent required by the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and as administered by the FCC, a complete Environmental Assessment (EA) draft or final report describing the expected impacts of the proposed telecommunications facility. To the extent the applicant claims that an EA is not required, it should provide an explanation as to why an EA is not required in the form of an opinion, ruling, or other certification from the FCC.

J. Proof of compliance with Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act, as amended, and with the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation's regulations under the Act.


K.	Detailed plans for emergency power generation, including:

1.	Demonstration of percent of electrical demand being proposed in event of loss of commercial power.

2.	Type of fuel, storage method, and expected means and frequency of fuel delivery to the site for power generation.


3.	Amount of generator time, based on historical power reliability for the area of the telecommunications facility, proposed frequency and duration of tests, and description of muffler system and methods for noise abatement.

4.	Feasibility of wind and/or solar power in conjunction with storage batteries.


L.	Two cross-sections of proposed telecommunications facility, drawn at right angles to each other, showing any guy wires or supports. This shall show the proposed height of the tower or structure  above the average grade at the  base.  This  shall  also  show  all  proposed  antennas,  including  their
 
 
 
..


location on the tower or structure as well as all electrical wires, cables, and support equipment.

M.	A professional  structural  engineer's  written  description  of  the  proposed tower or structure and its capacity to support additional antennas  or equipment at different heights and the ability of the tower or structure to be shortened  if  future  telecommunications  facilities  no  longer  require  the original  height.

N.	An Existing Conditions Plan and Proposed Site Plan as defined in Section
I6.5.C. and D. herein.

O.	All  pertinent  submitta/s  and  showings  pertaining  to:  FCC  permitting/ licensing;	Environmental Assessments  and  Environmental  Impact Statements;  FAA Notice of Construction or Alteration;  aeronautical  studies; all  . pertinent  data,  assumptions,  and   calculations   relating  to   service coverage; and all pertinent calculations and/or measurement data related to non-ionizing radiation emissions and exposure, regardless of  whether categorical exemption from routine environmental evaluation under the FCC rules is claimed.

P. An emergency plan to be implemented in the event that the tower or structure is deemed unsafe after inspection as  described  in section I9.E. and F. herein. The plan shall include measures to warn abutting landowners of an unsafe situation, to evacuate a zone where injury or property damage may occur, and to notify local authorities.

Q. Details of proposed method of financial surety as required in section I12.
{Abandoned,	Unused,	Obsolete,	Damaged,	or	Dangerous
Telecommunications   Facility  or  Portions  of  Telecommunications   Facility) herein.

16.5.	SITE PLAN REVIEW

Site  plan  applications  for  telecommunications  facilities  shall  include  the following  information:

A. Location Map: a copy of a portion of the most recent USGS Quadrangle map showing the area within at least  a two-mile radius of the proposed telecommunications facility site, including the exact latitude and longitude (degrees, minutes, seconds to the nearest tenth).

B. Vicinity Map at a scale of no smaller than 1 inch = 416 feet (or metric equivalent 1:5,000) with contour intervals no greater than 10 feet (or 3 meters) showing the entire vicinity within a 2,500-foot radius of the telecommunications facility site, topography, public and private roads and driveways,   buildings  and  structures,  water  bodies,  wetlands,  landscape
 
 
 
''


features, historic sites, and habitats for endangered species. It shall indicate the property lines of the  proposed  telecommunications  facility  site parcel and all access easements or rights of way needed for access from a public way to the site, and the names of all abutters or property owners along the access easement or who have deeded rights to the easement.

C.	Existing Conditions Plan: A recent survey of the area within 500 feet of the telecommunications facility site at a scale no smaller than 1 inch = 40 feet (1:480 or metric equivalent  1:500) with topography drawn with a minimum of
5  feet  (1.5  meters)  contour  intervals,  showing  existing  utilities,  property
lines, existing buildings or structures, wooded  areas,  existing  water wells and springs. It shall show the boundary of any wetlands or flood plains or watercourses, and of any bodies of water included in the Official  Flood Hazard Area within 500 feet from the tower or any  related facilities  or access ways or appurtenances. The survey plan shall  have  been completed, on the ground, by a Pennsylvania-registered land surveyor no more than two years prior to the application date.

D.	Proposed Site Plans of the entire telecommunications facility site, indicating all improvements at the same scale as or larger than the Existing Conditions Plan showing the following:

1.	Proposed tower or structure location and  any  appurtenances, including supports and guy wires, if any, and any accessory building(s). It shall indicate property boundaries and setback distances to the base(s) of the tower or structure  and the nearest corners of each of the appurtenant structures to those boundaries, and dimensions of all  proposed improvements. Where protective fencing is proposed,  it  shall  indicate setback distances from the edge of the fencing.

2.	Proposed spot elevations at the base of the proposed tower or structure and at the base of any guy wires, and the corners of all appurtenant  structures.

3.	Proposed utilities, including distance from source of power, sizes of service available and required, locations of any proposed utility or telecommunications  lines.

4.	Any direct or indirect wetlands alteration proposed.

5.	Detailed plans for drainage of surface and sub-surface water, to control erosion and sedimentation both during construction and as a permanent  measure.

6.	Plans indicating locations and specifics of proposed screening, landscaping, grading, ground cover, fencing, and additional information that may be required; any exterior light(s) or sign(s).
 
 
 
"	'    ·'


7.	Plans of proposed access driveway or roadway and parking area at the telecommunication facility site. This shall include grading, drainage, and traveled width. This shall also include a cross-section of the access drive indicating the width, depth of gravel, paving or surface materials.

8.	Plans showing any changes to be made to an existing telecommunications facility's landscaping, screening, fencing, lighting, drainage, wetlands, g1·ading, driveways or roadways, parking or other infrastructure as a result of a proposed modification of said facility.

9.	Horizontal and radial distances of proposed antenna(s) to nearest point on property line, and to the nearest primary or secondary residence, school, hospital, senior center, child care facility, religious structure, or any other public building.

E.	Proposed details of the telecommunications  facility including the following:

1.	Ground attachments, specifications for anchor bolts and other anchoring hardware for tower or structure.

2.	Proposed exterior finish and color of the tower  or  structure, building(s) and other portions of the telecommunications facility.

3.	The relative height of the tower or structure to the tops of surrounding trees, as they presently exist and the height to which they are expected to grow in 10 years.

F.	Proposed   plans   of  telecommunications	facility   building(s)   showing  the following:

1.	Floor plans and cross sections at a scale of no smaller than 3 inch =
1 foot ( 1:48) of any proposed appurtenant structure.

2.         Elevation views, indicating exterior appearance and materials.

G.	Proposed  equipment  plan elevations,  sections  and  details  at  a  scale  no smaller than 1 inch = 10 feet showing the following:

1.	Number of antennas and repeaters, as well as the exact locations of
·	antenna(s) and of all repeaters (if any) located on a map, as well as by degrees, minutes, and seconds to the nearest  tenth of latitude  and longitude.


2.	Mounting locations on tower or structure, including height above ground.

3.	Identification of all mounting frames, arms, brackets or other devices or equipment used to hold antennas and other equipment in place.·
 
 
 
..'




4.	Identification of all equipment or devices either attached to the structure or on the ground.

H. Visibility Maps and Visual Analysis: The  applicant  shall  provide photographs with a simulation of the proposed telecommunication facility. Photographs shall show views towards the proposed site, from a two-mile radius around the site, at forty-five-degree intervals. A minimum  of  eight views should be presented.

The applicant shall also develop and submit to the Planning Commission a written analysis of the visual impact of the proposed tower by a registered landscape architect. This analysis shall include photographs of the balloon test, as described in section I6.I., taken from at least 10 different perspectives within Haycock Township and any other visual analysis it may have developed or processed.

I.		Balloon Test: Within thirty-five days of submitting an application, applicant shall arrange to fly, or raise upon a temporary mast, a three-foot-diameter, brightly colored balloon at the maximum height of the proposed tower and within fifty horizontal feet of the center of the  proposed tower.  The  date, time, and location of this balloon test shall be advertised by the applicant at 7 and 14 days in advance of the test date in the local newspaper. The applicant shall inform the Zoning Board, the Planning Commission, and abutting property owners in writing of the dates and  times of the test, at least 14 days in advance. The balloon shall be flown for at least six consecutive hours, between 7 a.m. and 5 p.m. (and/or at  least two hours before sunset as posted for the test dates by the National Weather Service) on the dates chosen. In the event of application for co-location at an existing telecommunications facility, the applicant shall be exempt from this balloon test. The applicant shall record the weather during the balloon test including the wind velocity and direction.

J. Construction sequence and time schedule for completion of each phase of the entire project.

I7. EVIDENCE OF NEED

A.	Existing Coverage: Applicant shall provide written documentation  to the Zoning Board demonstrating that existing telecommunications facility sites within a 30-mile radius of the proposed site cannot reasonably be made to provide adequate coverage and/or adequate capacity to areas within the Haycock	Township which lack such coverage and/or capacity. The documentation shall include, for each telecommunications facility site listed which is owned or operated by the applicant, the exact location (in longitude and latitude, to degrees, minutes and seconds to the nearest tenth), ground elevation,  height  of  tower  or  structure,  type  of  antennas,  antenna  gain,
 
 
 
'.	·'  . '


height  of  antennas  on  tower  or  structure,  output  frequency,   number  of channels,  power  input  and  maximum  power output  per  channel.  Potential adjustments  to  these  existing  telecommunications  facility  sites,  including changes  in antenna type, orientation,  gain, height or power output shall  be specified.  Tiled  coverage  plots showing  each of these telecommunications facility sites, as they exist, and with adjustments as above, shall be provided as part of the application.

B.	Repeaters: The applicant shall demonstrate that it is not reasonably able to create adequate coverage in Haycock Township from wireless base stations located in other townships or to fill holes within the area of otherwise adequate coverage by use of repeaters. Applicants shall detail the number, location, power output, and coverage of any proposed repeaters in their systems and provide engineering data to justify their use.

C.	Towers: The applicant for new telecommunications facility utilizing a tower shail demonstrate that it has made a good faith effort to obtain permission to mount communications antenna(s) on an existing building,  structure  or tower.  A good faith effort shall require that the applicant contact all owners of potentially suitable structures (such as, but not limited to, smoke stacks, water towers/tanks, tall buildings, other towers or poles, church steeples, or other natural or manufactured tall structures or features) within a minimum one-half (1/2) mile radius of the proposed tower site and that one or more of the following reasons, supported by engineering and other related support data, for not selecting such structure apply:

1.	The proposed antenna(s) and related equipment would exceed  the structural capacity of the existing structure and its reinforcement cannot be accomplished  at a reasonable cost.

2.	The proposed antenna(s) and related equipment would cause radio frequency interference with other existing equipment  for  that  existing structure and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.

3.	Such existing structures do not have adequate location, space, access or height to accommodate the proposed equipment or to allow it to perform its intended function.

4.	Addition of the proposed antenna(s) and related equipment would result in electromagnetic radiation from such structure exceeding applicable standards established by the FCC and/or other  industry  standards governing human exposure to electromagnetic radiation.

5.	A commercially reasonable agreement could not be reached with the owner(s) of such existing structure(s).


D.	Five-Year Plan: All applications shall be accompanied by a written five year plan for the  utilization  of the  proposed facilities.   This  plan should include
 
 
 
''	'


justification for capacity in excess of immediate needs, as well as plans for any further development within the Township.

I8  GENERAL PROJECT REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS

A.	Access Roads and Utilities: Where  new  telecommunications  facilities require construction of, or improvement to, access roads, roads shall follow the contour of the land, be constructed or improved at the edge of fields and/or forests, and where feasible, access shall be over existing driveways and easements. Applicant shall maintain the access and shall ensure that no mud or dirt is conveyed onto public roads. Utility or service lines shall be underground, and designed and located so as to minimize disruption  to wildlife habitat, agricultural lands, and scenic areas.

8. Landscaping/Screening: Natural or planted evergreen screening shall be located at the perimeter of the site to ensure that ground equipment and structures associated with the telecommunications facility are hidden from adjacent public roadways. The evergreen screening shall consist of either a hedge, planted 3 feet on center maximum, or a row of evergreen trees planted 10 feet on center maximum. Existing on-site vegetation outside the immediate site for the telecommunications facility shall be preserved. Disturbance	to existing topography shall be minimized, unless the disturbance	is demonstrated to result in less visual impact on the telecommunications facility from surrounding properties and other vantage points.

C.	Fencing: The area around the telecommunications facility site shall be completely fenced and gated for security to a height of eight feet by means of chain link fencing. Use of razor wire is not permitted. In addition,  all towers and support structures shall be fitted with anti-climbing devices, as approved by industry standards.

D.	Signs: A sign no greater than two (2) square feet indicating the name of the telecommunications facility owner(s) and a  24-hour emergency telephone number, either local or toll-free, shall be posted adjacent to the entry gate. In addition, radio frequency radiation (RFR) warning signs, and the federal tower registration plate, where applicable, shall be posted on the fence or as required to meet federal requirements. "No Trespassing" signs may be posted at the discretion of the telecommunications facility owner( s). No commercial signs shall be placed on any telecommunications  facility.

E.	Building Design:

1.	Telecommunications facilities buildings shall not exceed 250 square feet, shall be designed to be architecturally similar and compatible with each other, and shall be no more than 12 feet high. The buildings shall be used only for the housing of equipment  related to this particular site. Whenever
 
 
 
. .	''	\


possible, the buildings shall be joined or clustered so as to appear as one building.

2.	Except as provided herein, the only lighting on the exterior of the telecommunications facility may be a fixture on  the  communications equipment building not greater than 100 watts and activated by a monitor sensor. Manually operated emergency lights are  permitted  for  use  only when telecommunications  facility operating personnel are on site.

Towers shall not be illuminated by artificial means and shall not display lights unless such lighting is specifically required by the FAA, FCC or other federal or state authority. In the event that any lighting is required solely as a result of tower height, the tower owner(s) shall submit for review by the Planning Commission (under Site Plan Review or Site Plan Amendment, as applicable). The Planning Commission may 1) require that the tower height be reduced to eliminate the need for lighting, 2) require another suitable location be utilized, or 3) make selection among lighting alternatives.

3.	The owner(s) of the facilities shall take reasonable measures to minimize noise from the operation of any machinery or equipment, as detected at the site perimeter. The noise level of the machinery shall be no louder than 40 decibels.

F.	Height of Towers and Telecommunications Facilities Combined with Existing Structure: New towers shall  not exceed the minimum height necessary to provide adequate coverage for the telecommunications use proposed for the tower and shall not exceed 200 feet iri height measured from the ground. Roof and/or building mount telecommunications facility shall be permitted to exceed the height limitations of the applicable zoning district by no more than forty-five (45) feet.

Antennas:	Omni directional or whip communications antennas shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height and seven (7) inches in diameter. Directional or panel communications antennas shall not exceed five (5) feet in height and three (3) feet in width. No microwave dish antennas shall be attached to a telecommunications  tower.

G.	Guy Wires: All guy wires associated with guyed towers shall be clearly marked so as to be visible at all times and shall be located within the fenced enclosure.

H.	Co-location:	Co-location  of  telecommunications   facilities  is  encouraged.
Owners of new towers shall agree to and allow for  co-location  consistent with the provisions of section I6.4.G., and at usual and customary rates for co-locators.

I.	Visual Impact: Towers, antennas, and any necessary  support  structures shall  be designed  to  blend  into the  surrounding  environment.  New towers
 
 
 
I I	I I   I I



shall have a galvanized finish unless otherwise required. The Zoning Board may require the tower(s) to be painted or otherwise camouflaged to minimize the adverse visual impact except in cases in which the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or other state  or federal authorities have dictated color.

Proposed facilities shall not unreasonably interfere with the view from any public park, conservation area, natural scenic vista, historic building or district, or major view corridor. Narrow structures with guyed supports may be preferred for aesthetic purposes.

J. Staff:  The  telecommunications  facility  shall  be fully  automated,  unstaffed and visited only for periodic  maintenance, and there shall be no water or sewage facilities connected to the compound.

K. Building Permit: Applicant shall make application for and have evidence of a Haycock Township building permit prior to construction or installation of any portion of the telecommunications facility.

L. Zoning Compliance: All telecommunications facilities shall be located on lots which meet the minimum size requirement and other regulations for the zoning district in which they are to be located, in addition to the setback requirements as provided in herein.

M.	Setback and Height Requirements: No telecommunications facility or tower, including guy-wire anchors and protective fencing, if any, shall be located:

1.	Closer than 200 feet horizontally to any property boundary of the site on which the tower is located, or the height of the tower, whichever is greater.

2.	Closer than 200 feet horizontally to any structure existing at the time of application which is used as a primary or secondary residence, school property (both public and private), a hospital, senior center, child care facility, building used for religious worship, or to any other building used regularly by the public. Primary or secondary residences are those dwelling units that include toilet facilities and facilities for food preparation and sleeping.

3.	Within the habitat of any state-listed rare or endangered wildlife or plant  species.

4.	Within 200 feet horizontally of any Pennsylvania  or  federally regulated  wetland.

5.	Within the 200 feet horizontally of the outer riparian zone, measured horizontally from any river or perennial stream.
 
 
 
. '


6.	Within the Township, state or federal setback requirements of an archeological site or historic structure.  No telecommunications  facility shall be located on a building or structure that is listed on an historic register or is in an historic district.

N. Parking: One (1) off-street parking space shall be provided within or outside the fenced telecommunications facility site.

0. At the completion of building, and/or installation, the owner shall provide the Township	with a certification issued by a Pennsylvania-registered professional structural engineer that the  telecommunications  facility  has been built in accordance with the plans submitted to the Township.

19.	MONITORING  PROTOCOL

A.	Monitoring Protocol: The Zoning Board may, as the technology changes, amend this section to require the use of testing protocols other than the approved monitoring protocol. A copy of the currently approved monitoring protocol shall be on file with the Township Secretary.

B. Pre-transmission Testing: After the granting of a permit and before applicant's telecommunications facilities begin transmission, the applicant shall submit a report, prepared by a qualified telecommunications or radio frequency engineer, on the cumulative background levels of non-ionizing radio frequency radiation around the proposed telecommunications facility site	and/or any repeater locations to be utilized for applicant's telecommunications	facilities. The engineer shall use the monitoring protocol, or one substantially similar. This report shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer, who may verify the results using an independent consultant.

C.	Post-transmission Testing: After transmission  begins, the owner of the telecommunications  facility shall provide testing of the site as follows:

There shall be routine annual monitoring of emissions/exposure by a qualified engineer using actual field measurement of radiation, utilizing the Monitoring Protocol. This monitoring shall measure levels of  non-ionizing radio frequency radiation (RFR) exposure at the telecommunications facility site and any repeaters. Each permittee shall provide a list of the most recent RFR readings at or near the site, their distances from the facility, dates of the readings, and the name of the person and company who took the readings and verify the operational levels of each telecommunications transmitter at the time of testing. In addition, each permittee shall provide additional RFR readings taken at sensitive areas within 3 miles  of  the facility. A report should indicate whether other permittees at the facility were notified prior to testing that RFR monitoring would occur. The notification should be attached to the report.
 
 
 
•	-	'l


A report of the monitoring results shall be prepared by the engineer and submitted to the Zoning Officer, who may  verify the results using an independent consultant. In the case of co-located telecommunications facility, permittee may bill all telecommunications providers and the telecommunications facilities owner(s) equally or according to a predetermined proportionality.

In the event of any major modification of existing  telecommunications facility, or the activation of any additional channels, the telecommunications facility owner(s) shall immediately perform new monitoring, as described in this section. Minor changes, such as slight changes in frequency, shall not require  additional  monitoring.

Permittees shall have the opportunity to demonstrate reasons for inability to comply with these provisions.

D.	Excessive Exposure: Should the monitoring of a telecommunications facility site reveal that the site exceeds the current FCC standard and guidelines in existence at the time of the violation, the owner(s) of all telecommunications facilities utilizing that site shall be so notified. In accordance with FCC requirements, the telecommunications facility owner(s) shall immediately reduce power or cease operation as necessary to protect persons having access	to the site, tower, and/or antennas. Additionally, the telecommunications facility owner(s) shall submit to the Township a plan for the correction of the situation that resulted in excessive exposure. Failure to act as described above shall be a violation of this Zoning Ordinance and subject to fines and other sanctions consistent with this Ordinance.

E.	Structural Inspection: Tower owner(s) shall arrange for  an  qualified consultant	(a licensed professional structural engineer) to conduct inspections of the tower's structural integrity and safety. Guyed towers shall be inspected every three years unless there is cause to conduct an inspection more frequently. Monopoles  and  non-guyed  lattice towers  shall be inspected every five years unless there is cause to conduct an inspection more frequently. A report of the inspection results shall be prepared by the consultant, and a copy shall be sent to the Zoning Officer within 10 business days. In the event of any major modification of the existing tower, which includes changes to tower dimensions, increase in number or types of antennas or other devices or structural modifications, the  tower  owner(s) shall immediately perform a new structural  inspection.  The Township  has the right to enter onto the property and conduct inspections during the construction phase and at all times thereafter.

F.	Unsafe Towers: Should the inspection required in section I9.E. reveal any structural defect(s) which, in the opinion of the qualified consultant (a licensed professional structural engineer), render(s) that tower unsafe, the tower owner(s) shall undertake the following actions:
 
 
 
' . ' '


1.	Immediately upon notification of any structural defect(s)  which render(s) a tower unsafe, post warnings of same at access points to the tower; notify appropriate emergency authorities;  notify  the  Zoning  Officer, and notify the landowner and owners of record of the abutting properties within the unsafe area (minimally a 360-degree area the radius of the height of the tower); when appropriate, in consultation with emergency authorities, restrict access to the unsafe area and/or encourage evacuation of residents.

2.	Within 10 business days of notification of any structural  defect(s) which render(s) a tower unsafe, submit to the Zoning Officer a  plan  to correct the structural defect(s) as soon as  reasonably  possible.  The Township shall review and make any changes if needed to the remediation plan within 10 days. The  tower owner(s) shall implement the  remediation plan upon Township approval.

110.	AMENDMENTS TO EXISTING TELECOMMUNICATIONS  FACILITY PERMIT

In the event of an alteration or addition to a  previously  approved telecommunications facility, the facility owner(s)  shall submit to the Zoning Board an application for a permit amendment when any of the following are proposed:

A.	Change in the number of buildings or other telecommunications facilities permitted on the site;

B.  Material change in technology used by the telecommunications  facility; or

C. Addition or change of any equipment resulting in greater  visibility  or structural wind-loading, or additional height of the tower, including profile of additional antennas, not specified in the original application.



111.	TEMPORARY WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS  FACILITIES

Temporary wireless telecommunications  facilities  are subject to the following:

A.	Use of a temporary wireless telecommunications facility requires a special exception use permit from the Zoning Board.

B. Temporary wireless telecommunications facilities are allowed for no longer than five days use during a special event.

C. The maximum height of a temporary telecommunications facility is 50 feet from grade.

D. Temporary wireless telecommunications facilities shall comply with all applicable sections herein.
 
 
 
•I	' '  '



112.	ABANDONED, UNUSED, OBSOLETE, DAMAGED, OR DANGEROUS TELECOMMUNICATIONS	FACILITY OR PORTIONS OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS   FACILITY

Abandoned	or	unused	telecommunications	facilities	or	portions	of telecommunications  facilities shall be removed as follows:

A.	.The  owner  of a  telecommunications  facility  shall  annually,  on January  15, file a declaration with the Zoning Officer certifying the  continuing  safe operation  of  every  telecommunications  facility  installed  subject  to  this Zoning	Ordinance. Failure to file a declaration shall mean that the telecommunications  facility is no longer in use and considered abandoned.

B. Abandoned or unused facilities shall be removed within 180 days of cessation of operations at the site, unless a time extension is approved by the Zoning Board within the 180-day period. In the event the facility is not removed within 180 days of the cessation of operations at a site, the Zoning Officer shall send the owner(s) of the facility a Notice of Zoning Violation and, following the expiration of the period for remediation of the violation, shall request Haycock Township to remove the facilities. Costs of removal shall be assessed against the facility owner, including any regulatory costs, disposal costs, clean up, and final landscaping costs.

C.	Unused portions of facility shall be removed by facility owner(s) within 180 days of the time that such portion is no longer used for antennas. The replacement of portions of a facility previously removed shall require the issuance of a new telecommunications  facility permit by the Zoning Board.

D.	An owner who has failed to file an annual declaration with the Zoning Officer by January 15 may, by February 15, file a declaration of use or intended use and may request the ability to continue use of the  telecommunications facility.

E. At the time of filing an application for a building permit for the construction of the telecommunications facility, a bond or other financial security, in the amount of $20,000.00 wherein a tower is proposed as part of the facility and
$5,000  otherwise,  in the form approved  by the Township  Solicitor  shall be
deposited with the Township to assure the removal of the facility when it ceases to be used as a telecommunications facility or is found in violation of the Township's code or ordinance as provided herein. At the time of filing an application for a building permit, applicant shall also enter into a written agreement with the Township, in a form approved by the Township Solicitor, to ensure that the Removal Bond remains continuously in effect.
 
 
 
.. t	'  '  '



113.	TELECOMMUNICATIONS  FACILITY   INSURANCE

The owner of a telecommunications facility shall provide evidence to the Township of liability, property damage and personal injury insurance in the minimum amount of One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and Three Million Dollars ($3,000,000.00) in the  aggregate covering  all portions of the telecommunications facility, naming Haycock Township as an Additional Insured thereon. The owner(s) shall arrange with the  insurance carrier(s) for original certificates of insurance for all renewals or cancellations of  said insurance coverage to be delivered to the  Zoning Officer. At a minimum the following  insurance requirements shall be satisfied:

A.	The required insurance must be obtained and maintained for the entire period the telecommunications facility is in existence from pre-construction through	final decommissioning and rehabilitation. If the operator, its contractors or subcontractors do not have the required insurance, the Township will order such entities to cease operation of the facility until such insurance is obtained.

B. Certificate(s) of insurance verifying such insurance shall be filed with the Zoning Officer at the time of application. For entities that are entering the market, the certificate(s) shall be filed prior to the commencement of construction and once a year thereafter, and as provided below in the event of a lapse of coverage. Such certificate(s) should provide the name, address and phone number of the insurance carrier and identify an agent in case of inquiries.

C. The certificate(s) of insurance shall contain a provision that coverages afforded under such policies shall not be canceled until at least thirty (30) days prior written notice had been given to the Township. All insurance policies shall be issued by companies authorized to do business under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

114.	INDEMNIFICATION AND  HOLD HARMLESS

The telecommunications facility shall, at its sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Township, its officers, public officials, boards and commissions, agents and employees from and against any and all lawsuits, claims, causes of action, actions, liability and judgments for injury or damage (including but not limited to expenses for reasonable attorney fees and disbursements of the Township in connection therewith) arising out of the construction or operation of the cell tower or arising in any way out  of  any failure by any locator to comply with the provisions of any federal, state or local laws, rules or regulations.
 
 
 
, t	••



Section 02:  Partial Repealer

All other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, as amended, shall remain in full force and effect. All other ordinances or provisions of the Zoning Ordinance inconsistent herewith or in conflict with any of the terms hereof are, to the extent of said inconsistencies or conflicts, hereby specifically repealed.

Section 03:  Savings Clause

In the event any portion of this Ordinance is determined by a court of jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or unenforceable, it shall not affect any of the other provision of this Ordinance or of the Zoning Ordinance. All other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and this Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.

Section 04:  Effective Date

All provisions of this Ordinance shall be in force and effect five days after approval and adoption.

 


ORDAINED AND ENACTED this



ATTEST:
 
Sf	/)
day of  ;(J/	t.-' , 2003.

HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS

)a1hTe t	fct'afr
 


 


















U:\TWC Clienls\HA YCOCK\Ordinance\Cell   Tower Telecomn1unications.dir\Telecommunications   Facility Ordinance.1 l ·10.03 .final.doc
 
 
 





ORDINANCE  NO.  Cf3



AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 85, WHICH WAS ADOPTED ON JANUARY 3, 2000, TO PROVIDE FOR DELETIONS, MODIFICATIONS AND ADDITIONS TO THE BUILDING CODE OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP.



BACKGROUND

WHEREAS, Section 1517 of the Second Class.Jownship Code provides that the corporate powers of the board of supervisors include the enactment and enforcement of ordinances to govern and regulate the construction, alteration, repair, occupation, maintenance, sanitation, lighting, ventilation, water supply, toilet facilities, drainage, use and inspection of all buildings and housing constructed, erected, altered, designed or used for any use or occupancy and the sanitation and inspection of land (53 P.S. Section 66517);

WHEREAS, Section 1518 of the Second Class Township Code provides that the corporate powers of the board of supervisors include the appointment of one or more building and housing inspectors to enforce the building and housing regulations of the township and for the inspection of the construction, alteration, repair and sanitation facilities of buildings and housing in the township (53 P.S. Section 66518);

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, a Second Class Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania ("Board of Supervisors"), by Ordinance No. 85, enacted on January 3, 2000, has adopted the 1999 BOCA National Building Code, 14th Edition, ("BOCA Building Code") as the Building Code of Haycock Township to govern and regulate the construction, alteration, repair and occupancy of all buildings in the Township;

WHEREAS, Section 1601 of the Second Class Township Code provides that the
·board of supervisors may adopt ordinances in which general or specific powers of the
township may be exercised, and, by the enactment of subsequent ordinances, the board of supervisors may amend, repeal or revise existing ordinances· (53 P.S. Section 66601);

WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors deems that it is in the best interests of the Township and of its citizens to amend Ordinance 85, to make certain deletions, modifications  and additions,  including  but not limited to the appointment  of a Code
· Enforcement Officer, to the Building Code of Haycock Township;

NOW THEREFORE, in· consideration of the foregoing, be it ENACTED and ORDAINED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township that Ordinance No. 85 is hereby amended as follows:
 
 
 




A	Paragraph 1 of Ordinance 85 is hereby amended to read as follows: Adoption of code by reference; modifications.
A.	The 1999 BOCA National Building Code in its entirety is hereby reaffirmed as the Haycock Township Building Code, as· modified in this Ordinance and may be amerided from time to time hereafter. Until a section marked "enacted unchanged" is updated, modified or amended, it is the intent of the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors that the corresponding chapter in the 1999 BOCA National Building Code is adopted in full and enacted unchanged.

B.	The 1999 BOCA National Building Code, with enacted modifications and amendments, shall be on file in the office of1he Haycock Township Secretary.

B.	Paragraphs 2 through 6 of Ordinance 85 are deleted and the following is hereby added:

CHAPTER 1, ADMINISTRATION, of the 1999 BOCA National Building Code, is reaffirmed with the following changes:

Section 101.0 SCOPE

101.1	Title: These regulations shall be known as the "Building Code of Haycock Township," hereinafter referred to as "this code."

101.2	Scope through 101.4 Intent: enacted unchanged.

Section 102.0 APPLICABILITY

102.1 General through 102.3  Matters not provided for:  enacted unchanged.

102.4 Referenced standards: The standards referenced in this code shall be the most recent. Where differences  occur between provisions of this code and referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply.

Section 103.0 VALIDITY:  entire section enacted unchanged.

Section 104.0  DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING INSPECTION

104.1	Code official: The Department of Building Inspection is hereby created. The Haycock Township Board of Supervisors may appoint a building inspector or other code official who shall for purposes ·of this Ordinance be known as the "Code Enforcement Officer." The Department shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of the building codes. Throughout this code, the Code Enforcement Officer is also referred to as the "Code Official."


2
 
 
 



104.2	Appointment: Any code Enforcement Officer appointed by the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors shall serve at the will of the Board of Supervisors.

104.3	Organization: The Code Official shall appoint such number of officers, technical assistants, inspectors and other employees as shall be necessary for the administration of this code and as authorized by the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors. The following are hereby appointed to assist the Code Official with the enforcement of this code: the Zoning Officer.

104.4	Deputy: The Code Official is authorized to designate an employee as deputy who shall exercise all the powers of the Code Official during the temporary absence or disability of the Code Official. The following are hereby authorized to act in the absence of the Code Official:  the Zoning Officer.

104.5	· Restriction of employees through 104.7 Official records: enacted unchanged.

Section 105.0 DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE CODE OFFICIAL

105.1	General:  enacted unchanged.

105.2	Applications and permits: The Code Official shall receive applications and issue permits for the erection and alteration of buildings and structures, inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued and enforce compliance with the provisions of this code. The Code Official may authorize the Zoning Officer to receive applications.

105.3	Notices and orders: The Code official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this code. The Code Official may authorize the Zoning Officer to issue compliance notices or orders.

105.4	Inspections:	The  Building  Inspector shall  make all of the  required inspections, or the Code Official shall accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals.  All reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual.  The Department of Building Inspection is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the prior approval of the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors.

105.5	Identification: enacted unchanged.

105.6	Rule-making authority: The 'Code Official  shall have the authority to recommend, as necessary in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare, rules and regulations to interpret and implement the provisions of this code to secure the intent thereof and to designate requirements applicable because of local climatic or other conditions.  No such rule or regulation shall be in force until



3
 
 
 


adopted by the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors. No such rule or regulation shall have the effect of waiving structural or fire performance requirements specifically provided for in this code or of violating accepted engineering practice
·	involving public safety.

105.T Department records: enacted unchanged.

105.8 Annual report: On or before the second Tuesday of each February, the Code Official shall submit to the Chair of the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors a written statement of operations in the form and content as shall be prescribed by the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors.

Section 106.0  APPROVAL:  entire section enacted unchanged.

Section 107.0 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT

107.01 General: Applications for building and use permits shall be submitted with all other permits required by state or county agencies, such as but not limited to the Board of Health, Department of Environmental Resources and the Department of Transportation, if required by the use.

107.1	Permit application: An application shall be submitted to the Department of Building Inspection for the following activities, and these activities shall not commence without a permit being issued in accordance with Section 108.0:

1.	Construct or alter a structure.

2.	Construct an addition.

3.	Construct an accessory structure with a proposed building area of 288 square feet or more.

4.	Demolish or move a structure.

5.	Make a change of occupancy.

6.	Install or alter any equipment which is regulated by this code.

7.	Move a lot line which affects an existing structure.

It shall be unlawful to construct, enlarge, after or demolish a structure, or change the occupancy of a building or structure requiring greater strength, exit or sanitary provisions, or change to a new use not lawfully in existence, or to install or alter any equipment for which provision is made or the installation of which is regulated by this code without first filing an application for a land use permit with the Zoning Officer or Code Official. Upon receipt of a valid land use permit, the applicant may then file applications for the required building permit; provided, however, that repairs
 
 
 

as defined in this code and which do not involve any violation of the code shall be exempt from this provision.

107.1.1 Repairs through 107.4  Description of work:  enacted unchanged.

107.5	Construction documents: The application for a permit shall be accompanied by not less than three sets of construction documents. The Code Official is permitted to waive the requirements for filing construction documents when the scope of the work is of a minor nature. When the quality of the materials is essential for conformity to this  code, specific information shall be given to establish such quality, and this code shall not be cited, or the term "legal" or its equivalent used as a substitute for specific information. Permits for all building groups, with the exception of Groups R-3 and R-4, are subject to the building regulations for protections from Fire and Panic by the Department of Labor and Industry of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. No permit will be issued until the applicant has furnished proof that the plans havebi:ien reviewed by the Department of Labor and Industry, if required. Approval of the plans by Labor and Industry shall not constitute a waiver of any applicable plan reviews and architectural review by the Building Inspector and Zoning Officer prior to approval and the issuance of building permits, at the cost as determined by the adopted fee schedule.

107.6	Survey plot plan: As a requirement for all new construction (except for construction of an accessory structure having a building area less than 288 square feet and for temporary structures on residential lots) prior to issuance of a building permit, and as part of the application for a land use permit, a survey plot plan, prepared by a Pennsylvania licensed surveyor, registered architect or licensed engineer shall be submitted to the Code Official, unless waived. Such survey shall bear the name and seal of the preparer, shall conform to all applicable state law (i.e., Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act, Pennsylvania Uniformed Planned Community Act, etc.), and shall conform to the following requirements:

1.	A boundary line survey of the proposed building lot, to a scale of not less than one inch equals 20 feet, showing all metes and bounds of the property.

2.	The size and location of all new construction. This shall include the proposed principal structure and all accessory structures, including garages, porches, decks, driveways, pools ahd sidewalks.

3.	A building envelope established by the Zoning Ordinance requirements for that district of the approved subdivision plan shall be shown on the survey plan.

4.	Lot area shall be defined in square feet, and the ratio of impervious lot coverage (including all improvements) shall be expressed as a percentage of the total lot area.

5.	All e.asements, restrictions, utility structures, land features to be removed for construction and surrounding properties shall be identified on the plot plan.
 
 
 



6.	Topographical site information at a contour interval of no less than two feet shall be provided. In lieu of this requirement for swimming pools, application for permanent pools shall be installed a minimum of eight inches above the ground, and a plan shall be submitted showing compliance with this requirement.

7.	The following grade elevations shall be indicated on the survey site plan: top of curb depression, basement, garage, first floor and spot elevations generally consistent with the approved grading plan.

8.	In addition to the above, the following detail shall also be provided: dimensions for all building and structure setbacks, the slope of the driveway as expressed as a gradient percentage, dimensions to the nearest off-lot principal structures (except on the street or open space of the lot), a legend indicating all zoning plan approval data (if different than the _Zoning Ordinance standard) and locations of on-lot survey markers.                  '

9.	In the case of demolition, the plot plan shall show all construction to be demolished and the location and size_ of all existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site. With historical structures, the required waiting period shall be observed.

107.6.1 Private sewage disposal system through 107.9 Time limitation for application: enacted unchanged.

Section 108.0 PERMITS

108.1	Action on application: The Code Official shall examine or cause to be examined all applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or the construction documents do not conform to the requirements of all pertinent laws, the Code Official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. The Code Official may withhold the issuance of any permit until all applicable state, county and federal permits have been received.

108.2	Suspension of permit through 108.9 Notice of start: enacted unchanged.

Section 109.0 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES:  entire section enacted unchanged.

Section 110.0 DEMOLITION OF STRUCTURES: entire section enacted unchanged.

Section 111.0 CONDITIONS OF PERMIT


111.1 Payment of fees through 111.3 Compliance with permit: enacted unchanged.
 
 
 


111.4	Compliance  with  survey plan:   All new work shall be located strictly in accordance with the approved survey plan.

111.5	Access: The permit holder shall be responsible for providing acceptable and stable access to all authorized emergency personnel and inspectors.

Section 112.0  FEES

112.1 General through 112.2 Special Fees: enacted unchanged.

112.3 New construction and alterations: The fees for plan examination, building permit, inspection and reinspection shall be as prescribed in Section 112.3.1 and the Code Official is authorized to establish with Board of Supervisors approval, a schedule of unit rates for buildings and structures of all use groups and types of construction.

112.3.1 Fee schedule: A fee for each plan examination, building permit, inspection and reinspection shall be paid in accordance with the fee adopted by resolution of the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors.

112.4 Accounting through 112.5 Refunds: enacted unchanged.

Section 113.0 INSPECTION: entire section enacted unchanged.


Section  114.0    PROFESSIONAL  ARCHITECTURAL  AND  ENGINEERING
SERVICES:  entire section enacted unchanged.

Section       115.0 WORKMANSHIP

115.1 General: enacted unchanged.

Section 116.0 VIOLATIONS

116.1	Unlawful acts:  enacted unchanged.

116.2	Notice of violation: The Code Official, or when authorized by the Code Official, the Zoning Officer, shall serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, removal, demolition or occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of this code or in violation of a detail statement or a plan approved thereunder or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions· of this code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. The violation notice shall be based on direct and personal observation of the condition.

116.3	Prosecution of violation: enacted unchanged.
 
 
 

116.4	Violation penalties: Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the Code Official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.

116.5	Abatement of violation: enacted unchanged.

Section 117.0 STOP WORK ORDER

117.1	Notice to owner:  enacted unchanged.

117.2	Unlawful continuance: Any person who.shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.

Section 118.0  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY

118.1  General through 118.2  Temporary occupancy:  enacted unchanged.

118.3	Issuance of certificate: Upon written request from the owner of an existing structure, the Code Official shall is.sue a certificate of occupancy, provided that there are no violations of law or orders of the Code Official pending and it is established after inspection and investigation that the alleged occupancy of the structures has heretofore existed. This code shall not require the removal, alteration or abandonment of or prevent the continuance of the occupancy of a lawfully existing structure unless such use is deemed to endanger public safety or welfare. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy (except for decks, additions and accessory buildings on residential lots), an "as-built" survey, with all the detail and requirements established in Section 107.6 hereof, shall be filed with the Department of Building Inspection containing the approval of the Haycock Township Engineer or his designated official.

118.4	Contents of certificate: enacted unchanged.

118.5	Weather delay: In the event of weather-related problems, a certificate of occupancy may be issued, provided that the builder or permit applicant has posted escrow moneys in sufficient amount as determined by the Haycock Township Engineer or his appointed official to cover the cost of the incomple!e items.

Section  119.0	UNSAFE  STRUCTURES  AND  EQUIPMENT:	entire section enacted unchanged.


Section 120.0  EMERGENCY MEASURES:  entire section enacted unchanged.
 
 
 




Section 121.0  MEANS OF APPEAL

121.1	Application for appeal: enacted unchanged.

121.2	Membership of board: The Board of Appeals shall consist of the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors.

121.3	Appellate review: Any person who is aggrieved by a decision of the Department of Building Inspection may appeal to the Board of Appeals by filing a written Notice of Appeal and the payment of the appropriate filing fee with the Haycock Township Secretary within 15 days of the decision of the Department. The Board of Appeals will thereafter hold a hearing on the appeal within 30 days, or longer if mutually agreed by the appellant. The hearing maybe continued from time to time as is necessary. Any person who derndn_strates to the Board of Appeals' satisfaction a direct, immediate, pecuniary and substantial interest in the subject matter may request to be a party to the appeal. The Board of Appeals shall decide all requests for party status.

121.3.1	Conduct of hearing: At the cost of the appellant, all hearings before the Board of Appeals shall be open to the  public and shall be stenographically recorded. The appellant and the appellant's representatives shall be given an opportunity to be heard and present any evidence in support of their position. The Building Inspector and/or Zoning Officer shall present any evidence in support of their position. The Board may receive the testimony of the Haycock Township Engineer and any other witnesses it requires to decide the appeal. Compliance with the strict rules of evidence is not required, but only relevant information shall be received by the Board of Appeals.

121.3.2	Postponed hearing: When a quorum of the Board of Appeals is not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the applicant's representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the heating.

121.4	Decision of board: The Board of Appeals shall announce a determination within five days of the final hearing, and shall render a written decision within 15 days of the final hearing. The decision shall uphold, modify or reverse the action of the Department of Building Inspection. The decision shall contain finds of fact and conclusions of law and cite the applicable sections of this code in support thereof.

121.5	Court review: Any person who is aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Appeals and was a party to the appeal before the Board of Appeals shall have the right to appeal an adverse decision of the Board of Appeals to the Bucks County Court of Common Pleas in the manner and time provided by law.

121.6	Stay of proceedings: No permit will be issued and no affected work may begin or continue while any appeal is pending before the Board of Appeals.  The
 
 
 


appeal of any decision of the Board of Appeals, which would otherwise permit work to begin or continue or allow a permit to be issued, by any party to the appeal will not stay the issuance. of any permit or the commencement or continuation of any. affected work except upon an order of court.

CHAPTER 2, DEFINITIONS, of the 1999 BOCA National Building Code, is reaffirmed unchanged, with the following additions:

Manufactured Home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days.

Substantial Damage: Damage from any caus sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

Substantial Improvement: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term indudes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure sate living conditions.

Zoning Officer: As used in this chapter, the officer or designated authority appointed by the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors charged with the administration of the Haycock Township Zoning Ordinance, and authorized to assist the building inspector in the administration and enforcement of this code.

CHAPTER 3, USE OR OCCUPANCY through CHAPTER 35, REFERENCED
STANDARDS, of the 1999 BOCA National Building Code, are enacted in the entirety, unchanged.

C.	Savings clause. Nothing in this chapter or in the building code, as amended and adopted hereby, shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any court or any rights acquired or liability incurred or any cause(s) of action acquired or existing under any ordinance repealed hereby; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired Or affected by this enactment.


D.	Inconsistent provisions.	In addition, all inconsistent provisions of all other Ordinances and Resolutions on the Township of Haycock, Bucks County, Pennsylvania are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency.  All other provisions of the
 
 
 


Ordinances and Resolutions of the Township of Haycock, Bucks County, Pennsylvania shall remain in full force and effect.

E.	Severability.	The provisions of this Ordinance are declared to be severable.  If any sentence, clause, section or part of this Ordinance is for any reason determined to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this Ordinance.  It is hereby declared as the intent of this authority that such remainder shall be and shall remain in full force and effect.

F.	Jurisdiction.     In the event any portion of this Ordinance is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or unenforceable, it shall not affect any of the other provision of this Ordinance. All other provisions of this Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect

G:	Effective Date.	All provisions of this OrdinahJ:;e shall take effect five (5) days after the date of its enactment.



PRDAINED and El ACTED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township this
31-r\ . day of	/'}!.&.,,_J-,      2003.
'
ATTEST:	HAYCOCK  TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
 



NancyM:Odis,   r
 
Kathleen M. Babb,,Chair_	c
 
h	-.".;;":
 
''.!'-ff/.
 
Township Secretary
 
24?	-/
Micha I Lennard, Vice Chair
 





















U:ITWC Clients\HAYCOCK\Ordinance.dir\Buiding  Code Amend 2003\Buiiding Code Ord. amend .2003.doc
 
 
 


8{'7/oo  11:06:26 .AM/Haycock/ZOA.2000.dir/Ordinance
ORDINANCE NO.	'ti
AN ORDINANCE OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP, BUCKS COUNTY,
PENNSYLVANIAAMENDINGTHE  ZONING ORDINANCE OF
HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP TO REVISE THE REGULATIONS FOR
FORESTRY, SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS AND THE
REGULATIONS CONCERNING THE ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY

BACKGROUND



A.  The  Haycock  Township  Board  of  Supervisors  on   or  about September 26, 1994, duly adopted Ordinance No. 71 revising and restating the Haycock Township Zoning Ordinance as adopted in 1975.
B.	Since its adoption, the Zoning Ordinance has from time to time been amended.
C.	The Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township deems it in the best interest of the citizens of the Township to amend the Zoning Ordinance to make provisions for posting adequate financial security for the conduct of forestry; to provide additional regulations concerning swimming pools, hot tubs and spas; to revise the regulations concerning accessory apartments; and to require for new residential construction that driveways be installed or adequate financial security posted to ensure their installation.
D.	The Board of Supervisors specifically finds and determines that thIB

Ordinance  is  consistent  with  the  Township   Comprehensive  Plan  and  the Community Development Objective stated therein and in the Zoning Ordinance.
 
 
 

NOW THEREFORE, be it ORDAINED AND ENACTED as follows:




Section 1.


A new Section 278.1 is hereby added to state as follows:

Section 278.1 - Swimming Pools, Spas and Related Structures -

a.	Above-ground/ on ground swimming pool -A removable swimming pool of any shape that has walls and an impervious liner that is located on the surrounding earth and may be disassembled or stored and reassembled to its original integrity.

b.	Barrier -A fence, wall, a building wall or a combination thereof.

c.	Hot tub/spa - A structure containing water intended for recreational use, in which all controls, water heating, and water circulating equipment are an integral part of the product.

d.	In-ground pool -A permanent swimming pool in which the surface of the water is approximately level with the surrounding ground surface and the volume of the water is below ground level.

e.	Swimming pool - Any structure, intended for swimming and/or diving purposes, made of concrete, masonry, metal or other man­ made impervious material or a combination thereof, in which the water is treated to maintain a sanitary condition, and that has a water depth of 24 inches or more. This includes in-ground, above­ ground/on ground swimming pools and hot tubs/spas.



Section 2.

Section 404.A.4 Forestry §a(3)(i) is revised and restated as follows:

"Adequate financial security in an amount determined by the Township Engineer shall be posted to secure the repair of damaged roads.
Section 3.

Section 404.H.2(g) is revised and restated as follows:

g.	. Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs





2
 
 
 
•


Swimming Pools
A swimming pool shall be permitted as an accessory to a single-family detached residential use subject to the following:
1.	A zoning permit shall be required to locate, construct or maintain a swimming pool.

2.	No person, owner, or occupant of  land shall install or maintain a swimming pool, spa or hot tub capable of being filled to a depth of twenty­ four (24) inches at the deepest or lowest point unless a permit is first obtained by the zoning officer and the required plans and information are filed, together with required permit fees. Ornamental pools and wading pools which do not exceed twenty-four (24) inches in depth are exempt from these provisions. Swimming pools shall include any pool, regardless of design or construction materials or the permanency of its loeation both above and below ground level, which is built, erected or used for the purpose of bathing or swimming and all buildings, equipment, and appurtenances thereto. This ordinance shall also apply to public swimming pools used and maintained by an individual, firm, corporation, club or association of persons for use by the public or members and their invitees or guests. In the case of public swimming pools, this use need not be accessory to a residential use.

3.	Each pool area and the paving, coping or deck surrounding it or associated with it shall be located within the required setback of the zoning district in which the property is located.

4.	Safety. Any pool or water area shall be suitably designed, located and maintained so as not to become a nuisance or hazard either to adjoining property owners or the public generally. All detachable ladders shall be removed when the pool is not in use.

5.	Sanitary Quality of Water. The physical, chemical and bacterial qualities of the water in public swimming pools shall comply with the latest standards of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Health. Failure to maintain the sanitary quality of water prescribed by this section or to restore such water to the required quality within the time prescribed by the Department of Health shall be a violation of this section.

6.	Construction and Maintenance. The construction and design of all pools 15hall be such that the same can be maintained and operated as to be clean and sanitary at all times. The owners of every pool shall be responsible to maintain said pool in such condition as to prevent breaks in the pool chassis or water from the pool overflow into adjacent public or private property. Swimming pools shall be constructed, eqnipped and maintained in strict conformity with the provisions of the swimming pool and public



3
 
 
 

health codes issued by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the Bucks County Health Department.

7.	Outdoor lighting, if used, shall be installed in such a way as to be shielded and not to reflect toward or into adjacent properties.

8.	All electrical work connected with the pool and all equipment incidental thereto shall comply with all underwriter laboratory regulations and must be inspected and certified by an electrical underwriter's inspection agency. Owner or his agent shall submit satisfactory documentation that the inspection and certification has occurred prior to the initial filing of the pool with water.

9.	A minimum isolation distance of twenty-five (25) feet shall be required between a swimming pool and any sewage disposal system.

10.Approved filtration systems and circnlators must be provided for all pools except such exempt or non-exempt wading pools as are emptied on a daily basis as hereinafter provided.

11.	All pool installations shall conform to all applicable building codes.

12.	In no case shall water in the pool or pool area be permitted to emit an offensive odor or create any unhealthful condition. Further, it shall be a violation of this Ordinance to cause or allow drainage onto adjoining land.

13. No pool shall be located under any electrical power lines (including service lines), and the pool must be located at least ten (10) feet (measured horizontally) from such power lines.

14.	Fencing of Pools: An outdoor private swimming pool, including an in­ ground, above-ground or on-ground' pool, shall be provided with a barrier which shall comply with the following:

a.	The top of the barrier shall be at least 48 inches  (1219  mm)  above finished ground level measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from the swimming pool. The maximum  vertical  clearance between finished ground level and the barrier  shall  be  2  inches  (51 mm) measured on the side  of the barrier which faces away from the swimming pool. Where the top of the pool structure is above-finished ground level, such as an above-ground pool, the barrier shall be at finished ground-level, such as the pool struc1:1;1re,  or shall be mounted on top of the pool structure. Where the barrier is mounted on the pool structure, the opening between the top of surface of the pool frame and the bottom of the barrier shall not allow passage of a 2.-inch (51 mm) dianieter   sphere.





4
 
 
 

b.	Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of a 4-inch (102 mm) diameter sphere.

c.	Solid barriers shall not contain indentations  or protrusions except for normal construction tolera:iices and tooled masonry joints.

d.	Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is less than 45 inches (1143 mm), the horizontal members shall be located on the swimming pool side of the fence. Spacing between vertical members shall not exceed 13/4 inches (44 mm) in width. Decorative cutouts shall not exceed 13,4 inches (44 mm) in width.

e.	Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is 45 inches (1143 mm) or more, spacing between vertical members hall·not exceed 4 inches (102 mm). Decorative cutouts shall not exceed 13,4 inches (44 mm) in width.

f.	Maximum mesh size for chain link fences shall be a 11/4 inch (32 mm) square unless the fence is provided with slats fastened at the top or the bottom which reduce the openings to not more than 1 3/4 inches (44 mm).

g.	Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members, such as a lattice fence, the maximum opening formed by the diagonal members shall be not more than 13/4 inches (44 mm).

h.	Access gates shall comply with the requirements of items a through g above and shall be equipped to accommodate a locking device. Pedestrian access gates shall open outwards away from the pool and shall be self-closing and have a self-latching device. Gates other than pedestrian access gates shall have a self-latching device. Where the release mechanism of the self-latching device is located less than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the bottom of the gate: (a) the release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate at least 3 inches (76 mm) below the top of the gate; and (b) the gate and barrier shall not have an opening greater than 1/2 inch (13 mni) within 18 inches (457 mm) of the release mechanism.

i.	Where a wall of a dwelling unit serves as part of the barrier and contains a door that provides direct access to the pool, one of the following shall apply:

1)	All doors within direct access to the pool through that wall shall be equipped with an alarm which·produces ·an audible warning when the door and its screen, if present, are opened.  The audible warning



5
 
 
 

shall commence not more than 7 seconds after the door and door screen, if present, are opened and shall sound continuously for a minimum of 30 seconds. The alarm shall have a minimum sound pressure rating of 85 dBA at 10 feet (3048 mm) and the sound of the alarm shall be distinctive from other household sounds such as smoke alarms, telephones and door bells. The alarm shall be equipped with manual means, such as touchpads or switches, to deactivate temporarily the alarm for a single opening from either direction. Such deactivation shall last for not more than 15 s.econds. The deactivation touchpads or switches shall be located at least 54 inches (1372 mm) above the threshold of the door.

2) All doors with direct access to the pool through that wall shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device with the release mechanism located a minimum of 54 inches (1372 mm) above the floor. Swinging doors shall open away from the pool area.

3) The pool shall be equipped with a power safety cover. Where in a closed position, the cover shall be capable of holding a weight of
485 pounds (2175 N), shall not have any openings that allow passage of a 4 lf2 (114 mm) sphere and shall incorporate a system to
drain standing water that collects on the cover. The cover control switch shall be permanently installed in accordance with NFPA 70
listed in Chapter 35, and be key-operated and of a spring-loaded or momentary-contact type. Where the switch  is  released,  the operation of the cover shall stop instantly and be capable of reversing direction immediately. The switch shall be in the line of sight of the complete pool cover.

J.		Where an above-ground pool structure is used as a barrier or where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, and the means of access is a fixed or removable ladder or steps, tlie ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier which meets the requirements of items a through i above. A removable ladder shall not constitute an acceptable alternative to enclosure requirements.

Spa/Hot Tub

Such pools are permitted as accessory uses to residential structures subject to the following conditions:
1.	A zoning permit shall be required to locate, construct or maintain a
spa or hot tub.
 
 
 

2.	Fencing of a spa or hot tub shall be required and shall meet the provisions of Section 404.H.2(g)(14) above.

3.	A spa or hot tub with a manufacturer's approved safety cover shall be exempt from the fencing provisions of Section 404.H.2(g.14).



Section4.

Section 404.H.3(a) is revised and restated as follows:

a.	The maximum floor area of an accessory apartment shall be 800 square feet whether attached to the primary residence or located in an accessory building.

Sections.

Section 1006 Certificate of Occupancy is revised to restate the last paragraph  as follows:
"No certificate shall be issued until the premises in question has been inspected and found by the Zoning Officer to be in compliance with the Zoning Ordinance. For a new residence or building to be served by a new driveway, the Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued until the driveway has been installed in compliance with the requirements of Haycock Township Ordinance No. 75 and, where applicable, requirements of a Penndot Highway Occupancy Permit or adequate financial security has been deposited with the Township to assure its installation. The Township Engineer shall determine the adequacy of the amount of the financial security to be posted. The issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy in no way absolves the owner or authorized agent from compliance with the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance or other Township ordinances."
'









7
 
 
 

Section 6.

All other provisions  of the Haycock Township Zoning Ordinance,  as amended, shall remain in full force and effect.
Section?.

This Ordinance shall be effective immediately upon enactment.
ORDAINED AND ENACTED this	1 th	day of	A Uf;Lt 'I

2000.

HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS

 


ATTEST:


tln-	-d0
Nancy Mhodis, 7cretary
 
\

--Ali :e"{i.iat tt:man
 

 
,:t>
 

Earl Winters

































8
 
 
 

l 11.Z2/99 2:2l pm HAYCCCK\OllDINANc!.4



.;


ORDINANCE    NO.	<g5


AN  ORDINANCE ADOPTIN'G TEE UNIFOBM CONSTR'O'CT:CON CODE AS  THE  MDN:rC:CPAL Btr.rLDDlG  CODE OF
HAYCOCX TOWNSHIP AND REQU:OUNG PERSONS APPLY:rN"G FOR A ZONDil'G USE AND OCCUPANCY PERMJ:TS :cN  HAYCOCK TOWNSX:CP TO OBTA.IN SERVJ:CES AT A CONSTR'O'CT:CON CODE Ol"F:CC:IAL OR TB:IlUJ   PARTY:  AGENCY   'l'O CERTIFY   PLAHNDl'G
REVIEW· Alm   :r:NSPECT:tON !'OR COMPLIANCE WJ:T:e: ·THE
UNJ:FOBM CONSTRUCTION CODE


BACXGRO'OHD

A.	The Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of November 10, 1999,    provides	for   the	establishment	of	a  Uniform	Construction  Code
'
which applies to the construction, alteration, repair and occupancy of all buildings in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania including the Township of Haycock.
B.	Section 301 of  the Act  provides  for  the  adoption  of	the 1999

Building Officials and Code Administrators  Inte=ational, Inc. ("BOCA") National Building Code, 14th Edition, .as the uniform Construction Code and further provides for the same to be amended,   from  time  to time,  by the Pennsylvania  Department  of  Labor  and  Industry.
C.	Section 501 (el  of  the Act provides regulations concerning non- municipal	administration	and enfqrcement	of	the  uniform	Construction
 
Code.
 

.  '
D.	The Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township by this  enactment
 

intends	to   establish	the	1.999  BOCA  Building	Code,	14th  Edition,	and
 

subsequent  editions of  same as the Building Code of ·Haycock Township and
-
to provide for non-municipal  administration of the Code.

N'OW TRElUJFORE, in consideration of the foregoing, it is ORDAINED and ENACTED  by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock  Township  as follows:
1.	The 1999 BOCA National .Building Code, 14th Edition, ("BOCA Building Code") is hereby adopted as the Building Code of Haycock Township,  Bucks  County,   Pennsylvania,  for the  construction,  alteration,
repair  and  oc f all buildings  in Haycock  Township .   The  BOCA
'
Building Code shall continue in force and effect until such time as the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry promulgates regulations establishing a uniform Construction Code after which the Uniform Construction Code shall cont=l the construction, alteration, repair and use of all buildings in Haycock Township.
2.	All persons  who  apply for a zoning permit  or occupancy permi:t

for a one or two family dwelling unit, utility and miscellaneous use structures within the Township shall be notified of their obligation to obtain the services of a construction code official or third party agency with appropriate categories of certification to conduct plan review and ·inspections of all construction. "Construction Code Officia:l" shall !!lean an individual. certified by the Pe=sylvania Department of Labor and Industry to perform plan review of construction documents, inspect construction or administer and enforce code$ and regulations. "Third party agency" shall. mean a person, firm or corporation certified by the Department of Labor and Industry as a Construction Code Official and contracted to perform ,plan review of




2
 

construction doCUlllents, inspect construction or administer and enforce codes and regulations under the Uniform Construction Code.
3.	For one family and two family dw lling units and utility and miscellaneous use structures, all of the following five inspections shall be required:
{a)	Foundation  inspection;

(b)	Plumbing, mechanical and electrical inspection; (c)	Frame and masonry inspection;
(d)	Wall board inspection;

(e)	Final inspection.

The final inspection shall not be deemed approved until all previous inspections have been successfully completed and passed.
4.	It shall be the responsibility of the owner of structures other than. one or two family units and utility and miscellaneous us'e structures, to obtain· the services of the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry or a third party agency with appropriate categories of certification under contract to the Department of Labor and Industry to conduct the plan review and inspections required by the Uniform Construction Code.
5.	A copy of the final inspection report shall be provided to

Haycock Township, the property owner,. the builder, and to a lender designated by the builder.
6.	No	occupancy	permit	or certificate	of occupancy	shall be

issued for a building which has been constructed, altered or repaired as defined in the BOCA Building Cod or Uniform Construction Code unless the Township receives a final inspection report certifying that· all

3
l
 
inspections required  by  this  Ordinance,  the BOCA  Bu:i.J.al.ng  <.iocie  ;onu.ior the Uniform Construction Code have been successfully completed and passed. Additionally, no occupancy permit or certificate or occupancy shall be  issued  for any new  construction unless  the Township  is supplied
with  certification  that  the  building  constructed  meets  all: of  the

applicable accessibility provisions of the BOCA Building Code and, when

in· effect, t e Uniform.Construction Code.

7.	This Ordinance shall be effective at 12:00 o'clock midnight

December 31, 1999.



RESOLVED	and	ENACTED	by	the	Board	of	Supervisors	of	Haycock

2aoo··



ATTEST:                            HAYCOCK TOWNSEXP
BOARD OF SUPBRV'.ISORS






, ...-ifathleen M. Babb, Chairman





·"Earlil:Wil1ters, Vice-Ch.airman


 












4
 
ORDINANCE NO.  8 :i·

AN	ORDINANCE  . OF	HAYCOCK· TOWNSHIP	AMENDING ARTICLE  II, DEFINITIONS,  AND  ARTICLE  V,  SECTION  507,  . FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS, OF THE HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP ZONING  ORDINANCE  OF  1975 AS  AMENDED  SEPTEMBER 26, 1994, TO  COMPLY WITH  SUGGESTED  PROVISIONS  OF THE  NATIONAL  FLOOD  INSURANCE  PROGRAM  AND  THE PENNSYLVANIA   FLOODPLAIN   MANAGEMENT   ACT   (1978-
166) SECTION 60.3 (d).

ARTICLE I.

The following definitions included within Article II, Definitions, are amended to read as follows:

Section 206	Basement
.
A story partly underground, but having one-half  or more of its height (measured from
floor to ceiling)  above the  average  finished grade  level  of the  adjoining  ground.   A
basement shall be counted as a story for the purposes of height measurement or for the determination of square footage or floor area only if the vertical distance between  the ceiling and the average  level of the adjoining ground is more than four (4) feet, or if it si used for business or dwelling purposes. For the purposes of Section 507, Floodplain Regulations, the term "basement" shall mean any area of the  building  having its floor below ground level on all sides.  ·                                   ·            ·

Section 221     Develooment

Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but ncit limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or the storage of materials or equipment.

ARTICLE II.

The following definitions are added to Arti le II, Definitions: Section 235.a.	Historic   Structure
An historic structure is any struC!ure that is:

a.	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily  determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing an the National Register;

b.	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary ta qualify as a registered historic district;




1
 
c.	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places iri states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or

d.	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:

(1)	By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of Interior, or

(2)	Directly  by  the  Secretary ·of the   Interior  in. states  without   approved programs.

Section 278 a.   Substantial Damage

Damage from any cause sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring  the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent or more of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

Section 278 b. Substantial Improvement

Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction"  of the  improvement.  · This  term· includes sti:uctures  which  have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed.   The term . does not, however, include either:	·

a.	Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state
·or  local  health,  sanitary,  or  safety  code  specifications  which  have  been
identified  by the  local  code  enforcement   official  and  which  are  the  minimum necessary to assure  safe living conditions,  or;	·

b.	Any alteration of a "historic  structure",  provided  that  the  alteration  will  not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure".

ARTICLE Ill.

Section 507, Floodplain Regulations, is amended to read as follows:

8.	FLOODPLAIN PERFORMANCE STANDARDS

Section 507	Floodplain Regulations

No  development  as  defined  in  Section  221  other  than  those  permitted  herein  shall hereafter be permitted in an area designated as floodplain as defined in this Ordinance.

a.   Purpose

The purpose of these provisions is to prevent the loss of property and life, the
.creation  of  health  and  safety  hazards,  the  disruption  of  commerce  and




2
 
governmental  services,  the  extraordinary  ·and  unnecessary  expenditure  of public funds for flood protection and relief, and to protect the tax base by:

(1)	Regulating uses, activities, and development which, acting along or in combination	with other existing .or future uses,  activities,  and development,		will · cause unaccept_able increases in flood heights, velocities,  and frequencies.

(2)	Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities and development from locating within areas subject to flooding.   .

(3)	Requiring all those uses, activities, and development that do occur in flood prone areas ta be protected and/or flaodproafed against flooding and flood damage..

(4) Protecting individuals from buying lands and structures which are unsuited far intended purposes because of flood hazards.

·	b.  Warning and Disclaimer of Liability

(1)   The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this Ordinance is considered reasonable far regulatory purposes and is based an acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This Ordinance does not imply that areas outside the floodplain districts or that land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damages.

 
(2)
 
This Ordinance shall not create liability an the part of the municipality or any officer or employee thereof far any flood damages that result from reliance an this Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.·
 

c.	Establishment of Floodplain

Far the  purposes  at this  Ordinance,  various  floodplain  areas  are  identified
·which are subject ta the provisions of this section. These floodplain areas are:

(1)	Flaodway: That portion of the floodplain including the watercourse channel and adjacent land areas which must be reserved to carry the 1OD-year recurrence-interval· flood without cumulatively increasing that flood elevation mare than one (1) foot.

 
(2)

(3)
 
Flood Fringe: That portion of the floodplain which is outside the Floodway.

Approximate 100 - Year Fiaod Boundary: That portion of the floodplain as identified in the Flood Insurance Study far which no detailed flood profiles or 1DO-year-flood elevations have been determined.
 






3
 
(4)		Floodplain Soils:  Areas subject to periodic flooding and listed in the Soil Survey	of    Bucks    and    Philadelphia    Counties    Pennsylvania.  U.S. Department  at  Agriculture:  Soil  Conservation  Service,  July,  1975,  as being "on the floodplain" or "subject to flooding".

The following soil types are floodplain soils:

 
Alluvial land
Alton gravelly loam, flooded
Bowmansville silt loam
Hatboro silt loam
 
Marsh Pope loam
Rowland silt loam
 

d.	Boundaries of the Floodplain

(1)	The following studies shall be used to identify the floodplain.· The  study which indicates a floodplain of greater delineation shall be used;-unless a detailed study which identifies a floodway and flood-fring has been prepared, in which case, such .detailed study shall be used:

(a)	The  Flood  Insurance  Study  prepared  by  the  Federal  Insurance Administration and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps.

(b)	The. Soil Survey of Bucks and Philadelphia Counties.  Pennsylvania· prepared by the U.S. Department at Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, July, 1975.	·

(c)	A study prepared by a registered engineer expert in the preparation at hydrological studies. Such hydrological studies shall be subject to · the review and approval of the Governing Body on recommendation of the municipal engineer.	·

(2) The delineation of any of the floodplain areas may be revised by the municipality where natural or man-made changes have occurred and/or more detailed studies conducted or undertaken by the U.S. Army  Corps of Engineers, a River Basin Commission, a·registered engineer or others of demonstrated qualifications document the need for such change. However, prior to any such change to the Flood Insurance Study, approval must be obtained from the Federal Insurance Administration and the Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic Development.

e.	General Provisions

(1)	The floodplain areas described above shall be overlays to the existing underlying zoning districts and the floodplain provisions shall serve to supplement the underlying zoning provisions. Where there is a conflict between the provisions or requirements cf any floodplain requirement and those cf the underlying zoning, the more restrictive  provisions  and/or those pertaining to the floodplain area shall apply. However, in all cases the floodplain reqllirements shall be met.      ·




4
 
(2)	In the event any provision concerning a floodplain regulation is declared inapplicable as a result of any legislative or administrative actions  or judicial discretion, the basic  underlying zoning district provisions shal_I remain applicable.

(3)	Under no circumstances shall any use, activity, and/or i:levelopment adversely affect -the capacity of the channels or floodways of any watercourse, drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or system:

(4)	No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind shall be made to any watercourse  channel until all adjacent municipalities which  may be affected by such action have been notified by the municipality, and until all  required  permits  or  approvals  have· been  first  obtained  from  the - Department of Environmental  Protection,  Bureau of Dams, Waterways, and Wetlands.	·

In addition, the Federal Insurance Administration and Periiisylvania Department of Community, and Economic Development,  Strategic Planning and Operations Office, shall be notified by the municipality prior to any alteration or relocation of any watercourse.                                        -

(5)	- All proposed development shall be in compliance with permits as required' by Federal or Commonwealth laws.

f.	Approximate 100-Year Flood Boundary and Floodplain Soils Regulations

Any proposed_ use, development or activity in approximate 100-year' flood boundary areas and floodplain soils areas shall be subject to all standards spedfied in this section for floodway _areas unless a hydrological study is prepared thereby identifying the floodway and flood fringe areas. Such study shall be prepared by a registered engineer expert in the preparation of hydrological studies. The hydrological study shall be subject to the review and approval of the Governing Body on recommendation of the municipal engineer.

g.	Use Regulations

(1)	Uses Permitted by Right

The following uses and activities are permitted in the floodplain provided that they are in compliance with the provisions of the underlying zoning district and are not prohibited by any other ordinance and provided that they do not require structures, fill or storage of materials or equipment, and provided that within the floodway there would be no increase in the one hundred year flood elevation.	-

(a)	Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture grazing, outdoor plant  nurseries, - horticulture, truck  farming,  forestry,  sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.

(b)	Public and private recreational uses and activities such as parks, day  camps,  picnic  grounds,  golf  courses,  boat  launching  and



5
 
swimming   areas,  hiking,· bicycling  and  horseba.ck  riding  trails, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, tennis
<;:ourts, and hunting and fishing areas.

(c)	Yard areas for residential and non-residential uses.

(d)	Temporary uses such as circuses, carnivals, and similar activities.

(2)	Uses Permitted by Special Exception

The following uses and activities are permitted in the floodplain by special exception provided that they are in compliance with the provisions of the underlying district and are not prohibited by any other ordinance and provided that all applicable floodplain requirements are met:

(a)	Utilities, public facilities and improvements such as streets, bridges, transmission lines and pipe lines.	·-

(b)	Water related uses and activities.

(c)	Storage of materials and equipment provided they are not buoyant, flammable or explosive, and are not subject to major damage by flooding, and provided such material : and equipment is firmly anchored to prevent flotation or movement. Storage of materials and equipment listed in subsection k. hereof shall be prohibiied in the floodplain.

(d)	Pervious parking areas.

h.	Existing Structures in the Floodplain

A strUcture or use of a structure or premises which lawfully existed before the enactment of these provisions, but which is not in conformity with these provisions, may be continued subject to the following conditions:

(1)	Existing  structures  and/or  uses  may  be  expanded  when  permitted  as  a  · special  exception  by the Zoning  Hearing Boar !.

(2)	Existing structures and/or uses located in any floodway shall not be expanded or enlarged unless the effect of the proposed expansion or enlargement on 100 year flood heights is fully offset by accompanying improvements.

(3)	Any increase in area shall not exceed an aggregate of twenty-five (25) percent of the area of the  structure and/or use, during the  life of the structure and/or use.

(4)	The mod' ification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to an existing structure shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and any other applicable ordinances.




6
 
i.	Special Requirements for Mobile Homes

Mobile homes are defined in Section 245 of this Ordinance. For floodplain management purposes, the term mobile home shall also include park trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicles and other similar veh_icles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days.    ·

(1)	No  mobile  home  shall  be  permitted  in  the  floodplain  except  as  a nonconforming use which predates the enactment of this Ordinance.

(2)	Within any floodway  area,  replacement  of, or expansion of an existing
: mobile home shall be prohibited.

(3)	Within any flood fringe area, replacement of or expansion of an existing mobile home shall be:

_(a)	Placed on a permanent foundation;

(b)	Elevated so that the lowest floor of the mobile home 'is one and one­ half (1.5) feet or more above the elevation of the 100 year flood;

(c)	Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.

j.	Prohibited Activities in the Floodplain

The commencement of any of the following activities; or the construction, enlargement, _or expansion of any structure  used,  or intended to be used, for any of the following  activities shall be prohibited within the floodplain:          ·

(1)	Hospitals

(2)	Nursing Homes

(3)	Jails or Prisons

k.	Development Which May Endanger Human Life

Any new or substantially improved structure which will be used for the production or storage of any of the following dangerous  materials  or substances or which will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply (more than ten (10) gallons or other comparable volume or any amount of radioactive substances) of any of the dangerous materials or substances, including but not limited to the following and other such materials or substances identified for exclusion from floodplain areas by the agencies of the Commonwealth or the Federal Government, on the premises,. shall not be permitted in any identified floodplain area.

(1)	Acetone
(2)	Ammonia
(3)	Benzene
(4)	Calcium carbide



7
 
(5)	Carbon disulfide
(6)	Celluloid
(7)	Chlorine
(8)	Hydrochloric acid
·	(9)	Hydrocyanic add
(10)	Magnesium
(11)	Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen
(12)	Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel, oil, etc.)
(13)	Phosphorus
(14)	Potassium
(15)	Sodium
(16)	sulfur and sulfur products
(17)	Pesticides (Including insecticides, ·fungicides and rodenticides)
(18)	Radioactive substances,  insofar  as such substances  are not otherwise regulated.

I.	Special Exceptions and Variances

When 'development   is  allowed  in the floodplain  either  by  special  exception  or variance, the following standards shall be met.	·

(1)	No developrnent  shall be permitted in the floodway  that would result in any increase in the 100 year flood elevation.

(2)	No new construction or development shall be located within  the area measured fifty {50) feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.

(3)	Elevation Requirements

(a)	Residential Structures

Within any floodplain area, the lowest floor (including  basement)  of any building shall be at least one and one-half (1.5) feet above the one-hundred year flood elevation. Fully or partially enclosed spaces below the lowest floor shall be prohibited. A document certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, which certifies that the proposed building is in-compliance with the  elevation  requirements shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer.                                          ·


















8
 

(b)	Non-residential Structures

(i.) Within any identified floodplain area, the lowest floor (including basement) of any non-residential structure, or any substantial improvement to ari existing non-residential structure, shall be at least one and one-half (1.5 feet)  above the  one hundred
(100) year flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space enclosed by such structure shall remain either completely or essentially dry during any flood up to that height. · Fully or partially enclosed spaces below the lowest floor shalf beprohibited.

(ii.)		Any non-residential structure, or part thereof,  having a lowest floor which  is not elevated to at least one  and one-half (1.5) . feet above the one hundred (100) year flood elevation, shall be floodproofed  in  a  completely  or  essentially   dry  manner  in accordance with the W1 or W2 space  classification standards contained	in	the	publication	entitled	"Flood-Proofing Regulations''  published by the  U.S. Army  Corps of Engineers· (June 1972), or with some equivalent standard.  All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be accompanied by
a statement certified by a registered professional engineer or · architect	which	states	that	the	proposed	design	and construction  are  in conformance  with  the  above  referenced standards.

(4)	Fill

 
(a)






(b)



(c)
 
The cross-sectional area of the floodplain shall not be reduced by more than three (3) percent. The three (3) percent shall be allocated to one and one-half (1.5) percent on either side of the centerline of the watercourse. Such fill shall not cumulatively increase the 100- year flood elevation more than one (1) foot.

Fill shall consist of soil or small rock materials only; solid waste landfills shall not be permitted.

Fill shall be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance to erosion, scouring, or settling.
 

(d)	. Fill shall be no steeper than one (1) vertical to two (2) horizontal, unless substantiated data justifying steeper slopes is submitted to•. and approved by, the Zoning O\ficer.

(e)	Fill shall be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent properties.








g
 
(5)	·   Drainage

Storm drainage facilities shall . be designed to convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system shall insure proper drainage along streets, and provide positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.

(6)	Water and Sanitary Sewer Facilities and Systems

(a)	All  new  or  replacement  water  and  sanitary  sewer  facilities  and· systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.

 
(b)



(c)
 
Sanitary sewer faciiities and systems shall be designed prevent the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.            ·

No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any identified floodplain area. No expansion of any on-site sewage system now located either wholly or partially in the floodplain shall be permitted.
 

(7)	·	Other     Utilities

All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.

(8)	Streets

The finished elevation of all new streets shall be at least one (1) foot above the one hundred (100) year flood elevation.

(9)	Storage

No materials that are 'buoyant, flammable, explosive or, in times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life. shall be stored within any identified floodplain area.

(1O)  Placement of Buildings and Structures

All buildings and structures shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum obstruction· to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.









10
 

(11)	Anchoring

(a)	All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral  movement. The zoning officer shall require the applicant to submit the written opinion of a registered professional engineer that the proposed structural design meets this criteria.

(b)	· All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or components located below the one hundred  (100)  year  flood. elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.

(12)	Floors, Walls and Ceilings

(a)	Wood flooring used at or below the 100-year flood elevation shall be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the· flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain  without  ca1Jsing  structural damage to the building.

(b)	Plywood used at or below the 100 year flood elevation shall be of a "marine" or water-resistant variety.

(c)	Walls and ceilings at or below the 100-year flood elevation shall be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant and will withstand inundation.

(d)	Windows, doors, and other components at or below the 100-year flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant material.	·

(13)	Paints and Adhesives

·	(a)	Paints  or  other  finishes   used  at  or  below  the   100-year  flood elevation shall be of a "marine" or water-resistant quality.

(b)	Adhesives used at or below the 100-year flood elevation shall be of a "marine" or water-resistant variety.

(c)	All wooden compont:ints (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be finished with "marine" or water-resistant paint or other finishing materials.

(14)	Electrical Components

(a)· Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three  (3) feet  above the 100-year flood elevation.

;
(b) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower  levels and shall be dropped from above.





11
 
(15)	Equipment

Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall not be located below the 100-year flood elevation.

(16)  Fuel Supply Systems

All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made for the drainage at these systems in the event that floodwater infiltration occurs.

·	m.	Variances

If compliance with any of the requirements of this Section would result in an exceptional hardship for a prospective builder, developer, or lan\:fowner, the Zoning Hearing Board may, upon request, grant relief from the strict application of the requirements. Requests for variances shall be considered by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the following:

(1)	No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use or activity within any floodway .that would cause any increase in the one hundred (100) year flood elevation.

(2)	No varia(lce shall be granted for any of the requirements pertaining to Development· Which May Endanger Human Life (subsection k.) or Prohibited Activities in the Floodplain (subsection j.).

(3)	.   If granted,  a variance  shall invOlve  only the  least modification  necessary · to provide  relief.	·	·	·

(4)	In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall attach whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in order to protect the ·public health, safety,  and welfare, and to achieve the objectives of this Ordinance.
.	.
(5)	Whenever  a variance  is. granted, the Zoning  Hearing Board shall notify the applicant in writing that:

(a)	· The granting  at the variance  may  result in increased premium rates for flood  insurance;

(b)	Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.

(6}		In reviewing any request for a variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider, but not be limited to, the following:

(a}	That there is good and sufficient cause;




12
 
(b)	That failure  to  grant  the  variance  would   result  in  exceptional hardship to the applicant;

(c)	That the. granting of the variance will neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights, ·additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense; nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public, or conflict with any other applicable state statute or regulation, or local ordinance or regulation.

(7) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be maintained by the municipality. In addition, a report of all variances granted during the year shall be included in the annual report to the Federal Insurance Administration.

(8) Notwithstanding any · of the  above,  however,  all  structures _shall  be designed  and  constructed  so  as  to  have  the  capability  of  resisting  the
.'.!00-year flood.

ARTICLE IV.

Should any· section· or any prov1s1on of this Ordinance be declared by any Court of competent . jurisdiction to be invalid,  illegal, or unconstitutional, such decision shall have no effect on the validity of this .Ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof.

ARTICLEV.

Any ordinance or resolutfon or part of any ordinance or resolution inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.                  ·
 

SO ORDAINED thi
 
3-&-2--- day of
 

MA.-V+t----'' A.D. 1999.


HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS





.
.	a
 












13
 
 
 
3/9198 J:Haycoc.k - Onlimmca.,3



 


ORDINANCE NO.
 
  13 I 	
 

ORDINANCE OF RAYCOCK TOWNSHIP, BUCKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AMENDING THE RAYCOCK TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE TO PROVIDE THAT USE H.{17) MOBILE HOME FOR QUALIFYING FAMILY MEMBER SHALL BE PERMITTED ONLY BY CONDITIONAL USE
AND PROVIDING STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL OF SUCH USE


BACKGROUND


A.	On or about September 26, 1994, the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township adopted a new Zoning Ordinance amending the Haycock Township Zoning Ordinance of 1975.
B.	On or about September 3, 1996, the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township adopted Ordinance No. 76 creating a new accessory use: "H. (17) Mobile Home for Qualifying Family Member" as a use permitted by right.
C.	The Board of Supervisors has determined that it is in the interests of the Township to provide that use H. (17), Mobile Home for Qualifying Family Member be permitted by conditional use approval rather than as a use by right.
D.	In furtherance of the purposes and community development goals and objectives recited at Sections 102 and 105 of the Amended Zoning Ordinance	and,	specifically,	the objectives	of	Section 105 (c), the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township has determined that the following amendment to the Zoning Ordinance will promote the purposes and community development objectives stated therein nd will afford an opportunity for residents of the Township to provide suitable housing for family members as defined in Section
l.a	., hereof.
 




IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, upon recommendation of the Haycock Township Planning Commission and the Bucks County Planning Commission that the Haycock Township Zoning Ordinance is hereby amended as follows:
1.	Section, 404.H. (17) "Mobile Home for Qualifying Family

Member" is hereby amended to provide as follows:

"A free standing mobile home is permitted in addition to.a primary residence on a property which otherwise meets the minimum lot require- , ments for a single family detached residence in the district in which it is located subject to the following conditions:

a.	This use shall be permitted only by conditional use approval pursuant to the provisions of Section 1108 of the Zoning Ordinance.

b.	The mobile home shall be occupied only by the parents, grandparents, or children of an owner of a prop­ erty and the owner shall reside in the primary residence ·on the prop­ erty.

c.	Only one (1) mobile home for quali­ fying family member shall be permit­ ted on any one (1) property.

d.	The mobile	home	shall be no	less than	Four	Hundred	Eighty	(480) square feet and no more than Eight Hundred	(800) square feet in floor area.

e.	The mobile home shall be installed and located only to the side or rear of the principal residence and shall conform to the minimum side and rear yard	requirements for principal structures in the zoning district.




2
 





f.	The provisions of all current munic­ ipal	ordinances regulating mobile homes and regulations of the Bucks County Health Department shall be met.

g.	The area between ground level and the	perimeter of the mobile home shall be enclosed by means of wood or aluminum skirting or other simi­ lar material.

h.	Each mobile home shall be placed on a permanent foundation of at least eight (8) poured concrete or masonry pillars set on a concrete base at least eight inches (8") thick. The pillars shall be spaced no more than ten feet (10') apart with the end piers	being no farther than five feet (5') from the ends of the unit . The pillars shall be at least one foot by two feet (1'x2') in size and at	least thirty-six inches (36") below grade. Each pillar shall have installed a tie-down ring to which the mobile home shall be secured.

i.	No permanent fences, walls or other structures shall be installed that may	interfere with removal of the mobile home.

j.	Prior to the issuance of a use and occupancy permit, a certificate, in the form of an affidavit shall be presented	to the Zoning Officer verifying that the occupant of the principal dwelling intends and will reside in the principal dwelling and that a qualifying family member as described	above will occupy the mobile	home for as long as both dwelling units are located on the property.	The mobile home shall be removed		from the property. within ninety		(90) days after it is no longer occupied by a person who is a



3
 




qualified family member as described herein.


2.	Section 403, Table of Use Regulations, is hereby amended to show that use, H. (17), Mobile Home for Qualified Family Member, is designated as a use permitted as a conditional use in each of the zoning districts designated in the Table of Use Regulations.
3.	Secti,on 1.108 of the Zoning Ordinance is hereby amended to insert a new section at Section 1.1.08 d. (4)(aa) providing as follows:
Use H, (1.7) Mobile Home for Qualified Family Member

(1.) The applicant shall identify who will occupy the mobile home and such person's relationship to the owner.

(2)	The applicant shall provide satisfactory evidence from the Bucks County Health Depart­ ment that the sewage disposal needs of the mobile home will be met in a manner consistent with Bucks County Health Department Regula­ tions and the Regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.	

(3)	
The applicant shall submit a plan, drawn to scale, showing the location of. all existing structures on the property, identifying their use and showing the proposed .location of the mobile home. The plan must demonstrate how the applicant will comply with the requirement of Sections 404 .H. (1.7) (c)(b)(e)(f)(g}and (h).	

(4)	
The Board of Supervisors shall attach such conditions to the approval of the application as it deems appropriate, including the condi­ tion that the applicant execute the certifica­ tion required by Section.404.H>(l.7) (j) of this	
	Ordinance.	
4.	All other terms and provisions of the Amended	Haycock
Township Zoning Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.

4
 







5.	This	Ordinance	shall	take	effect	immediately	upon adoption.



OIU:JAINJSD and ENA 'l"Zt> by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township on this / day of	..;.ii&;"U!;...	,   1998.


ATTEST:	BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
HAYCOCX TOWNSHIP
 




Nancy w'f Yodis Township Secretary
 
:cii Lennard, Chairman
 

.	iM_1L1,,)JA,.#=
athleen M. Babb, Vice Chairman





rs




























s
 
 
 

11/5/ 97 J:Haycock - Ordinance.!


..
ORDINANCE NO. :1L

ORDINANCE  OF HAYCOCK  TOWNSHIP,  BUCKS  COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA,  AMENDING  ORDINANCE NO.	71	, THE ZONING  ORDINANCE  OF HAYCOCK  TOWNSHIP,
TO REVISE THE REGULATIONS  FOR RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY  STRUCTURES.



BACKGROUND




A.	The Haycock Township Board of Supervisors on or about September 26, 1994, duly adopted Ordinance No. 7 1	revising and restating the Haycock Township Zoning Ordinance as adopted in 1975.
B.	The Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township deems it in the best interest of the citizens  of the Township to amend the Zoning Ordinance to clarify certain provisions thereof  as they relate to residential  accessory buildings  and structures (use H2).
C.	The Board of Supervisors specifically finds and determines that this Ordinance is consistent with the Township Comprehensive Plan and the Community Development Objectives stated therein and in the Zoning Ordinance.
NOW,  THEREFORE,  be  it  ORDAil'\iED  AND  ENACTED  as follows:

Section I.

Section 404.H.2( d) is revised and restated as follows:

"Buildings such as storage sheds, bath houses, and private greenhouses or unenclosed (without walls) decks; porches and patios.
New and existing buildings or structures may extend into the minimum side or

rear yards to a distance of ten feet from a lot line provided  that such building  or
 
structure shall not exceed two hundred eighty-eight  (288) square feet of gross floor


area.11

Section 2.

Section 404.H.2G)  is revised and restated  as follows:

"Accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height.

Such buildings and structures may extend into a rear yard, but no greater than the required side yard for the zoning district in which the building or structure is located provided such building or structure shall not exceed seven hundred fifty (750) square feet !'  Accessory buildings exceeding seven hundred fifty (750) square feet shall comply with the set back provisions of  the zoning district in which they are located.
Section 3.

Section 404.H.6 is revised and restated as follows:

Non-Residential Accessory Building, Structure or Use

Accessory buildings, structures, or uses customarily  incidental to non-residential uses, not including outside storage or display, where a principal use is permitted by special exception or conditional use, any accessory use shall also require a special exception or conditional use.
1.	Non-residential accessory buildings shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in

height and shall comply with the front side and rear yard set back requirements of the zoning district in which the building or structure is located,
2.	Parking shall conform to the most closely related use in Section 404.


Section 4.

All other provisions of the Haycock Township Zoning Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.
2
 

Section 5.

This Ordinallce shall be effective immediately upon enactment.

ORDAINED AND ENACTED this '  .:1 1!.aay of	-1e::Jb;(d.,	, 1998.




 


ATTEST:
 
HAYCOCK  TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS





\.	athleen 1\1. Babb, Chairman (Vic.:)





Ellrl"Winters

 































3
 
 
 
i"i	.
'i';./95 13:29 pm ZONORDIN.AMD  HT-JSL-95-5



ORDINANCE NO.	7,;t_


AN ORDINANCE BY THE BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP AMENDING THE
HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE


BACKGROUND

A.	On or about September 26, 1994, the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township adopted a new Zoning Ordinance amending Haycock Township Zoning Ordinance of 1975.
B.	In furtherance of the purposes and community development goals and objectives recited at Section 102 and 105 of the Amended zoning Ordinance and specifically the objectives set forth at Section
105.c.	the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township has determined

that the following amendments to the Zoning Ordinance will promote the purposes and community development objectives stated therein.
IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township upon recommendation by the Haycock Township Planning Commission and the Bucks County Planning Commission that various sections of the Haycock Township Zoning Ordinance are hereby amended as follows:
1.	Section 204.a. Lot Area is amended to delete the sentence,

"In addition, the minimum lot area does not include any area designated as open space under requirements of Section 501, Site Capacity Calculations and Section 502 Table of Performance Standards."
2.	Section 219 Density is amended to replace the words "net buildable site area" with the words "base site area."
3.	Section 239 Impervious Surface Ratio is amended to replace

the words "net buildable site area" with the words "base site area;"
 
ii
I







4.	Section 270 Net Buildable Site Area is amended to read:

"The net buildable site area is the area of the site which may be altered, disturbed or regraded for development purposes.	The net buildable site area may contain buildings, roads, parking areas, sewage systems and stormwater management facilities.	The net buildable site area shall not contain required open space, recreation areas and natural resource protection areas."

5.	Section 403 Table of Use Regulations is amended as applied to Use A4 Forestry, as follows:




6.	Section 501 Site Capacity Calculations is amended so that the introductory paragraph is preceded by the words, "Except for Use Bl Single-Family Detached."
7.	Section 501.g. is amended to replace this subsection with, "g.	Reserved" .
8.	Section 501.h. is amended to replace the words "Unusable

Land" with the words "Required Open Space."

9.	Section 501.i. Number of Dwelling Units is amended to replace the words "Net Buil·dable Site Area" with the words "B::l;:;e Site Area."
10.	Section 501.j. Impervious Surfaces is amended to replace the

words "New Buildable Site Area" with the words "Base Site Area."










2
 






11.	Section 502 Table of Performance Standards is amended to delete the Maximum Density DU/AC perfonnance standards for the B1- Single Family Detached uses for the following districts:



12.	Section 1108 Governing Body: Powers and Duties - Conditional Uses is amended to delete subsection d.(4) (cl Use A4 Forestry and replace it with d. (4)(cj Reserved.
This Ordinance shall be effective five (5) days after enactment.
-h5
ENACTED    AND    ORDAINED    this $-	day of J7e;or.:-,•t6.;;L"'<....

1995.

ATTEST:	HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS



 
BY:




























3
 


EARL D. WINTERS, Chainnan
 
 
 


Table  of  Contents
ARTICLE  I.	TITLE,  PURPOSE  AND  JURISDICTION...............................................................	1
Section     100	Title ,	1
Section	101	Short    Title   ...................................................................................................	1
Section	102	Purpose...........................................................................................    ...........	1
Section	103	Interpretation ..................................................................  :............................	2
Section	104	Separability     .................................................................................................	2
Section	105	Statement of Community Development Goals and Objectives.........................	3
Section	106	Enactment   and  Applicability.............  .............................................................	11
ARTICLE  II.	DEFINITlONS	13
Section 200	General....................................................................................................... 	13
Section	201	Accessory ...................................................................................................	13
Section	202	Alley ...;..................................................................................  :....................	14
Section	203	Alterations ................................ ,...................................................................	14
Section	204	Area ........................... ;............................................  :...................;...............	14
Section	205	Authority    .....................................................................................................	14
Section	206	Basement...................................................................................................	14
Section	207	Bo.ard......................... .................................................................................	14
Section	208	Boarder,  Roomer,  or  Lodger.........................................................................	14
Section	209	Building ......................................................................................................	15
Section	21o	Building      Height............................................................................................	15
Section	211	Building   Setback   Line..................................................................................	15
Section	212	Building Spacing ................................................................................ .........	15
Section	213	Campsite.....................................................................................................	15
Section	214	Cellar    ........, .................................................................................................	15
Section	215	Cold Frame..................................................................................................	15
Section	216	Conditional Use...........................................................................................	15
Section	217	Condominium..............................................................................................	16
Section	218	Decision ......................... :..................... .......................................................	16
Section	219	Density ............................................................................................... ........	16
Section	220	Determination..............................................................................................	16
Section	221	Development  ..............................................................................................	16
Section	222	Dwelling......................................................................................................	16
Section	223	Easement...................................................................................................	17
Section	224	Electric Substation.......................................................................................	17
Section	225	Employee  ......:............................................................................................	17
Section	226	Establishment         .............................................................................................      .	17
Section	227	Family     .........................................................................................................	17
Section	228	Flood  Fringe ........................................................... ,....................................	17
Section	229	Flood Plain..................................................................................................	17
Section	230	Flood    Plain   Soils..........................................................................................	17
Section	231	Floodway ....................................................................................................	18
Section	232	Floor Area...................................................................................................	18
Section	233	Floor Area Ratio............................. ..............................................................	18
Section	234	Greenhouse................................................................................................	18
Section	235	Hearing    .......................................................................................................	18
Section	236	Home      Occupation........................................................................................	18
Section	237	Hydric   Soils 	1........................................................	18
Section	238	Impervious   Surface ......................................................................................	18
Section	239	Impervious   Surface  Ratio..............................................................................	19
Section	240	Lake ...........................................................................................................	19
Section	241	Lake Shore Area. .........................................................................................	19
Section	242	Livestock ......................................................................................... ;..........	19
Section	243	Lot.......  .......................................................................................................	19
 

Section	244	Lot        Lines...   ..................................................................................................	21
Section	245	Mobile Home...............................................................................................	21
Section	246	Mobile    Home   Lot.........................................................................................	21
Section	247	Modular      Home.............................................................................................	21
Section	248	Municipal       Engineer......................................................................................	21
Section	249	Municipal      Waste...........................................................................................	22
Section	250	Nonconformities..........................................................................................	22
Section	251	Open   Space................................................................................................	22
Section	252	Open Space Ratio .......................................................................................	22
Section	253	Parking.......................................................................................................	22
Section	254	Performance   Standard   Subdivision...............................................................	23
Section	255	Planned   Residential   Development................................................................	23
Section	256	Pond..........................................................................................................	23
Section	257	Pond Shore Area.........................................................................................	23
Section	258	Principal   ......................................................................................................	24
Section	259	Public  Hearing  .............................................................................................      ·	24
Section 260	Public Meeting ...................................................................... :. 	24
Section· 261	Public Notice ................................................................... :. 	24
Section	262	Recreational Vehicle....................................................................................	24
Section	263	Report  ............................................................................................   :...........	24
Section	264	Right-of-Way ............................... ............................................... .................	24
Section	265	Sewer.........................................................................................................	25
Section	266	Sign  ...........................................·.................................................................	25
Section	267	Site.............................................................................................................	25
Section	268	Site Area.....................................................................................................	25
Section	269	Site Area, Base............................................................................................	25
Section	270	Site Area, Net Buildable ...................................................................... .........	25
Section	271	Site Capacity ...............................................................................................	25
Section	272	Special      Exception........................................................................................	25
Section	273	Steep   Slopes..............................................................................................	25
Section	274	Story.................................................   ,.........................................................	25
Section	275	Story,  Ground..............................................................................................	26
Section	276	Street.........................................................................................................	26
Section	277	Street  Line..................................................................................................	26
Section	278	Structure.....................................................................................................	26
Section	279	Tree Protection Zone (TPZ) ......................................................... .................	26
Section	280	Use.............................................................................................................	27
Section	281	Utilities........................................................................................................	27
Section	282	Variance......................................................................................................	27
Section	283	Wetlands.....................................................................................................	27
Section	284	Wetland     Margin............................................................................................	27
Section	285	Woodlands..................................................................................................	27
Section	286	Yard   ..................................................................     :.........................................	28
ARTICLE Ill.	ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS. 	 29
Section  300	Establishment of Districts 	 29
Section  301	Classes of Districts.......................................................................................	29
Section  302	Zoning  Districts  Map.....................................................................................	29
Section 303	Interpretation  of  District  Boundaries ..............................................................	29
Section  304	Statements of Purposes and Intent for the Districts........................................	30
ARTICLE  IV.	USE REGULATIONS	33
Section  400	Applicability  of Regulations ........................................................................ .'..	33
Section  401	Uses by Right, Special Exceptions, Conditional Uses, and Uses Not Penmitted	33
Section  402	Uses Subject to Other Regulations...............................................................	33
Section  403	Table    of     Use     Regulations    .............................................................................	34




ii
 

Section	404	Use  Regulations..........................................................................................	38
		A.	Agricultural Uses.................................................................................	38
		A 1	General   Farming   ................................................................. .............	38
A2	Nursery.	39
A3	Intensive  Agriculture.	39
A4	Forestry	40
AS	Riding Academy	41
A6	Commercial   Kennel.	42
A7	Agricultural Retail.	43
AS	Farm Unit.	44
A9	Farm Support Facility.	44
B.	Residential Uses.	44
B 1	Single-Family  Detached	44
B2	Residential  Conversion.	45
B3	Rooming  or Boarding  House	47
B4	Village  Twin ...................................................................  :.	47
BS  ·Single-Family Detached Cluster .................................. :.	47
B6	Pelformance Standard Subdivision ............................................ '.	48
B7	Mobile  Home Park ........................................................... ,.	53
BS	Planned  Residential  Development  (PRO)	54
B9	Urban Dwelling.	54
B1 O   Life Care Facility.	54
C.	Institutional and Recreational Uses.	57
C1	Place of Worship.	57
C2	School .............-.	57
C3	Commercial School.	58
C4	Library or Museum	58
cs	Reserved.	58.
C6	Recreational Facility	58
C7	Goif Course.	60
CS	Private  Club................................ :.	61
C9	Community   Center.	61
C10   Day Care Center	62
C11   Hospital.	62
C12   Nursing  Home.	63
C13   Halfway House.	63
C14  Cemetery.	64
C1s  Recreational Camping Park.	64
C16   Municipal Services ....,.	65
C17   Recreational  Cabin/Cottage  Development.	65
D.	Office Uses	71
1	Office.	71
2	Medical Office.	72
3	Office Park	72
E.	Retail and Consumer Service Uses	73
E1	Retail Shop.	73
E2	Large    Retail   Store............................................................................	73
E3	Service  Business.............................................................................	73
E4	Financial     Establishment....................................................................	73
Es	Eating Place....................................................................................	74
ES	Drive-Ins  and Other Eating Places.....................................................	74
E7	Repair   Shop....................................................................................	74
EB	Funeral   Home   or   Mortuary   ................................................................	74
E9	Motel,  Hotel  and  Inn ....................................................................... ;.	75
E10	Indoor      Entertainment.......................................................................	7S
E 11	Athletic    Facility.......  ..........................................................................	75
E12	Outdoor Entertainment. ......................................... .-.........................	76
E13	Tavern............................................................................................	77


iii
 

E14   Lumber Yard	77
E 15  Veterinary Office or Clinic	77
E 16   Service Station.	77
E17  CarWash.	78
E 18  Automotive  Sales	78
E 19   Automotive  Repair.	79
E20   Truck Sales	79
E21   Parking Lot or Garage................... :.	79
E22   Multiple Commercial Use.	79
E23   Adult Commercial Uses.	80
E24   Outdoor Motion Picture Establishment.	81
E25   Vehicular Track or Course.	82
E26  Flea Market.	83
E27   Dwelling in Combination.	83
E28  Auction House.	84
F.	Utility, Service and Transportation  Uses.	84
-  F1	·Utilities     ......................................................................      :.	84
F2	Emergency  Services.	85
F3	Terminal ..........:.................................................................. .,.	85
F4	Airport or Heliport.	85
G.	Industrial Uses.	85
G1	Manufacturing.	85
G2	Research	86
G3	Wholesale Business, Wholesale Storage, Warehousing.	86
G4	Mini-Warehouse	86
GS	Printing.	87
G6	Contracting  ............ ,	87
G7	Truck  Terminal.	87
Ga	Crafts.	88
G9	Planing Mill.	88
G10  Mill.	88
G11   Fuel Storage and Distribution	88
G12  Industrial Park.	88
G13  Junk Yard.	89
G14   Extractive  Operation,  Mining.	91
G15  Resource Recovery Facillty ............................................. .......... .......	9S
G16   Municipal Wast.e Landfill.	97
H.	Accessory Uses.	100
H 1	Accessory Home Occupation	100
H2	Residential Accessory Building, Structure or Use...............................	104
H3	Accessory     Apartment.......................................................................	107
H4	School Bus Shelter ..........................................................................	107
HS	Dormitory   ........................................................................................	107
H6	Nonresidential  Accessory  Building ..:.................................................	108
H7	Outside Storage and Display ................................... .........................	108
HS	Temporary  Structure  or Use..............................................................	109
H9	Temporary  Community  Event ...........................................................	109
Hi O	Air     Landing      Field..............................................................................	109
H11	Satellite Dish Antenna, Aerials, Masts, Radio and	
Television Towers and Flagpoles...................................................	11O
H12	Kennel   -  Hobby  ...............................................................................	111
H13	Noncommercial     Kennel....................................................................	111
H14	Bed and Breakfast...........................................................................	112
H 1s	Off-Street Parking............... .............................................................	113
H 16	Signs ..............................................................................................	113
ARTICLE  V.	PERFORMANCE   STANDARDS.	115
Section soo	Compliance. 	115
iv
 
A.	GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Section 501	Site Capacity Calculations.	115
Section 502	Table of Performance Standards.	117
Section 503	Area and Dimensional Requirements	119
Section 504	Environmental Performance Standards.	119
Section 505	Buffer Yards	122
Section 506	Performance Standard Bonuses.................._.	128
B.	FLOOD PLAIN PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Section 507	Flood Plain Regulations ................................................................... :.	130
C.	NUISANCE STANDARDS
Section	508	Noise..........................................................................................................	139
Section	509	Smoke, Ash, Dust, Fumes, Vapors and Gases...............................................	142
Section	51o	Heat............................................................................................................	142
Section	511	Odor...........................................................................................................	142
Section	512	Glare...........................................................................................................	142
Section	513	Vibrations....................................................................................................	142
Section	514	Storage and Waste Disposal .................................................. .-......................	142
Section	515	Radioactivity  and Electrical Disturbance.........................................................	143
D. PARKING PERFORMANCE STANDARDS	. ,
Section 516	General Regulations Applicable to Off-Street Parking Facilities .......................	144
Section 517	Reduction of Non-Residential  Parking Requirements.....................................	145
Section 518	Design      Standards........................................................................................	146
Section 519	Off Street Loading .......................................................................................	147
E. DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Section	520	Lot  Area   or  Yard   Required   .............................................................................	149
Section	521	Minimum Lot Area........................................................................................	149
Section	522	Minimum Lot Width ............................................... .......................................	149
Section	523	Traffic Visibility Across Corners .......................... ...........................................	150
Section	524	Future   Rights-Of   Way   ...................................................................................	151
Section	525	Exceptions for  Existing  Building Alignment...................................................	151
Section	526	Yard Requirements ................................. ,....................................................	152
Section	527	Projections into Yards ..................................................................................	152
Section	528	Fences and Driveways  in Yards.....................................................................	152
Section	529	Exceptions to Building Height......................................................................	152
F.  OPEN SPACE IN RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS
Section 530	General     Requirements.................................................................................	153
Section 531	Open Space Designation.............................................................................	153
Section 532	Design  Standards  for  Open Space................................................................	154
Section 533	Open  Space  Performance  Bond...................................................................	154
Section 534	Ownership  of  Open  Space .....................................-......................................	155
Section 535	Costs........................... ...............................................................................	156

ARTICLE  VI.	OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS	157
A.	VILLAGE EXPANSION (OVERLAY) DISTRICT











B.	ARTERIAL CORRIDOR (OVERLAY) DISTRICT
Section 610	Applicability 	161
Section 611	Purpose and Intent. 	161
Section 612	Limitations. 	161
v
 

Section  613	Access Management ...................................................................................	161
Section  614	Setbacks............................... ............................................•.........................	161
Section  615	Procedures.................................................................................................	161
 

ARTICLE VII.	PLANNEDRESIDENTIALDEVELOPMENT........................................................
 

163
 
Section	700	Purpose.....................................................................................................  .	163
Section	701	Establishment of Districts ............................................................................ .	163
Section	702	Use Regulations ......................................................................................... .	163
Section	703	Application Procedure ................................................................................ .	166
Section	704	Feasibility Review ....................................................................................... .	166
Section	705	Application for Tentative Approval ............................................................... ..	167
Section	706	The Public Hearing ..................................................................................... .	168
Section	707	The Findings .............................................................................................. .	168
Section	708	Status of Plan After Tentative Approval ........................................................ .	169
Section	709	Application for Final Approval ....................................................................... .	170
Section	71o	Abandonment of PRD................................................................................. .	171
Section	711	Required Number of Copies for Reviews ................................. :.....................	171
Section	712	Fees..........................................................................................................  .	171
 
ARTICLE  vm.  NONCONFORMITIES ....................................................................................... .
 
173
 
Section  800
 
Definitions .................................................................................................. .
 
173
 
Section	801	Registration of Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Lots............................. .	173
Section	802	Continuation .............................................................................................. .	173
Section	803	Nonconforming Lots .................................................................................. ..	173
Section	804	Extension of Nonconforming Uses and Structures ........................................ .	174
Section	805	Restoration ............................................................................................... ..	174
Section	806	Ownership ................................................................................................ ..	175
Section	807	Abandonment ............................................................................................ .	175
Section	808	Changes .................................................................................................... .	175
ARTICLE IX.	SIGNS 	177
 




















ARTICLE X.	ADMINISTRATION  ...........................................................................................   ..
 




















189
 
Section	1000	Zoning Officer - Duties and Powers ............................................................. ..	189
Section	1001	Duties of the Planning Commission............................................................. ..	189
Section	1002	Zoning Permits Required ........................................................................... ..	190
Section	1003	Application Requirements for Zoning Permits .............................................. ..	190
Section	1004	Fees ..........................................................................................................  .	191
Section	1005	Life of a Zoning Permit ................................................................................ .	191
Section	1006	Certificate of Occupancy ............................................................................ ..	191



vi
 


ARTICLE Xl.	ZONING HEARING BOARD AND OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE  PROCEEDINGS 	193
Section	1100	Establishment of Zoning Hearing Board ........................................................	193
Section	1101	Membership, Terms o1 Office of Zoning Hearing Board...................................	193
Section	1102	Removal of Member o1 Zoning Hearing Board................................................	193
Section	1103	Organization of Zoning  Hearing Board...........................................................	193
Section	1104	Expenditures far Services of Zoning Hearing Board.......................................	194
Section	1105	Jurisdiction of Zoning Hearing Board and Governing Bady ...........................•.	194
Section	1106	Zoning Hearing Board:  Powers and Duties - Variances...................................	195
Section	1107	Zoning Hearing Board:  Powers and Duties - Special Exceptions.....................	196
Section	1108	Governing Body: Powers and Duties - Conditional Uses ................................	203
Section	1109	Hearings  .....................................................................................................	212
Section	111o	Parties Appellant Before the Zoning Hearing Board .......................................	213
Section	1111	Validity of Ordinance:  Substantive  Questions ........................................ .......	21 3
Section	1112	Court Appeals .............................................................................................	216

ARTICLE XII.	AMENDMENTS.	217
Section	1200	Power of Amendment ............................................................ :.....................	217
Section	1201	Who   May  Initiate.......................................................................... ,.................	217
Section	1202	Enactment  of Zoning Ordinance Amendments ..............................................	217
Section	1203	Change of Zoning in the FC Future Commercial District ..................................	217
Section	1204	Extension of Development Area ...................................................................	218
Section	1205	Impact Statement. ........................................................................................	219
Section	1206	Periodic Amendment of QAZO .....................................................................	225
Section	1207	Fees ...........................................................................................................	225
ARTICLE XIII.	ENFORCEMENT 	227
Section	1300	Jurisdiction ..................................................................................................	227
Section	1301	Remedies  ...................................................................................................	227
Section	1302	En1orcement     Notice.....................................................................................	227
Section	1303	Enforcement       Remedies...............................................................................	228

ARTICLE XIV.  QUAKERTOWN AREA PLANNING COMMITTEE.	229
Section	1400	Purpose......................................................................................................	229
Section	1401	Membership ................................................................................................	229
Section	1402	Duties.........................................................................................................	229
ARTICLE XV.	REPEALER AND EFFECTIVE DATE 	231
Section  1500	Repealer  .....................·..............; 	231
Section  1501	Effective Date. 	231
Section  1502	Enactment 	231
APPENDIX A	BUCKS COUNTY WETLAND PLANT LIST..........................................................	A-1
 
 
 


ARTICLE  I.	TITLE,   PURPOSE  AND  JURISDICTION

Section  100	Title

An Ordinance regulating the location, height,  bulk,  erection,  construction, reconstruction, alteration, razing, removal and size of structures; the percentage of lot which may be occupied; the size of yards, courts and other open spaces; the density and distribution of population; the intensity of use of land or bodies of water for trade, industry, residence, recreation, public activities or other purposes; and the uses of land for agriculture, water supply, conservation, or other purposes, in the Haycock Township portion of the Quakertown Area.

Section  101	Short Title

This Ordinance shall be known as and may be cited as the "Haycock Township Version of the Quakertown Area Zoning Ordinance of 1975 as amended."

Section  102	Puroos·e

The purpose of this Ordinance is the promotion  of the health, safety, morals, convenience, order and welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the Quakertown Area by:

a.	Lessening the danger and congestion of traffic on the roads and highways and limiting excessive numbers of roads;

b.	Securing safety from fire, panic, flood, and other dangers;

c.	Providing adequate light and air; access to incident solar energy, and a safe, reliable and adequate water supply for domestic, commercial, agricultural and industrial uses;

d.	Controlling and regulating the growth of the area, concentrating development in areas where adequate sewerage service, water supply, roads and schools can be provided, and limiting development in areas where these facilities are not provided;

e.	Providing standards to control the amount of open space and impervious surfaces within a development; to control the intensity of development in areas of sensitive natural resources or natural features in order to reduce or eliminate adverse environmental Impacts; to protect the people's right to clean air, pure water, and the natural, scenic, historic, and aesthetic. values of the environment and to protect natural resources which are a part of the ecological system to which we are all bound and, therefore, are the common property of all the people, including generations yet to come, and must be protected to insure the health, safety and welfare of all the people;

f.	Providing for the use of land for residential housing of various dwelling types encompassing all basic forms of housing, including single-family and two-family dwellings, and a reasonable range of multi-family dwellings in various arrangements, mobile homes and mobile home parks, provided, however, that this Ordinance shall not be deemed invalid for the failure to provide for any other specific dwelling type;                                    ·

g.	Promoting such distribution of population and such classification of land uses and distribution of land development and utilization as will tend to facilitate and conserve adequate provisions for transportation, water flowage, water supply, drainage, sanitation, schools, parks and other public facilities, educational opportunities, recreation, soil fertility, and food supply;
 

h.	Protecting the tax base;

i.	Securing  economy  in governmental  expenditures;

j.	Fostering agriculture and other industries;

k.	Protecting both urban and non-urban development through the use of a development area for urban and suburban uses and a reserve area for non-urban development; and _

I.	Accommodating reasonable overall community growth, including population and employment growth, and opportunities for development of a variety of residential dwelling types and nonresidential   uses.

Section 103	Interpretation

In interpreting arid applying the provisions of this Ordinance,· they shall tie held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare.

a.	Whenever any regulations made under authority of this Ordinance  require a greater width or size of yards, courts or other· open spaces, or require a lower height of buildings or smaller number of stories, or require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied, or impose other higher standards than are required in or under any other statute, the provisions of the regulations made under authority of this Ordinance shall govern.

b.	Whenever the provisions of any other statute require a greater width or size of yards, courts or other open spaces, or require a greati;r percentage of lot to be left unoccupied, or impose other higher standards than are required by any regulations made under authority of this Ordinance, the provisions  of  such statute   shall govern.

c.	This Ordinance does not repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, except those specifically or impliedly repealed by.this Ordinance, or any private restrictions placed upon property by covenant,  deed or other private agreement  unless repugnant hereto.

d.	Provisions in the subdivision and land development regulations of the appropriate municipality providing for the varying of design standards shall not be considered to be in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance.

Section  104	Separability

It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Governing Body that:

a.	If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any provisions of this Ordinance to be invalid or ineffective in whole or in part, the effect of such decision shall be limited to those provisions which are expressly stated in the decision to be invalid or ineffective, and all other provisions of this Ordinance shall continue to be separately and fully effective.

b.	If a court of competent jurisdiction finds the application of any provision or provisions of this Ordinance to any lot, building or other structure, or tract of land, to be invalid or ineffective in whole or in part, the effect of such decision shall be limited to the person, property, or situation immediately involved in the controversy, and the application of any such provision to other persons, property, or situations shall not be affected.



2
 


Section  105	Statement of Community Develooment Goals and Objectives

The following Statement of Community Development Goals and Objectives shall serve as a guideline for growth and development within the municipalities participating in the Quakertown Area Comprehensive Plan and the Quakertown Area Zoning Ordinance. Participating municipalities are Haycock Township, Milford Township, Richland Township, Quakertown Borough, Richlandtown Borough and Trumbauersville Borough. _ Quakertown Borough, which participates in the comprehensive planning program, has enacted a separate zoning ordinance. This statement is in compliance with the requirements of Section 606 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.

a.	Growth Management

Growth is a dominant factor - in land use and community planning for the Quakertown Area. Many problems and demands which face these municipalities and the school district  are generated as direct  or indirect results of the location,
·timing·and magnitude of  growth.   Pressures for  continued- development  are
regional in scale. Current residents travel throughout the Philadelphia metropolitan area as well as to New Jersey and New York for employment. Growth must be balanced with preservation of natural and man-made environments. The type and intensity of new development must be guided and coordinated with a full range of facilities and services. Decisions must include considerations of timing, location, character and magnitude of new and changing uses.

Metropolitan  areas,  like  the  Quakertown  Area,  continue  to  grow  although migration from rural areas to urban areas is no longer as large as it was in previous decades.	There are, however, other important migration trends within urban areas and from one urban area to another. There is migration from central cities to the urban fringe.  People seek more desirable living environments.  It is clear that the desires of a large segment of the population do not match with the present location of these individuals or the quality of life that they desire for their families. It is this pressure which is the  major component of growth in the Quakertown Area.  The Quakertown Area lies at the fringe of two metropolitan areas:  the Philadelphia    metropolitan     area     and    the    Allentown-Bethlehem-Easton metropolitan area. Growth is encouraged by the location of the Quakertown Area on highways between the two areas.

There is much discussion regarding the desirability and need for controlling growth and there are strong reasons to support a policy for such regulations. The first is ecological. We have come to realize that environmental destruction accompanies uncontrolled urban  development and we have been less than successful in limiting these adverse environmental impacts in the past. The second set of reasons is economic. For years, the public has challenged the "bigger is better" philosophy. We have reached the point of understanding where rising costs for schools and services from police to garbage collection are being associated with the process of growth. Growth does not automatically bring benefits to the municipality. In fact, uncontrolled, poorly planned growth can be associated with increased municipal and school district costs.

A critical area of concern that any policy attempting to direct or control growth must take into account is how the growth is regulated.  Stated more precisely, who is affected by growth or by attempts to control growth.	Past policies intended to slow down or retard growth, such as municipality-wide large lot zoning, have accomplished little. Even during periods where the zoning is clearly restricted--permitting  development  only  on large lots--we have seen little indication of a slowing of development. It is obvious, however, that in areas of large-lot zoning the growth that did take place was limited to a specific socio­ economic group, those who could pay higher costs of housing in low-density,



3
 

single-family houses. Side effects of a low-intensity zoning policy have been to further encourage urban sprawl and a failure to provide any substantial degree of environmental protection. Any future policy that attempts to control growth must deal effectively with the problem of exclusion. In setting up a policy to direct growth, we must provide associated policies which guarantee that such controls will not be exclusionary.

Goal: To guide the form, location and timing of growth in order to protect the natural environment, enhance the man-made environment and establish living and working environments that are properly provided with a full range of services and facilities within appropriate portions of the Quakertown Area.

Objectives:

(1)	To recognize that a certain amount of  growth is inevitable and imminent.
It is the  intent of the comprehensive  plan  and  the  zoning  ordinance  ta
·provide  areas  sufficient  to  accommodate  the  anticipated  need far  a
variety of housing types and densities and far nanresidentiai uses for the 1990 to 2000 period.	·

(2)	To direct mare intensive residential and nonresidential development into Development Areas where supportive services and facilities can be economically  and efficiently  provided.

 
(3)
 
Ta limit development in Reserve Areas ta law intensity, rural uses where supportive services and facilities cannot or should not be provided at this time.
 

(4)	Ta recognize that, other than areas used or intended far higher density housing and intensive nonresidential uses, the Quakertown Area is essentially rural or semi-rural in character. Planning efforts shall protect this - character while providing far anticipated new development in appropriate locations.

 
(5)



(6)



(7)



(8)


(9)



(10)
 
Ta ensure that land designated for mare intensive residential and nonresidential uses are areas currently served or which are intended ta be served by infrastructure.

To base any further expansion of higher density residential or nonresidential areas on demonstrated need for expansion and on specific and committed improvements in infrastructure.

To recognize that responsibility for improvements to the Quakertown Area's road system is shared by municipalities, the Commonwealth and developers.

To develop programs and procedures that will coordinate the provision for all infrastructure.

To coordinate provision of services with new development  and to take steps to bring existing deficiencies in services and facilities up to meet needs of current residents. '

To recognize that changes in federal and state funding programs have decreased funds available for services and facilities at a time of increased demand due ta the rate and magnitude of development and to develop new methods of funding services and facilities to meet needs of current and future  residents.



4
 


b.	Environmental Protection, Open Space and Historic Preservation

We have come to realize that man is an inseparable part of the environment. Where man takes an action intended to improve the quality of his life, whether it be the development of a farm, subdivision or shopping center, we now recognize that there will be environmental impacts, many of which will be adverse. Because we operate In a closed ecological system, adverse environmental impacts eventually feed back through the system and affect the quality of life. Water pollution, soil erosion and pesticides are all examples of such impacts within the system.

We  may look  upon the environment  as a common  or public  good.	An environment of high quality Is deserved and desired by all. The environment to be protected iS both natural and man-made and Its protection involves many considerations.	Article 1-27 of the Pennsylvania Constitution guarantees all citizens the right to clean air, pure water and the preservation of natural, scenic, tiistorlc ·and aesthetic values  of the environment.	Municipalities have the responsibility of protecting natural features of the landscape and providing for open space under the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.	The  constitution  and  the  code  form  the  basis  for  open  space requirements and municipal environmental  regulations.	In exercising this · responsibility,  municipalities  ·must  balance  the  rights  of  the  public  to environmental protection with individual property rights. The built environment also   deserves    protection.	This  includes  the  character  of  residential neighborhoods and the municipality's historic resources.

Goal: To protect the people's right to clean air, pure water and the other natural and historic resources of our environment and to guarantee a quality environment for present and future residents in the Quakertown Area.

Objectives:

(i)	To protect specific natural features of the landscape through natural resource standards incorporated in zoning and  subdivision/land development ordinances.

(2)	To conserve the Quakertown Area's groundwater supply through sewage facilities planning, water resources planning, effective stormwater management, enforcement of sound development standards and promotion of proper site design.

(3)	To require evaluation of environmental impacts of certain planning, zoning and development decisions and to minimize adverse environmental impacts through sound design and proper planning.

(4)	To ensure proper collection, treatment and disposal of wastewater and to remedy conditions where pollution exists. Water supplies must be husbanded and protected from contamination and depletion. To achieve this, water that eventually becomes effluent should be used when feasible, to recharge the groundwater resources.

(5)	To require usable open space in intensive residential developments that is adaptable for active and passive recreation.

(6)	To support state and federal programs that result in the continuation of open space in the municipalities.





5
 


(7) To support efforts that will protect  and enhance historic structures and areas of the Quakertown Area.

(8)	To protect the character and enhance the quality of Quakertown Area's villages through appropriate land planning techniques and ordinance standards.

(9)	To foster state and national registration of structures and sites that are of historic significance and to protect by similar means the immediate area surrounding these landmarks.

c.	Residential Development

Continued residential development must be coupled with the necessary expansion of a full range of services and facilities. A variety of housing types at appropriate densities to meet the needs and desires of a broad population should ·be permitted in various areas.                                 ·

In addition to a variety of housing types and densities, a diversity' of housing prices will meet needs of current and future residents of the Quakertown Area. Although development standards and review procedures have some affect on housing prices, the national economy, policies of major financial institutions, and developers' market strategies and profit expectations are the primary and controlling factors that affect the final price of a house. Affordable housing will require cooperative efforts of private industry as well as various levels of government. In any such effort, affordable housing must be structurally sound, attractive and integrated with more conventional housing to avoid social stratification Of neighborhoods.

Goal: To promote adequate, safe and sound housing for present and future residents regardless of socio-economic characteristics.

Objectives:

(1)	To ensure that the zoning ordinance provides for a variety of housing types and that sufficient land is designated for higher density use to accommodate a fair share of regional housing growth between 1990 and 2000.

(2)	To incorporate appropriate design and improvement requirements in subdivision and land development ordinances to ensure safe and healthy residential environments.

(3)	To adopt flexible site development requirements and to encourage use
Of cost effective technology  and materials.

(4)	To provide the low and moderate income housing density bonuses in zoning ordinances in order to encourage developers to produce more affordable housing.

(5)	To permit mixed land uses which could provide opportunity  for  more affordable housing.

(6)	To permit emergency shelter facilities and group homes in appropriate areas.

(7) To permit accessory apartments in residential areas for  elderly  and disabled relatives.



6
 


(8)       To encourage efforts to preserve and rehabilitate existing-housing stock.

{9)     To require evaluation of zoning change requests to determine the impact on the mix of housing opportunities and accommodation of a fair share of regional housing growth.

{1O) To ensure that new higher density residential development is located in areas with needed and desired infrastructure.

(11)	To ensure that over-all new residential development includes a variety of housing types and intensities to provide for balance and diversity in the housing stock.

(12)	To  cooperate  with  private  efforts  to  provide  affordable  housing  that  is attractive, structurally  sound and integrated into the community.

(13)	To encourage use of cluster and mixed residential forms of development to protect vulnerable natural features, provide for open space, permit better site design, increase housing opportunities and 'minimize site development costs.

d.	Nonresidential   Development

A balanced variety of land uses is important for the Quakertown Area. Residential and nonresidential uses complement each other. Nonresidential uses provide employment, shopping and service opportunities for the residents.  Residents provide a portion <if the labor force and local markets. Although nonresidential uses place burdens on the road system and other services, these uses generate revenues for  municipalities, the school district  and municipal authorities.

Decisions related to the expansion of any commercial, office or industrial zoning district should be made on locational considerations as well as the need for additional capacity as determined by the municipal officials. These considerations would include proper access, road capacity (including existing traffic, traffic generated by the proposed development, other developments in the area and background traffic growth), availability of sewer and water services and compatibility with surrounding land uses.

Programs to improve conditions in areas where improvement is warranted should be encouraged and supported where such programs are initiated and funded by nonresidential property owners, developers and businessmen.

Goal: To support and encourage nonresidential developments compatible with the essentially residential character of the municipalities and which have minimal impact on the highway network and other services and to encourage improvement programs in appropriate areas.

Objectives:

(1)	To encourage concentration of convenience retail uses at selected areas near  residential  developments.

(2)	To discourage strip commercial  development.

{3) To permit industrial and commercial uses in designated areas with due regard for protection of neighboring land uses.





7
 

(4)	To require high standards to control nuisances such as objectionable odors, noise, smoke and hazardous material of any kind.

(5)	To encourage  high quality  office, commercial and industrial development.

(6)	To concentrate nonresidential development In areas zoned for such uses and which contain adequate water, sewer, drainage and highway facilities.

(7) To require full evaluation of requests to expand nonresidential areas in order to determine the impacts on municipal services, highway network and natural features of the landscape.

(8)	To support, encourage and assist joint efforts of nonresidential property owners, developers and businessmen to improve conditions In commercial and industrial areas.

(9)	To foster continued use and revitalization of the Quakertown Borough center as an area of compatible mixed uses which are typical of a traditional town center.

e.	Recreation Facilities

Recreation is an important part of a person's life as an individual and a member of the community. Active recreation improves physical well being, develops skills and confidence and teaches team work. Passive recreation brings an appreciation of the natural environment. Recreation facilities are key components of the quality of life in the Quakertown Area.

Goal:	To provide recreational opportunities, including active and passive recreation facilities, for municipal residents of all ages.

Objectives:

(1)	To implement park and recreation plans  in municipalities that have prepared and formally adopted such plans and to encourage preparation of park and recreation plans in other municipalities.

(2)	To cooperate among participating municipalities and the school  district to avoid the unnecessary  duplication of facilities.

(3)	To revise the Quakertown Area Linked Open Space Study so that links would be located adjacent to collector roads where appropriate.

(4)	To refer to the Quakertown Area Linked Open Space Study during review of subdivisions and land development proposals and discuss with developers' incorporation of identified links into development plans.

(5) To recognize that in rapidly growing areas, such as the Quakertown Area, that open space, parks and recreation facilities are important improvements and are vital aspects of any development proposal. Ordinance requirements for these improvements and fees to provide municipal-scale facilities are appropriate methods of addressing recreational needs of the Quakertown Area. Such requirements, under the provisions of Section 503(11) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, should be included in municipal subdivision and land development ordinances.




8
 


f.	Sewage Facilities - Water Facilities

Sewer and water systems are two critical elements needed to support more intensive residential and nonresidential development. Where soils are suitable for the renovation of effluent, on-site services are adequate to serve low-density, rural forms of development. Sewer and water  services should be considered utility resources with limited capacities. Expansion of these services in terms of capacities should be based on projected need. Expansion of service areas should be a logical progression from areas of existing services into areas where other needed infrastructure exists or is planned to be located. Premature extension of services beyond such areas diminishes the capability to plan for and provide other needed services and to achieve environmental protection, land use and growth management goals.

Goal: To use sewer and water services as methods of  implementing housing projections and land use goals included in the comprehensive plan update.

Objectives:

(1)	To base sewer and water facilities planning (capacities and service areas) on projections and land use goals of the comprehensive plan and guidelines of the municipal sewage facilities plan (Act 537).

(2)	To coordinate expansion of these services with planning for all critical infrastructure.

(3)	To ensure that, in efforts to recharge  groundwater  resources, the quality of water is acceptable.

(4)	To affirm that uses permitted under this zoning ordinance are based on goals and land use guidelines included in the comprehensive plan as well as changing municipal needs as identified by elected officials and planning commissions and that access to sewer and water facilities does not justify a change in land use.

g.	Highway Network

The relationship between the highway network and land use is strong and direct. The road system plays a role in influencing over-all growth within the Quakertown Area and development of individual properties. A good highway network _not only provides access to homes, work, shopping and recreation, but also provides a means for business and industry to acquire materials and to reach their markets.

Conversely, land use can directly impact the ability of highways to function. Intense land uses directed to roadways that are not designed to accommodate large traffic volumes or to roadways with limited capacity due to current use will have detrimental impacts on the road. Improper matching of intensive land uses and limited capacity roads will slow the flow of traffic and result in hazardous conditions. An inefficient use of the public's investment in the highways will also result.

Traffic conditions, to a large degree, result from the Quakertown Area's location in the greater region. Much of the traffic passes through the area and has neither local origins nor destinations. Growth in the surrounding greater region adds traffic to the road network. Traffic would increase in the Quakertown Area even in the improbable event that development would end.





9
 

Goal: To protect, maintain and improve the carrying capacity o1 the Quakertown Area's highway network and to make improvements that will eliminate or avoid hazardous conditions.

Objectives:

(1)	To enhance specific standards, criteria and procedures for traffic impact analysis in land use ordinances and to require an evaluation of the impact on the  capacity of the road system for conditional uses, special exceptions and zoning change requests.

(2) To evaluate the Impact on the road system, to identify needed off-site improvements and to avoid hazardous conditions for major  subdivisions and  land developments.

 
(3)


(4)



(5)

(6)
 
To  develop  a  capital  improvements  program  for  .needed  highway
·impro.vements.

To develop funding programs whereby costs of needed improvements are shared by municipalities, the Commonwealth, adjacent municipalities and developers.

To implement the Quakertown Area Traffic Analysis of 1987.

To undertake an Environmental Impact Study which will identify alternative solutions to the traffic congestion in the Quakertown Area.
 

(7) To participate in efforts to improve the Routes 313/663 corridor through the-central and upper parts of Bucks County.

(B) To cooperate with public agencies or private interest groups in efforts to establish public transportation systems or transportation management associations to reduce pressure on the road system.

h.	Municipal and School District Services

Demands for municipal and school district services and improvements have increased with development, the disappearance  o1 state and federal programs and changing requirements of Commonwealth statutes. The municipallties and school district will provide needed services and construct desired facilities on a financially responsible basis.

Goal: To provide needed and desired services within constraints of fiscal abillties. Objectives:
(1)	To strengthen the tax base by encouraging the development of a variety
o1 complementary  nonresidential  uses in appropriate locations.

(2)	To cooperate in the management of solid waste with Bucks County and other participating municipalities under Act  101 of 1988.

(3)	To avoid duplication of facilities and procurement of materials through cooperation with surrounding municipalities.

(4)	To require that developers contribute a fair share o1 costs of new services and facilities that result from rapid growth in the Quakertown Area.




10
 


(5)	To identify areas where new school sites may be needed and work with developers to reserve these site for future  school  uses.

i.	Haycock  Township

It is recognized that the rate of growth in Haycock Township has been slow and the amount has been small. The character of the community is rural. Human settlements are small villages. Services which foster urban or suburban development are nonexistent. Large land areas are owned by the state and county governments and are set aside for park, recreation and conservation purposes. Small farms exist where the terrain is not steep, heavily forested, scattered with boulders or covered with wetland or floodplain soils. In fact, much of Haycock Township has physical limitations much more severe than other portions of the Quakertown Area. it is recognized that Haycock Township is not in the path of development. However, the legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has placed certain responsibilities on the Township government, as specified in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, related to the accommodation cf reasonable land uses. The Township's planning and zoning efforts have balanced these responsibilities with the unique character and limitations of the community.

Goal: To maintain the rural character of Haycock Township and to meet the land use planning responsibilities as mandated by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

Objectives:

(1)	To designate an adequate amount of land for all necessary housing types amj in a sufficient amount to provide for a fair share of the regional housing growth based on Bucks County projections.

(2)	To designate appropriate areas for nonresidential land uses which will have minimal impact on the community.

(3)	To protect the unique natural features of the Township while accommodating a reasonable level of development.

(4)	To protect and enhance the character of the community and the life style that is unique to Haycock Township.

Section  106	Enactment and Applicabilitv

This Ordinance, prepared by the municipalities participating in the Quakertown Area Planning Program, was enacted by the Governing Body of the individual municipality under the provisions of Section 608 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. The Ordinance is administered by the Governing Body, the planning commission, the zoning officer, and the zoning hearing board of the individual municipality under the further provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code for the land area within the municipality as illustrated on the municipal zoning map incorporated in this Ordinance. The Quakertown Area Planning Committee shall serve the municipality in an advisory capacity under Article XIV of this Ordinance and Article XI of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.











11
 



































































12
 


ARTICLE  II.	DEFINITIONS

Section 200	General

a.	Unless a contrary intention clearly appears, the following words and phrases shall have for the purpose of this Ordinance the meanings given in the following clauses.

b.	For the purpose of this Ordinance, words and terms used herein  shall be interpreted as follows:

 
{1)

(2)

{3)



(4)

(5)

(6)



(7)

(8)


(9)


{10)


(11)


(12)



13.
 
Words used in the present tense include the future. The singular includes the plural.
.T	he word "person" includes an individual, firm, corporation, partnership, company, association, or government entity; including a trustee, a receiver, an assignee or a similar representative.

The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel". The term "shall" is mandatory.
The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be occupied."

The word "Municipal" or "Municipality" means Haycock Township.

The words "Governing Body" refer to the Board of Supervisors of Haycock  Township.

The word "Commission" and the words "Planning Commission" always mean the Planning Commission of Haycock Township.

The words "Area Planning Committee', "Planning Committee" or "Committee" mean the Quakertown Area Planning Committee.

The words "Zoning Hearing Board" always mean the Zoning Hearing Board of Haycock Township.

The words "Quakertown Area"  refer to the area comprising  the  Boroughs of Quakertown, Richlandtown and Trumbauersville and the Townships of Haycock,  Mmord and Richland.

The words "Municipal Plan" refer to the Quakertown Area Comprehensive Plan adopted by Haycock Township.
 

c.	Any word or term not defined herein shall be used with a meaning of standard usage.

Section 201	Accessory

a.	Accessory Building:  See Section 209.b.

b.	Accessory Use:  See Section 280.b.





13
 

Section 202	Alley

A right of-way which provides secondary service access for vehicles to the side or rear of abutting  properties.

Section 203	Alterations

As applied to a building or structure, a change or rearrangement in the structural parts, or an enlargement or diminution, whether by extending on a side or by Increasing in height, or the moving from one location or position to another.

Section 204	Area

a.	Lot Area: The area contained within the property lines of the individual parcels of land shown on a subdivision plan or required by this Ordinance, excluding any area within an existing or designated future street right-of-way, or the area of any easement which would interfere with the proposed use. In addition, the minimum lot area does not include any area designated as open space ,under the requirements of Section 501, Site Capacitv Calculations and Section 502 Table of Pertormance Standards.

b.	Floor Area: The sum of the areas of the several floors of the building or structure, including areas used for human occupancy or required for the conduct of the business or use, and basements, attics, and penthouses, as measured from the exterior faces of the walls. It does not include cellars, unenclosed or  screened porches, attics not used for human occupancy, nor any floor space in an accessory building nor in the main building intended or designed for the parking of motor vehicles in order to meet the parking requirements of this Ordinance, nor any such floor space intended and designed for accessory heating and ventilating equipment.

Section 205	Authority

A body politic and corporate created pursuant to the Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No.
164)	known as the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945."

Section 206	Basement

A story partly under ground, but having one-half or more of its height (measured from floor to ceiling) above the average finished grade level of the adjoining ground. A basement shall be counted as a story for the purposes of height measurement or for the determination of square footage or floor area only if the vertical distance between the ceiling and the average level of the adjoining ground is more than four (4) feet, or if it is used for business or dwelling purposes.

Section 207	Board

Any body granted jurisdiction under  this Ordinance or under the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code {Act 247, as amended by Act 170) to render final adjudications.

Section  208	Boarder, Roomer: or Lodger

A person occupying any room or group of rooms forming a single, habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes, and paying compensation for such room or rooms by prearrangement for a week or more at a time to an owner or operator. Any person occupying such room or rooms and paying such compensation without prearrangement for less than a week at a time shall be classified for purposes of this Ordinance not




14
 


as a roomer, boarder, or lodger but as a guest of a commercial lodging establishment (motel, hotel, inn, guest  house).

Section 209	Building

a.	Building: A structure under roof, used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, or property. The word "building" shall include any part thereof.

b.	Building, Accessoiy: A subordinate building located on the same lot as a principal building and clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal building. Any portion of a principal building devoted or intended to be devoted to an accessory use is not an accessory building.

c.	Building, Principal:	A building in which is conducted, or is intended to be conducted, the principal use of the lot on which it is located.

Section 210	Building Height

A vertical distance measured from the elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the building ta the highest point of the roof .or the structure.

Section 211	Building Setback Line

The line parallel to the street line at a distance therefrom  equal to  the  depth  of the minimum front yard required for the district in which the lot is located. For exceptions, see Section ·
243.e	Lane Lots.

Section 212	Building Spacing

The minimum distance between two buildings. The minimum building spacing shall be measured from the outermost wall or projection, including bay windows, chimneys, flues, columns, ornamental features, cornices and gutters.

Section 213	Campsite

A plot of ground within a recreational camping park intended for the accommodation of a recreational vehicle, tent or other individual camping unit an a temporary basis.    ·

Section 214	Cellar

A story partly underground and having more than one-half of its height (measured from floor ta ceiling) below the average finished grade level of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be counted as a story for the purposes of height measurement or for the determination of square footage or floor area, nor shall it be used for dwelling, office or business purposes.

Section 215	Cold Frame

A small, temporary structure covered with glass or some other transparent material used ta protect plants. A cold frame which remains on the ground for more than three (3) months in a calendar year shall be considered a gr enhouse  (See Section 234).

Section 216	Conditional Use

A use permitted in a particular zoning district pursuant to the provisions  of  Sections  401.c
and 11OB of this Ordinance.





15
 

Section 217	Condominium

Real estate, portions of which are designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of those portions. Real estate is not a condominium unless the undivided interests in the common elements are vested in the unit owners.

A condominium is a unit with all of the following characteristics:

a.	·The unit  may  be any  permitted  land use.	A condominium  is an ownership arrangement, not a land use.

b.	All or a portion of the exterior open space and any community interior spaces are owned and maintained in accordance with the Pa. Uniform Condominium Act 68 Pa. C.S.A. Section 3101 et seq.. and in accordance with the provisions for open space, roads, or other development features in this Ordinance and the Municipal Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.

Section 218	Decision

Final adjudication of any board or other body granted jurisdiction under this Ordinance  or the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247, as amended by Act 170) to do so, either by reason of the grant of exclusive jurisdiction or by reason of appeals from determinations. All decisions shall be appealable to the court of common pleas of the county and  judicial  court wherein the municipality lies.

Section 219	Density

Density is a measure of the number of dwelling units per unit of area. It shall be expressed in dwelling units per acre. The measure is arrived at by dividing the number of dwelling units by the net buildable site area. See Section 502 Table of Performance Standards for the density requirements for the various districts and Section 501 Site Capacity Calculations for the calculations used to determine the net buildable site area.

Section 220	Determination

Final action by an officer, body or agency charged with the administration of this Ordinance or applications thereunder, except the following:

a.	The Governing Body;

b.	The Zoning Hearing Board

Determinations shall be appealable only to the board designated as having jurisdiction for such appeal.

Section 221	Development

Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.

Section 222	Dwelling

a.	Dwelling: A building containing one or more dwelling units.





16
 


b.	Dwelling Unit: Any room or group of rooms located within a building and forming a single, habitable unit with facilities used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating, by one (1) family.

Section 223	Easement

A grant of the specified use of a parcel of land by the property owner to the public, a corporation, or a person.

Section 224	Electric Substation:  See Section 281 Utilities. Section 225	Employee
A person who. is employed or is engaged in gainful activity. This term is utilized in the parking standards of this Ordinance as a measure of the number of parking spaces required. It shall refer to the maximum number of employees on duty at any time, at a place of business, whether the employees are full or part time. If shifts are involved in which two shifts overlap, it refers to the total of both shifts.

Section 226	Establishment

An economic unit, generally at a single physical location, where business is conducted or services or industrial operations performed.

Section 227	Family

One or mare persons related by blood, foster relationship, marriage or adoption and, in addition, any domestic servants or gratuitous guests thereof; or a group of not more than five persons who need not be so related and, in addition, domestic servants or gratuitous guests thereof, who are living together in a single, non-profit dwelling unit and maintaining a common household with single cooking facilities. A roomer, boarder, or lodger shall not be considered a member of the family.

Section 228	Flood Fringe

The portion of the flood plain which is outside the floodway. Section 229	Flood Plain
Areas adjoining streams, ponds or lakes subject to the 100 year-recurrence-interval-flood; or areas identified by the presence of flood plain soils.  Refer to Sections 504.a. and 507.

Section 230	Flood Plain Soils

Areas subject to periodic flooding and listed in the Soil Survey of Bucks and Philadelphia Counties, Pennsylvania, U.S. Department of Agriculture; Soil Conservation Service, July, 1975, as being "on the flood plain" or "subject to flooding".  Refer to Sections 504.b. and 507.

The following soil types are flood plain soils:

 
Alluvial land
Alton gravelly  loam, flooded Bowmansville silt loam Hatboro silt loam
 
Marsh Pope loam
Rowland silt loam
 






17
 

Section 231	Floodway

The portion Of the flood plain including the watercourse channel and adjacent land areas which must be reserved to carry the 100-year-recurrence-interval flood without cumulatively increasing that flood elevation more than one (1) foot.

Section 232	Floor Area:  See Section 204.b. Section 233	Floor Area Ratio
 

area.
 
The ratio of the floor area to the lot area, as determined by dividing the floor area by the lot
 

Section 234	Greenhouse

A building, usually made of glass or some other transparent material, used for the cultivation, storage or protection of plants. A cold frame which remains on the ground for more than three (3) months in a calendar year shall be considered a greenhouse.

Section 235	Hearing

An administrative proceeding conducted by a board pursuant to Section 1109 of this Ordinance.

Section 236	Home Occupation

An activtty for gain customarily carried on in a dwelling, or in a building or structure accessory to a dwelling, clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes.   Refer to Section 404.H1.

Section 237	Hvdrfc Soils

A soil that is saturated, flooded, or ponded long enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions that favor the growth and regeneration of wetlands vegetation. Wetlands vegetation are those plant species that have adapted to the saturated soils and periodic inundations occurring in wetlands. The following soils, classified in the Soil Survey of Bucks and Philadelphia Counties.  Pennsylvania, U.S. Department of  Agriculture,  Soil Conservation Service,
.J	July 1975, are hydric soils:

Bowmansville silt loam Doylestown silt loam Fallsington silt loam Hatboro silt loam Towhee silt loam
Towhee extremely stony silt loam

Section 238	Impervious Su1iace

Impervious surfaces are those surfaces which do not absorb rain. All buildings, parking areas, driveways, roads, sidewalks, and any areas in concrete, asphalt, and packed stone shall be considered impervious surfaces within this definition. In addition, other areas determined by the Municipal Engineer to be impervious within the meaning of this definition shall also be classed as impervious surfaces.







18
 



Section 239	Impervious Surface Ratio

The impervious surface ratio is a measure of the intensity of use of a piece of land. It is measured by dividing the total area of all Impervious surfaces within the site by the net buildable site area

Section 240	Lake

A permanent body of water, naturally occurring or man-made, covering an area of two (2) or more acres.  Refer to Section 504.f.

Section 241	Lake Shore Area

The landside edge of lakes from established shoreline to an upland boundary. Refer to Section  504.g.

Section 242	Livestock

Animals commonly raised on farms such as cows, steers, sheep, goats, pigs, horses, ponies, donkeys or mules.

Section 243	Lot

a.	Lot: A parcel of land, used or set aside and available for use as the site of one or more buildings and any buildings accessory thereto or tor any other purpose, in one ownership and not divided by a street, nor including any land within the right· of-way of a public or private street upon which said lot abuts, even if the ownership to such right-of-way is in the owner of the lot. A lot for the purpose of this Ordinance may or may not coincide with a lot of record.

b.	Lot Area:  See Section 204.a.

c.	Average Lot Area per Dwelling Unit: The average lot area for all dwelling units of a single type. Individual lots may be smaller or larger than the average provided that the average size is maintained and that all other standards of this Ordinance are met.

d.	Corner Lot: A lot which has an interior angle of less than one hundred and thirty­ five (135) degrees at the intersection of two (2) street lines. A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if the tangent to the curve at the points of intersection of the side lot lines intersect with the street lines at an angle of less than one hundred and thirty-five (135) degrees.

e.	Lane Lot: A lot which meets the criteria for an exception to the minimum Jot width.
See Section 522.c.

f.	Through Lot: An interior lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets.

g.	Depth of Lot: The mean distance from the street line of the lot to Its opposite rear line, measured in the general direction of the side lines of the lot.

h.	Lot Width: The minimum distance between side lot llnes at the required minimum building setback.  The width shall be measured in one of the following ways:






19
 


(1)	Where both side lot lines are perpendicular to the street line or where the side lot lines angle in opposite directions, the width is measured parallel to the street line.

(2)	In the case of the lot being located on a curved road or cul-de-sac where the side lot lines angle in opposite directions, lot width shall be measured along the shortest tangent to the arc of the building setback line.

(3)	Where both side lot Jines angle in the same direction and are not perpendicular to the street line, lot width shall be the shortest distance between both side lot lines, measured along a line extending through the intersection of the front yard and a side yard setback lines.

(4)	For a corner lot, the minimum lot width must be met along both streets.


LOT WIDTH CALCULATIONS












Refer: t.o 5-ection 243.h. (1 )


 
r--""""-I
I	I
I	I
I
I
 



L.O	f'Wlt>1l{	Refer to Section 2!!3.h. (3)
 

-------ct..

Refer to Section 243.h.(1)	.  d













MIMMJJ/I\
- fl.air( '{Jr$,!;)

Refer to Section 243.h.(4)

CU.- ·

Refer to Section 243.h.(2) 20
 


Section 244	Lot Lines

a.	Lot Lines: Any boundary line of a lot.

b.	Lot Line. Rear: Any lot line which is parallel to or within forty-five {45) degrees of being parallel to the street line, except for a lot line that is Itself a street line, and except that in the case of a corner lot, the lot line opposite the street line which the front of the principal building faces shall be considered the rear lot line. In the case of a lot having no street frontage or a lot of an odd shape, only the one lot line furthest from any street shall be considered a rear lot line. Where the side property lines of a lot meet in a point, the rear property line shall be assumed to be a line not less than ten (10) feet long, lying within the lot and parallel to the street line.

 








-	- ct-



c.	Lot Line, Side: Any lot line which is not a street line or a rear lot line.

d.	Street Line:  See Section 277. Section 245	Mobile Home
A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that It may be used without a permanent foundation.

Section 246	Mobile Home Lot

A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.

Section 247	Modular Home

A dwelling unit erected on a foundation and made of one or more sections built in a factory. The completed unit must meet the building code which is in effect and is considered to be real property.

Section 248 .	Municipal Engineer

A professional engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appcinted as the engineer for Haycock Township.



21
 

Section 249	Municipal Waste

Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semi-solid or contained gaseous material, resulting from operation of  residential, municipal, commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste in the Solid Waste Management Act from a municipal, commercial or Institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant or air pollution control facility. The term does not include source-separated recyclablematerials.

Section 250	Nonconformities

a.	Nonconforming  Lot:  See Section 800.a.

b.	Nonconforming  Structure:  See Section 800.b.

c.	Nonconforming  Use:  See Section 800.c. Section 251	Open Space
Open space is land used for recreation, resource protection, amenity, or buffers; and is protected by the provisions of this Ordinance and the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance to ensure that it remains in such uses. Open space shall not include land occupied by nonrecreational buildings or structures, roads or road rights-of-way, parking areas  for nonrecreational uses, land reserved for future parking areas for nonrecreational uses, stormwater detention or retention basins, or the yards or lots of dwelling units.

Open space shall be used in accordance with Section 531 Open Space Designation; open space shall be owned and maintained in accordance with Section 534 Ownership of Open Space. Open space recreation uses specified in Section 531.b(3) may contain impervious surfaces. Such impervious surfaces shall be included in the calculation of the impervious surface ratio.

Section 252	Open Space Ratio

The open space ratio is a measure of the intensity of land use. It is arrived at by dividing the total amount of open space within the development by the base site area.

Section 253	Parking

Parking is the temporary storage of motor vehicles. For purposes of this Ordinance, parking is provided for in the following forms:

a.	On-Street Parking: The parking of motor vehicles on a street, in a line parallel to the moving lanes of a street.

b.	Off-Street Parking: The parking of motor vehicles in an area which has direct access to a street via a driveway or accessway, but which is not located on a street.

(1)	Cammon Parking Area:   An off-street  parking lot or garage  designed  to serve three or more dwelling units or nonresidentiai uses.

(a)	Common  Parking  Lot:  An off-street ground level area for the temporary storage of motor vehicles.





22
 


(b)	Common Parking Garage: A deck, building or structure, or part thereof, used for the temporary storage of motor  vehicles. Where there is ground level  parking, It is covered by a roof. Multiple tiers of parking shall be subject to the building height limitations of this Ordinance.

(2)	Private Parking Area: An off-street parking lat or garage designed for the temporary storage of a small number of motor vehicles. It is for use by one or two dwelling units only and is located in close proximity to the dwelling unlt(s) it serves. A private parking area is located on the fee-simple lot which contains the dwelling unit it serves, or is located on the minimum lot area required by this Ordinance, whether the lot is deeded or for planning purposes only.

(a)	Private Parking Lot: An open, uncovered area for the temporary storage of motor vehicles, owned and operated by the residents
of the nearby dwelling unlt(s).                              ·   .
(b)	Private Parking Garage or Caroort: A structure which is accessory
to, attached to, or part of a dwelling unit which is used for the temporary storage of motor vehicles and owned and operated by the  residents thereof.

(c)	Community Garage: A structure which is accessory to, attached to, or part of a group of attached dwelling units which is used for the temporary storage of motor vehicles and owned and operated by the residents of those units.

c.	Spillover Parking: An area which  is intended to accommodate the occasional need for parking beyond the requirements of the residents of the dwelling unit. The need for spillover parking is created by service vehicles and other occasional visitors.

Section 254	Performance Standard Subdivision

A type of cluster development in which the developer may choose to develop a variety of housing types subject to the regulations in Articles IV and V of this Ordinance. Performance standard subdivisions allow the grouping or clustering of dwelling units, permitting a variety of housing types to encourage better, more flexible designs. The subdivision as a whole must meet prescribed standards for open space, density and impervious surfaces.

Section 255	Planned Residential Development

Planned Residential Development shall be considered a special district which may be granted to a developer for the purpose of providing residential and nonresidential uses in a community setting. See Article VII.      ·

Section 256	Pond

A permanent body of water, naturally occurring or man-made, covering an area of up to two (2) acres.  Refer to Section 504.f.                                              '

. Section 257	Pond Shore Area

The landside edge of ponds from established shoreline to an upland boundary. Refer to Section  504.h.




23
 

Section 258	Principal

a.	Prlncjpal Bujldlnq  See Section 209.c.

b.	Principal Use See Section 280.c. Section 259	PubHc Hearing
A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the Governing Body or planning agency, intended to inform and obtain public comment prior to taking action in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247, as amended by Act 170.)

Section 260	PubHc Meeting

A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July_ 3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84) known as the "Sunshine Act'.                                                                                                       -

Section 261	PubHc Notice

Notice published once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be more than thirty (30) days and the second publication shall not be less than seven (7) days from the date of the hearing.

Section 262	Recreational Vehicle

A vehicle_ or piece of equipment intended primarily as temporary living quarters for recreational camping or travel use, whether self-powered or designed to be pulled or carried. The basic entities are, but are not limited to, the following: travel trailer, truck-mounted camper, motor home, folding tent camper, and autos, buses or trucks adapted for vacation use.

Section 263	Report

Any letter, review, memorandum, compilation or similar wdting made by any body, board, officer or consultant other than a solicitor to any other body, board, officer or consultant for the purpose of assisting the recipient of such report in the rendering of any decision or determination. All reports shall be deemed recommendatory and advisory only and shall not be  binding  upon their recipient, board, officer, body or agency, nor shall any appeal lie therefrom. Any report used, received or considered by the body, board, officer or agency rendering a  determination   or decision shall be made available for inspection to the applicant and all other parties to any proceeding upon request, and copies thereof shall be provided at cost of production.

Section 264	Bight-of-Way

a.	Right-of-Way: Land set aside for use as a street, alley, or other means of travel.

b.	Existing Right-of-Way:. The legal right-of-way as established by the Commonwealth or other appropriate governing authority and currently in existence.

c.	Future Right-of-Way: The right-of-way deemed necessary to provide adequate width for future street improvements. Future right-of-way widths are designated in Section 524.






24
 


Section 265	Sewer

a.	Private Sewer:	An on-lot sewage disposal system providing for disposal of effluent for one building and its accessory buildings on a single lot.

b.	Public Sewer: Any municipal or privately owned sewer system in which sewage is collected from more than one lot and piped to an approved sewage disposal facility. It may also be referred to as "off-lot" or "off-site" sewer. This shall include capped sewers when installed to municipal specttications.

Section 266	§jgn:   See Section 901. Section  267	Site
A parcel or parcels of land intended to have one or more buildings or intended to be subdivided into one or more lots.

Section 268	Site Area

All land area within the site as defined in the deed. This area shall be from an actual site survey rather than from a deed description.

Section 269	Site Area. Base

The area of a tract of land remaining after subtracting land which is not contiguous, land previously subdivided, future road rights-of-way and existing utility rights-of-way from the site area See Section 501 for the specific calculations.

Section 270	Site Area. Net Suildable

A calculated area upon which the density, the open space ratio and the impervious surface ratio requirements for the applicable district are computed. It can be determined for a particular tract of land by completing the calculations found in Section 501.

Section 271	Site Capacity

The maximum number of dwelling units, the maximum impervious surfaces, the buildable portion of the site, and the minimum open space as calculated under the provisions of Section 501 Site Capacitv Calculatjons.

Section 272	Special Exception

A use permitted in a particular zoning district pursuant to the provisions of Sections 401 (b) and 1107 of this Ordinance.

Section 273	Steep Slopes

Areas where the average slope exceeds eight (8) percent which, because of this slope, are subject to high rates of stormwater runoff and therefore erosion and flooding. Refer to Section 504.c.

Section 274	Storv

That part of a building located between a floor and the floor or roof next above it. The first story of a building is the lowest story having one-half (1/2) or more of its wall area above average finished grade level. A half-story is a story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than two feet above the floor.



25
 

Section 275	Story. Ground

That story with its floor level immediately above the average finished grade level of the adjoining ground at any particular point or side of the building.

Section 276	Street

A public or private way used, or intended to be used, for passage or travel by motor vehicles. Streets are further classified by the functions they perform:

a.	Thoroughfares:

(1)	Expressway--designed for large volumes of high-speed traffic with access limited to grade-separated intersections.

(2)	Arterial Highways--designed for large volumes of high speed traffic with
·access to abutting properties restricted.	·

{3) Collector Highways--designed to carry a moderate volume of fast-moving traffic from primary and secondary streets to arterial highways, with access to abutting properties restricted.

b.	Local Streets

(1)	Primary Streets--designed to carry a moderate volume of traffic, to intercept rural roads and secondary streets, to provide routes to collector highways, and to provide access to abutting properties.

(2)	Rural Roads and Secondary Streets--designed to provide access to abutting properties and to primary streets.

(3) Marginal Access Street--a secondary street parallel to and adjacent to an expressway, arterial highway, or collector highway and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through-traffic.

Section 2n	Street Line

The dividing line between the Street and the lot. The street line shall be the same as the existing right-of-way provided that where a future right-of-way width for a road or street has been established, then that width shall determine the location of the street line.

Section 278	Structure

Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.

Section  279	Tree Protection Zone CTPZl

An area that is radial to the trunk of a tree in which no construction activity shall occur. The tree protection zone shall be fifteen (15) feet from the trunk of the tree to be retained, or the distance from the trunk to the dripline, whichever is greater. Where there is a group of trees or woodlands, the tree  protection zone shall be the aggregate of the protection zones for the individual trees.  Refer to Section 504.e.                                    ·








26
 


----- TPZ	.

 
TRfE CLUSTER




Section 280	Use
 


 
TYPICAL TREE
 


l;-TPZ	.,

 
TRfE WITH  DRJPllNE
LESS THAN 1.5 HET
 

a.	Use: Any activity, occupation, business or operation carried on, or intended to be carried on, in a building or other structure or on a tract of land.

b.	Use. Accessory:  A use located on the same Jot with a principal use, and clearly incidental or subordinate to, and in connection with, the principal use.

c.	Use, Principal: The main use on a lot. Section 281	Utilities
Those services customarily rendered by public utility corporations, municipalities, or municipal authorities, in the nature of electricity, gas, telephone, water and sewerage, including the appurtenances used in connection with the supplying of such services (buildings, wires, pipes, poles and the like).

Section 282	Variance

Relief granted pursuant to the provisions of Section 1106 of this Ordinance. Section 283	Wetlands
Those areas that are inundated and saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas.  Refer to Section 504.i.

Section 284	Wetland Margin

The transitional area between the wetland boundary and the upland environment measured from the outer limit of the wetland vegetation to an upland boundary. Refer to Section 504.j.

Section 285	Woodlands

Areas comprised of one-quarter (1/4) acre or more of wooded land .where the largest trees measure at least six (6) Inches dbh (diameter at breast height or four and one-haif feet above the ground). Woodlands are also a grove of trees forming one canopy where ten (1O) or more trees


27
 

measure at least ten (10) inches dbh.  The woodland shall be measured from the dripllne of the outer trees.  Refer to Section 504.d.

Section 286	Yard

a.	Yard: An open space unobstructed from the ground up except for permitted projections and plantings, on the same lot with a structure, extending along a lot line or street line and inward to the structure. The size of a required yard shall be measured as the shortest distance between the structure and a lot line or street line.

b.	Yard, Front: A yard between a structure and a street line and extending the entire length of the street line. Jn the case of a corner lot, the yards extending along all streets are front yards. In the case of a lot other than a corner lot that fronts on more than one street, the yards extending along all streets are front yards.

c.	Yard. Rear: A yard between a structure and a rear lot line and eXtending the entire length Of the rear Jot line.

d.	Yard. Side: A yard between a structure and a side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard. In the case of a Jot having no street frontage or a lot of odd shape, any yard that is not a front yard or a rear yard shall be considered a side yard.









































28
 


ARTICLE  Ill.	ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS

Section 300	Establishment of Districts

The Quakertown Area is hereby divided into districts of different types, each type being of such number, shape, kind and area, and of such common unity of purpose and adaptability of use, that are deemed most suitable to carry out the objectives of this Ordinance and the Comprehensive Plan.

Section 301	Classes of Districts

For the purpose of this Ordinance, the Quakertown Area is hereby divided into districts which shall be designated as follows:

 
RP RA RD FC VC-1 SAC SAL SAM SRH VC-2 URL PC
cc
SC
Pl Ext



Section 302
 
Resource  Protection Rural Agricultural Rural Development Future Commercial Village Center-1
Suburban Residential Conservation Suburban Residential Low Suburban Residential Medium Suburban Residential High
Village Center-2
Urban Residential Low Planned Commercial Central Commercial Select Commercial Planned Industrial Extraction
Village Expansion (overlay)  District Arterial Corridor (overlay) District

Zoning Districts Mao
 

Districts are bounded and defined as shown in the zoning maps entitled "Haycock Township" which are contained in this Ordinance and which, with all explanatory matters thereon, are hereby made part of this Ordinance.

Section 303	Interpretation of District Boundaries

Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the district as indicated on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:

a.	Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately  coinciding with  the center lines of streets, highways, railroad lines, or streams, such center lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.

b.	Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately coincide with lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries; or where district boundaries are extensions of lot lines or connect the intersections of lot lines, such lines shall be said district boundaries.

c.	Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to center lines of streets or highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the zoning map.



29
 

Section 304	Statements of Pumoses and Intent for the Districts

a.	Reserve Areas--The purposes of the zoning districts of reserve areas are to maintain the rural character of the area for the foreseeable future; to preserve large environmentally sensitive areas; to protect and enhance the character of existing rural villages; and to protect the general scenic quality of the area.

(1)	Resource Protection District (RP)--The purpose of this district is to protect areas consisting largely of sensitive natural features such as woodlands, steep slopes, scenic areas, wetlands, floodplains, and lakes and ponds. Intensities are such as to ensure that these resources are permanently protected.

(2)	Rural Agricultural District (RA)--The purpose of this district is to provide standards for low-intensity development in rural areas until these areas are  both  needed  for  development  and  provided  with  utilities.    The
·	intensity of use is intended to be such that development which does occur will not require urban services and will not present or create problems for future development.

(3)	Rural Development District (RD)--The purpose of this district is to provide for limited, low-density residential development in areas which are not now served with public sewers or for which a need for higher intensity development does not exist.

(4)	Future Commercial District (FC)--lt is the purpose of this district to reseJVe future commercial sites until they are provided with utilities and made suitable for commercial development by the provision of adequate service roads and traffic controls. It is intended that once the site is proposed with suitable facilities, it will be changed at the request of the owner to Planned Commercial (PC), Select Commercial (SC), or Planned Industrial (Pl}.

(5)	Village Center-1 District (VC-1)--The purpose of this district is to protect the character of existing villages in rural areas. A variety of residential and small-scale commercial uses are permitted to continue the existing land use pattern. The intensities are intended to allow in-fill development that is compatible with existing conditions in the villages.

b.	Development Areas--These areas are established  to accommodate the anticipated growth of the Quakertown Area for a specific period of time. The zoning districts of development areas provide areas for residential, commercial, industrial and other nonresidential uses. The infrastructure needed to sustain these developed activities must be available within the development areas. The purpose of the development areas is to control and regulate development so as to coordinate the Quakertown Area's growth with the provision of public services and facilities. Within this area, development is encouraged  to promote the efficient use of land and a well balanced community.

(1)	Suburban Residential Conservation District (SRC)-lt Is the purpose of this district to preserve natural features and resources such as woodlands, steep slopes, wetlands, floodplains and lakes and ponds in areas where such features predominate. Residential uses are permitted an very large lots or where they are clustered with large areas of open space.

(2)	Suburban Residential Low District (SRL)--lt is the purpose of this district to provide for low-intensity suburban residential development.  A variety



30
 


of housing types are encouraged, as are clustering and the provision of open spaces. The intensities are intended to blend with existing residential uses and protect natural features and resources.

(3)	Suburban Residential Medium District {SRM)-lt is the  purpose  of  this district to provide for medlum·intensity residential development. A variety of residential uses are encouraged, as are clustering and the provision of open spaces. The medium intensities are designed to encourage good residential development  near major roads.

(4)	Suburban Residential High District (SRH)··lt is the purpose of this district to provide higher intensities of residential development. A variety of residential uses are encouraged. The higher intensities relate to similar uses in adjacent developed areas of easy access and few natural limitations or other appropriate locations.

(5)	· Village Center District (VC-2)-The purpose of this district is to protect the character of  existing  villages  in  Development  Areas.  A  variety  of residential and small-scale commercial uses are permitted to continue the existing  land use pattern.   The intensities are intended to  allow  in-fill
development that is compatible with existing conditions in the villages.

(6)	Urban Residential Low District (URL)-lt is the purpose of this district to retain the urban character of existing residential areas as well as to provide for future residential development in a variety of housing types at appropriate densities.

(7) Planned Commercial* District (PC)--11 is the purpose of this district to provide for the creation and continuation of commercial development in appropriate areas.   Highway-oriented  businesses  may  be required to
provide an access road which is intended to lessen traffic congestion  and
hazards by reducing the number of access points.

(8)	Central Commercial District (CC)--lt is the purpose of this district to provide for the continuation of the commercial core areas which have traditionally served as the business centers of the Quakertown Area.

(9)	Select Commercial* District (SC)--lt is the purpose of this district to provide for the creation and continuation of low intensity commercial and office development in appropriate areas where its effect on adjacent residential land uses must be minimized.  Highway-oriented businesses
may be required to provide an access road which is intended  to  lessen
traffic congestion and hazards by reducing the number of access points.

(1O) Planned Industrial District (Pl)--lt is the purpose of this district to encourage planned industrial, heavy commercial, office or laboratory uses in appropriate  areas. Such development shall be planned as a whole with all uses fronting on an internal street. The intent is to encourage high-quality industrial and commercial development which relates to adjacent residential areas as a good neighbor, with design standards which avoid adverse impacts on neighboring residential developments.	'

c.	Special Purpose* Districts--These districts are intended to provide for a special use or use group which is accommodated most suitably in a separate district, so


* Planned Commercial and Select Commercial districts may be designated  Special Purpose Districts by resolution of the Governing Body.


31
 


that it may be kept distinct from other uses. Special purpose districts may be within either the reserve area or development area.

Extraction District (Ext)-lt is the purpose of this district to provide for the continuation of existing extractive operations and other uses which would otherwise interfere with the development and operation of other land uses.

d.	Overlay Zoning Districts

(1)	Village Expansion (Overlay) District-It is the purpose of this district to provide suitable standards and guidelines for development areas adjacent to existing villages and towns. A major objective is to integrate future development with existing development through appropriate urban design. New developments should be expansions of the villages and towns rather than self-contained neighborhoods.

(2)	Arterial Corridor (Overlay) District--lt is the purpose of this district to provide for convenient access to uses within the district, while promoting consistent and appropriately restrictive management of access to arterial highways in order to maintain their critical local and regional arterial functions for transportation.











































32
 


ARTICLE  IV.	USE REGULATIONS

Section  400	Applicability  of Regulations

Except as provided by law or in this Ordinance, in each district no building, structure, or land shall be used or occupied except for the purposes permitted in Section 403 and for the zoning districts so indicated. On any property, parcel or tract of land, only one (1) principal use shall be permitted, except where specifically permitted by this Ordinance.·

Section  401	Uses by Right, Special Exceptions, Conditional Uses. and Uses Not Permitted

a.	A use listed in Section 403 is permitted by right  in any district denoted by the letter "P" subject to such requirements as may be specttied in Section 404, and after a zoning permit has been issued in accordance with Article X.

b.	A use listed in Section 403 is permitted as a Special Exception in any district
·denoted  by the letter "S,"  provided the Zoning Hearing Board authorizes the
issuance of a zoning permit by the zoning officer, subject to the requirements of Section 404 and Article XI and such further conditions  as said Board may  impose to insure the protection of adjacent uses, or the health, safety  and  general welfare.

c.	A use listed in Section 403 is permitted as a Conditional Use in any district denoted by the letter "C,' provided the Governing Body, having received a recommendation from the Planning Commission, grants the conditional use subject to the requirements of Section 404 and the express standards set forth in Article XI, and such further conditions that the Governing Body may impose to insure the protection of adjacent uses, or the health, safety, or general welfare.

d.	A Planned Residential Development is only permitted in districts denoted by the letters "PRO" in Section 403 when a zoning change is granted by the Governing Body subject to the provisions of Article VII of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, (Act 247, as amended by Act 170) and Article VII of this Ordinance.

e.	A use listed in Section 403. is not permitted in any district denoted by the letter
nNn,

Section 402	Uses Subject to Other Regulations

Uses permitted by right or as special exceptions or conditional uses shall be subject, in addition to use  regulations, to such regulations of yard, lot size, lot width, building area, easements, provisions for off-street parking and loading, and to such other provisions as are specified in other Articles hereof.

In particular, the laws of the Commonwealth and the regulations of the Bucks County Departmen• 0; ealth regarding waste disposal shall be adhered to. Further, no zoning permit shall be issued until approval is obtained from the Buck County Department of Health for sewage disposal or until a certification of the availability of public sewage service is obtained from the servicing authority.











33
 

SECTION  403	TABLE  OF  USE  REGULATIONS

 
A.	AGRICULTURAL  USES	RESERVE
 
DEVELOPMENT
 
SPECIAL
 
 	RP     RA     RD	FC   VC-1
 
SAC   SAL   SAM  SRH  VC-2   URL    PC	CC     SC	Pl 	
 
EXT
 
A1	General Farming	p	p	p	p	p	p	p	p	p	p	N	p	c	p	p	p A2	Nurse	p	p	p	p	p	p	p	p		p	p	p·	p	N	p	p	p A3	Intensive Agriculture	c	p	p	p	N	N	N	N		c	N	N	p	N	N	p	p A4	Forestrv	c	c	c	c	N	c	c	c		c	N	c	c	.c	c	c	c AS	Rldln<i Academv	p	p	p	p	N	p	c	c	c	N	c	p	p	p	p	p A6	Commercial Kennel	c	c	c	c	N	N	N	N		N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N A7	Aaricultural Retail	N	s	N	s	p	N	N	N	N	p	N	p	N	p	N	N
AB	Farm Unit	p	p	p	p	p	P.	p	p	p	p	p	p	p	p	p	p
A9	Farm Suooort Facilitv	N	p	N	c	N	N	N	N	N	p	N	p	N	N	p	N

B.	RESIDENTIAL USES

B1	
Sinale-Familv  Detached	p	p	p	p	p		p	p	p	p	p	p	N	N	N	N		N
B2	Residential  Conversion	p	p	p	p	p		p	p	p	p	p	p	N	p	N	N		N
B3	Roominci or Boardina House	N	N	N	N	s		N	N	s	s	s	s	N	N	N	N		N
B4	V/llaaeTwin	N	N	N	N	p		N	N	N	N	p	N	N	N	N	N		N
BS	SinQle-Familv Detached Cluster	p	p	p	N	N		p	p	p	p	N	N	N	N	N	N		N
B6	Performance  Standard  Subdivison	N	N	N	N	N		p	p	p	p	N	p	N	N	N	N		N
B7	Mobile Home Park	N	N	N	N	N		N	p	p	p	N	N	N	N	N	N		N
BB	Planned Residential Develooment	N	N	N	N	N		PRO	PRO	PRO	PRO	N	N	N	N	N	N		N
B9	Urban DwellinQ	N	N	N	N	N		N	N	N	N	N	p	N	N	N	N		N
610	Life Care Facilitv	N	c	c	N	N		c	c	c	c	c	c	c	c	c	N		N

C.	INSTITUTIONAL AND  RECREATIONAL  USES

C1	Place of Worshio                                 p        p        p        p        p                   p        p        p        p        p        p        p        p        p        p                   p C2	School                                               p        p        p        p       p                   p       p       p        p        p        p       N       N       N       N                 N C3	Commercial School                              N       N       N       N       c            N       N       N       N       c     N       p       p        p       p                  N C4	librarv or Museum                                   N       N       N        N       p                  N       N       p        p        p        p        p       p       p        p                   N
1'J;Y
P = A use permitted by right.	PAD=  A planned residential development js permit1ed, subject to the provisions of Article VI.
 
C =  A  use permitted as a conditional use.
S = A use permitted as a special exeplian
 
N = A use Is not permitted.
 

'.	INSTITUTIONAL AND RECREATIONAL USES

	RESERVE					DEVELOPMENT				SPECIAL
RP	RA	RD	FC	VC-1	S- R--C	SR-- L	S- R- --M--	SR- --H-   V-  C- -2-   U-R- L	PC	CC	SC	Pl	EXT










8





D.	OFFICES

C>1       Office                                                  N        N        N        N        c             N        N        N        c     c     c      p        p        p        p                   N D2    Medical Office                                      p        p        p        p        c             p        p        p        p        c     p        p        p        p        p                   N D3    Office Park                                              N        N        N        N        N                  N        N        N        N        N        N        p       p       c     p                  N

E.	RETAIL AND CONSUMER  SERVICE USES

E1	Retail Shoo                                            N        N        N        N        c              N        N        N        N        c      N        p         p         p        N                   N E2	Large Retail Store                                  N        N        N        N        N                   N        N        N        N        N        N        p        p         N        N                    N E3	Service  Business                                 N        N        N        N        c              N        N        N        N        c      N        p         p         p        N                   N E4	Financial Establishment                        N        N        N        N        c              N        N        N        N        c      N        p        p         p        p                    N ES	Eatina Place                                          N        N        N        N        c              N        N        N        N        c      N        p         p        p         p                    N EB	Drive-In's and Other Eatina Places            N        N        N        N        N                   N        N        N        N        N        N        p        N        N        c              N
=1   Repair Shop                                                N        N        N        N        N                   N        N        N        N      .c     N        p         p        p         p                    N
::a   Funeral Home or Mortuarv                            N        N         N         N         N                    N        N         N         N         c      c     p        p         p         N                     N
;::9    Motel, Hotel and Inn                                   N        N        N        N        N                   N        N        N        N        N        N        p         p        N        N                   N
::10  Indoor Entertainment                                  N        N        N        N        N                   N        N        N        N        N        N         p         p         N        N                     N
::11 Athletic  Facilitv                                           N        N        N         N        N                    N        N         N         N        N        N        p         p         N         p                    N
::12 Outdoor  Entertainment                               N        N        N         N        N                    N        N         N         N        N        N        c      N        N        N                    N
::13 Tavern	N	.    N	N	N	c	N	N	N	N	c	N	p	p	N	N	N 	
 

E.	RETAIL AND  CONSUMER  SERVICE  USES




E14	Lumber Yard	-	N	N	N	N	N		N	N	N	N	N	N	c	N	N	p		N
E15	Veterinatv  Office or Clinic	N	c	N	N	c		N	N	N	N	c	N	p	c	N	p		N
E16	Service Station	N	N	N	N	N		N	N	N	N	N	N	c	c	N	c		N
E17	Car Wash	N	N	N	N	N		N	N	N	N	N	N	p	p	N	N		N
E18	Automotive  Sales	N	N	N	N	N		N	N	N	N	N	N	c	c	N	p		N
E19	Automotive Repair	N	N	N	N	N		N	N	N	N	.N	N	c	c	N.	p		N
1E20	Truck  Sales	N	N	N	N	N		N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	p		N
E21	Parklna Lot or Garaae	N	N	N	N	N		N	N	N	N	N	N	p	p	N	N		N
E22	Multit::le Commercial Use	N	N	N	N	N		N	N	N	N	c	N	c	c	c	N		N
E23	Adult Commercial Uses	N	N	N	N	N		N	N	N	N	N	N	c	c	N	N		N
E24	Outdoor  Motion Picture Establishment	N	N	N	N	N		N	N	N	N	N	N	c	N	N	c		N
E25	Vehicular Track or Course	N	N	N	N	N	.	N	N	N	N	N	N	c	N	N	N		N
E26	Flea Market	N	N	N	N	N		N	N	N	N	N	N	c	N	c	N	N
E27	Dwellino in Combination	N	N	N	N	p		N	N	p	p	p	p	N	p	p	N		N
E28	Auction House	N	N	N	N	N		N	N	N	N	N	N	s	N	N	s		N

F.	UTILITY,  SERVICE  AND  TRANSPORTATION  USES

F1	Utilities                                                      s      s      s      s     s             s     s      s      s      s      s      s      s      s      p                     s F2	Emergency  Services                             c      c      c      c      c              c      c      c      c      c      c      c      c      c      c              N F3	Terminal                                                   N        N        N        N        N                   N        N        N        N        N        N        p         p         N        p                    s F4	Airport or Meliport			N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	s	N

G.	INDUSTRIAL USES

G1    Manufacturina                                         N        N        N        N        N                   N        N        N        N        N        N        N        N        N        p                    N G2    Research                                                N        N        N        N        N                   N        N        N        N        N        N        N        c      N        p                    N G3    Wholesale Business,                                  N        N        N        N        N                   N        N        N        N        N        N        c     N        N        p                    N
Wholesale Storaae, Warehousina
G4    Mini Warehouse                                           N        N        N        N        N                   N        N        N        N      "N        N        p         p         c     p                    N
G5	Prlntlno                                          N        N       N       N       N                  N        N        N        N        N        N        p        p       N        p                   N G6	Contractlna                                            N        N        N       N        N                  N       N        N        N        N       N        p        N        N        p                  N G7	Truck Terminal ·                                  N       N       N        N        N                  N       N       N        N       N       N        p        N        N        N                  N GB	Crafts                                                   N        N        N        N        N                  N       N        N        N        N        N        c     c     N        p                   N G9	Outside Storaae                                       N        N       N       N       N                  N       N        N        N       N       N        N       N       N       p                   N
 


G.	INDUSTRIAL USES

 
RESERVE
 
DEVELOPMENT
 
SPECIAL
 
.R.P.	-R--A-
 
RD	FC	VC-1
 
SRC	SAL   SRM  SRH  VC-2   URL    PC	CC     SC	Pl
 
EXT
 









H.	ACCESSORY USES





























1 See Section 404.HB.
 

Section 404	Use Regulations

A.	Agricultural Uses

A 1	General Farming

The production of agricultural, horticultural, arboriculture, viticultural and dairy products; the keeping of livestock, poultry, and the products thereof; bee raising and the products thereof; and all buildings (barns, sheds, silos, etc.) which are associated with this use.

a.	This principal use may be combined with the following other principal agricultural uses; A2 Nursery, A4 Forestry, AS Riding Academy, and A6 Commercial Kennel subject to the following:

(1)	The proposed use shall be a permitted use in the applicable zoning  district   as  indicated   in· Section  403  Table   of   Use Regulations.

(2)	The applicable use regulations of Section 404 shall be met for each agricultural use.

b.	Dwelling units shall meet the requirements of Use AB Farm Unit.

c.	Retail sales shall meet the requirements of Use A? Agricultural Retail.

d.	The keeping and raising  of  livestock  and  poultry  with  the  intent  of producing capital gain or profit, or with the intent of selling any livestock or poultry  products.

(1)	On parcels where  more than two (2)  head of livestock or  one hundred (100) fowl per one (1) acre are kept, the requirements of Use  A3   Intensive  Agriculture   shall   be  met.    The  district regulations for Use A3 apply.

(2)	On parcels where not more than two (2) head of livestock or one hundred (100) fowl per one (1) acre are kept, any barn, animal shelter or other building/structure for the keeping of animals or fowl shall be situated not less than fifty (50) feet from any street line, property line, dwelling or well.

(3)	Uvestock and poultry shall not be permitted to run at large.

(4)	A zoning permit is required for these uses.

e.	The keeping and raising of livestock and poultry as farm pets or for domestic purposes on the property.

(1)	On parcels where more than two (2) head of livestock or one hundred (100) fowl per one (1) acre are kept, the requirements of Use A3 Intensive Agriculture shall be met and a zoning permit is required. The district regulations for Use A3 apply.

(2)	On parcels where not more than two (2) head of livestock or one hundred (100) fowl per one (1) acre are kept, the requirements of Section d(2) above shall be met and no zoning permit is required.

(3)	Livestock and poultry shall not be permitted to run at large.



38
 


f.	Silos shall be sttuated not less than one and one-quarter  (1.25) times the height of the silo from any street line or property line.

g.	A cold frame shall  not be considered impervious surface and shall not require a zoning permit provided that it does not remain on the ground for more than three (3) months in a calendar year.

h.	For the keeping of bees, adequate shade and water shall be provided in the immediate vicintty of the hives.

i.	The raising of ferrets and/or garbage-fed pigs shall not be permitted.

j.	No area for the storage or processing of animal waste shall be situated less than two hundred (200) feet from any street line or property line.

k.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space per employee. A2	Nursery
The raising of plants, shrubs and trees, outdoors or in a greenhouse, for sale and transplantation.

a.	The maximum impervious surface ratio shall be three (3) percent. This ratio may be exceeded provided the requirements of Use A3 Intensive Agriculture are met and provided Use A3 Intensive Agriculture is a permitted use in the applicable zoning district.

b.	A cold frame shall not be considered impervious surface and shall not require a zoning permit provided that it does not remain on the ground for more than three (3) months in a calendar year.

c.	Dwelling units shall meet the requirements of Use AB Farm Unit.

d.	Retail sales shall meet the requirements of Use A7 Agricultural Retail.

e.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space per employee. A3	Intensive Agriculture
Mushroom houses; feedlots; aquaculture; confinement livestock or poultry operations taking place in structures or closed pens; the keeping or raising of more than two (2) head oflivestock or one hundred {100) fowl per acre; and greenhouse operations which create an impervious surface ratio of greater than three (3) percent.

a.	Minimum lot area: ten (1O) acres.

b.	Any barn, animal shelter or other building/structure for the keeping of animals or fowl shall be situated not less than one hundred (100) feet from any street line, property line, dwelling or well. Livestock and poultry shall not be permitted to run at large.

c.	Silos shall be situated not less than one and one-quarter  (1.25) times the height of the silo from any street line or property line.

d.	Maximum impervious surface ratio: twenty (20) percent.

e.	Dwelling units shall meet the requirements of Use AB Farm Unit.



39
 

f.	Retail sales shall meet the requirements of Use A7 Agricultural Retail.

g.	A cold frame shall not be considered impervious surface and shall not require a zoning permit provided that it does not remain on the ground for more than three (3) months in a calendar year.

h.	All applicable regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources shall be met.

i.	Feedlots, pens and confinement areas shall not be situated less than thirty (30) feet from any stream or swale.

j.	The raising of ferrets and/or garbage-fed pigs shall not be permitted.

k.	Commercial kennels are not included in this use (see Use A6).

I.	. No structure for the storage or processing of manure, garbage, or spent mushroom compost or structures for the cultivation of mushrooms shall be situated less than two hundred (200) feet from any street line or property line. No storage or processing of manure, garbage or spent mushroom compost shall take place outdoors.

m.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for each employee. A4	Forestry
The removal of trees as part of commercial logging operations. This includes clear-cutting or selective cutting for the sale of the trees  for  lumber,  pulp, firewood or the like.

a.	For all commercial forestry operations as described above, a zoning permit shall be required and the following conditions shall be met:

(1)	The area of the forest shall not be cleared below  eighty  (80) percent of the forest as it exists at the time the forestry use is established.

(2)	Applications for other forestry/logging activities shall be accompanied by a Forest Management Plan prepared by a qualified forester, which shall be approved by the municipality. For any tract or tracts of land for which a Forest Management Plan which includes a logging operation has been approved and for which a logging permit is issued and pursuant to which any logging operation is conducted, such tract or tracts shall not be subject to or permitted any other use under this ordinance (including other permitted uses in said zoning district) until certification by the municipality of the successful completion of any reforestation  portion of the approved Forest Management Plan, including any reforestation period set forth by the plan.

(3)	Each Forest Management Plan and the logging operation itself shall comply with the following requirements:

(a)	The Forest Management Plan submitted in support of a proposed logging operation shall identify the principal variety or varieties of trees intenqed to be logged.





40
 


(b)	A reforestation program shall be submitted which shall show	program for re-establishment of the forest on a sustained yield basis. The program shall specifically identify each principal variety of tree to be reforested, the method of reforestation to be employed and the recommended reforestation or° regeneration period in terms of years.

(c)	An erosion and sedimentation control plan designed to prevent erosion and sedimentation during and after the logging operation shall be submitted and approved by the Bucks County Conservation District.

(d)  All cutting, skidding, removing and transporting of trees shall be planned and performed in such manner as to minimize the disturbance of or damage to other trees and vegetation and the land itself.

(e) Skidding across perennial or intermittent streams is prohibited except over bridges or culverts.

(f)      "No  Logging"  buffer  zones  shall  be  maintained  along both sides of any streams and around the perimeter of any springs. The width of the buffer zone shall  be fifty (50}  feet  on each side.

(g)	All plans shallshow  how the general habitat and visual block of the forest is to be maintained so that the forest retains its visual and habitat qualities at alltages of the long-range cutting plan.

(h)	A bond shall be posted to insure reforestation.

(0 A bond shall be posted to insure the repair of damaged roads, damaged waterways, terrain restoration and any other damage that may occur.

b.	An exception is provided to exempt the individual property owner from the requirement of obtaining a permit to cut a tree or trees as part of normal maintenance and upkeep of his property: The following activities are specifically exempt from the provisions of this use and shall not require a zoning permit:

(1)	Selective cutting for property maintenance and/or heating of the owner's  home.

(2)	Removal of diseased or dead trees.

(3)	Within fifty (50) feet of any property line, not mare than twenty
(20) percent of the trees may be cut.

·	AS	Riding Academy

An establishment where horses are boarded and cared for and/or where instruction in riding, jumping and showing is offered and/or the general public may, for a fee, hire horses for riding.

a.          Minimum lot area: five (5) acres.



41
 

b.	Any building or structure used for the keeping or raising of horses shall be situated not less than one hundred (100) feet from any street line or property  line.

c.	Silos shall be situated not less than one and one-quarter  (1 .25} times the height of the silo from any street line or property line.

d.	Maximum impervious surface ratio: three (3) percent.

e.	One single-family detached dwelling shall be permitted on the same tract with this principal use provided that the yard and  setback  requirements for Use 81 Detached Dwelling for the applicable zoning district shall be met. If additional dwelling units are proposed, the  requirements  of  Use AB Farm Unit shall be met.                                              -

f.	Shows and/or competitions shall meet the requirements of Use H9 Temporary Community Event.

g.	Retail sales of related items shall be limited to a maximum floor area of seven hundred and fifty {750) square feet.

h.	No area for the storage or processing of animal waste shall be situated less than two hundred (200) feet from any street line or property line.

i.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for every three (3) persons present at such facilities when they are filled to capacity plus one {1} additional off-street parking space for each full-time employee.

A6	Commercial  Kennel

An establisl1ment, structure, lot or portion of a lot on or in which six (6) or more dogs, eleven (11) cats or domestic pets are housed, bred, boarded, trained, groomed or said or in which animals are raised for laboratory use or for furs and skins.

a.	Minimum lot area: ten (10) acres.

b.	No animal shelter or run shall be located closer than two hundred  (200)
feet from any street line or property line.

c.	Maximum impervious surface ratio: three {3) percent.

d.	One single-family detached dwelling shall be permitted on the same tract wtth this principal use provided that the yard and  setback  requirements for Use 81 Detached Dwelling for the applicable zoning district shall  be met. If additional dwelling units are  proposed, the requirements  of  Use AB Farm Unit shall be met.

e.	- Shows and/or competitions shall  meet  the  requirements  of  Use  H9 Temporary  Community  Event.

f.	Retail sales of related items shall be limited to a maximum floor area of seven hundred and fifty (750) square feet.

g.	No structure for the storage or processing of animal waste shall be situated Jess than two hundred (200) feet from any street line or property line. No storage, processing or spraying of animal waste shall take place outdoors.



42
 


h.	Each kennel shall include an enclosed area where animals shall be kept from 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and 9:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m. on weekends and legal holidays (nighttime hours). The enclosed area shall be constructed to minimize sound conduction from inside to outside and shall be constructed of cinder block, wood with  T-1 siding or other material approved as part of the conditional use and constructed in such a
way as to keep the animals dry and warm and out of the weather. Kennels
shall be constructed so that access to outside runs can be cut off allowing
animals to be kept inside during the above-stated nighttime hours.

i.	Kennels and runs shall be installed on concrete pads. Kennels shall be cleaned. All fecal matter and bedding material containing fecal matter and urine .shall be placed in double bags and disposed of by a duly licensed hauler. Medical waste generated through the treatment of animals shall be disposed of in accordance with the requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources (PaDER). Dead animals shall be disposed of as required by PaDER or the Bucks County Department of Health.

j.	A buffer of a rapidly growing evergreen species, such as arborvitae or white pine, shall be planted, established and maintained around the entire perimeter of the kennel, except for one (1) break of six (6) foot width in a location approved by the zoning officer, to provide access to the kennel. The evergreen material shall be planted not less than ten (1O) feet from the kennels.  The plant material shall not be less than four
(4) feet in height at the time of planting and shall grow to a height of at least twenty (20) feet when fully mature. The evergreen material shall be planted in staggered, double rows on five (5) foot centers, such that when they are fully grown they present a solid sound and visual barrier to
the kennels.  Any tree which dies shall be replaced with a living tree not less than four (4) feet in height.

k.	The applicant shall maintain a kennel license issued pursuant to the "Dog Law" (3 D.S. Section 459-101 et seq.) in effect at all times and shall at all times comply with the requirements of the Dog Law.

I.	No additional outside lighting shall be installed on the property, except a single light standard, as approved by the zoning officer, which does not produce strong or dazzling light or glare beyond the property boundary.

m.		Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for each employee plus one (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of sales area.

A7	Agricultural Retail

The retail sales of agricultural products at roadside stands or other structures to the general public.

a.	Agricultural retail is an accessory use which shall be clearly subordinate to primary uses A 1, A2, and A3.

b.	Products sold must be grown, raised and produced on the property.

c.	The maximum floor area within a building shall be limited to two thousand (2,000) square feet. Exterior display and storage shall be limited to four thousand (4,000) square feet.

d.	Agricultural retail shall take place on sites of two (2) acres or larger.



43
 

e.	Agricultural retail uses shall meet the yard and setback requirements for the related primary agricultural use.

f.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of sales area.

AB	Farm Unit

Detached dwelling units for the sole use of the property owner, immediate family members of the property owner and persons engaged in agricultural employment on the property. Immediate family members shall be limited to parents, grandparents, siblings, sons and daughters.

a.	A farm unit is an accessory use which shall be clearly subordinate to primary uses A 1, A2, A3, AS and A6.

b.	Maximum density: one {1) dwelling unit per thirty (30) acres.

c.	A farm unit shall meet the minimum yard and setback requirements of Use 81 Detached Dwelling, from any street line or property line and between other farm  units on the property.

d.	Parking: two (2) off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit. A9	Farm Support Facility
Commercial grain or commercial feed mill. Facility for the warehousing, sale and service of agricultural equipment, vehicles, feed or supplies.

a.	Minimum lot area: two (2) acres.

b.	Maximum impervious surface ratio: iorty (40) percent.

c.	The lot shall have frontage  on and take access from an arterial  or  a collector highway as designated in this Ordinance.

d.	No outdoor storage of fertilizers or chemicals shall be permitted.

e.	No structure for the storage or processing of manure, garbage, or spent mushroom compost shall be situated less than two hundred (200) feet from any street line or property line. No storage or processing of manure, garbage or spent mushroom compost shall take place outdoors.

f.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for every five hundred (500) square feet of total floor area, plus one (1) space for each company vehicle normally stored on the premises.

8.	Residential Uses

81	Single-Family Detached

A single-family detached dwelling with yards on all sides of the house and with no public or community open space. Detached dwellings may include dwellings constructed on the lot, prefabricated dwellings, manufactured dwellings, modular dwellings and mobile homes.






44
 

a.	No more than one (1) single-family detached dwelling shall be placed on a lot and such detached dwelling shall be occupied by not more than a single-family.
b.	Area and Dimensional Requirements Min. Lot
Width at	Maximum	Minimum Yards
Building	Building	Maximum
Minimum	Setback	Coverage	Front	Side (ea)	Rear	Height
 District	Lot Area	Line• (ft)	(Percent)	(ft)	(ft)	(ft)	(ft)

RP	2 acres	200	10	75	30	
75	
35
SRC	2 acres	200	10	75	30	75	35
RA	2 acres	200	10	75	30	75	35
RD,FC	1 acre	120	10	50	25	50	35
VC-1	20,000  sf	80	10	15	15	35	35
SRL	20,000  sf	100	10	50	15	50	35
VC-2	15,000 sf	70	12	15	10	35	35
SRM	15,000 sf	100	12	45	15	50	35
SRH	12,000 st	85	15	35	15	50	35
URL	9,000 sf	50	30	25	10	25	35
•	For exception,  See Section  522.

c.	If the dwelling is a mobile home, the following conditions shall also apply:

(1)	The provisions of all current municipal ordinances regulating mobile homes and regulations of the Bucks County Health Department regarding water supply and waste disposal shall be adhered to.

(2)	The area between ground level and the perimeter of the mobile home shall be enclosed by means of wood or aluminum skirting or other similar material.

(3)	Each mobile home shall be placed on a permanent foundation of at least eight (8) poured concrete or masonry pillars set on a concrete base at least eight (8) inches thick. The pillars shall e spaced no more than ten (1O) feet apart with the end piers being no farther than five (5) feet from the ends of the unit. The pillars shall be at least one (1) foot by two (2) feet in size and at least thirty-six (36) inches below grade. Each pillar shall have installed a tie-down ring to which the mobile home shall be secured.

d.	Parking: three (3) off-street parking spaces for dwellings having three (3) bedrooms or less; tour (4) off-street parking spaces for dwellings having tour (4) bedrooms or more.

B2	Residential Conversion

The  conversion  of an existing  residential  or  nonresidential  building  into two  or more dwelling  units, subject to the following  provisions:

a.	The following maximum density requirements shall be met:

(1)	In the RP, RA, RD, FC and SRC districts, the number of dwelling units permitted on a lot shall not exceed one and one-half (1.5)



45
 

times  the  maximum  density  permitted  in Section  502 Table  of Performance  Siandards for  single-family  detached dwellings.

(2)	In the SRL, SRM, SRH, VC-1, VC-2 and URL districts, the number of dwelling units permitted on a lot shall not exceed the maximum density permitted in Section 502 Table of Performance Standards for single-family detached dwellings.

{3) In the CC district, the maximum density shall be eight (8) dwelling units per acre.

b.	The building to be converted shall meet the minimum yard requirements for Use B1 Single-Family Detached for the applicable zoning district. This requirement shall not apply  in the CC district.

c.	Detached dwellings which are converted must maintain the appearance of a detached dwelling with a single front entrance. Stairways leading to the second or any higher floor shall be located within the walls of the building wherever practical. Stairways and fire escapes shall otherwise be located on the rear wall in preference to either side wall and in no case on a front wall or on a side wall facing a street. After conversion the building shall retain substantially the same structural appearance It had before such conversion.

d.	All septic systems must be approved by the Bucks County Department of Health as suitable for the proposed conversion. For units proposed to be served by  public sewers, certification should be  provided from  the servicing  authority  that adequate service is available for the  proposed conversion.

e.	Separate  cooking,  sleeping,  living  and  bathroom  facilities  shall  be provided for each dwelling unit.

f.	Each converted structure shall have a recreation area of at least two hundred (200) square feet per dwelling unit. The recreation area shall not be located in the front yard or the minimum side or rear yards.

g.	A building must be  occupied  at  least  seven  (7)  years  before  it  is converted.	·

h.	Off-street parking spaces shall be located to the side or rear of the converted  structure.

i.	Off-street parking lots with three (3) or more spaces shall be buffered from abutting· residences by hedge material placed on three (3) foot centers. Alternately, a four (4) to five (5) foot fence may be erected which provides a visual screen.

j.	Parking: three (3) off-street parking spaces for each dwelling unit having three (3) bedrooms or less; four (4) off-street parking spaces for each dwelling unit having four (4) bedrooms or more. If the converted building fronts on a primary or secondary road on which on-street parking is permitted, the parking requirements may be fulfilled by a combination of off-street and on-street spaces. Off-street parking is required up to the maximum impervious surface ratio. On-street parking is permitted thereafter, based on the street frontage of the lot. One (1) on-street parking space may be permitted for each continuous forty (40) feet of lot frontage on a primary or secondary road, which is  uninterrupted  by  a


46
 


driveway,  setbacks  from  fire  hydrants  or setbacks  from  street intersections.

B3	Rooming or Boarding House

A dwelling used for the housing of roomers·, boarders, or lodgers with or without	,
common  eating facilities,  including dormitory,  fraternity, sorority,  or  other
buildings of charitable,  educational,  or  philanthropic  institutions.

a.	The minimum lot area per sleeping room shall be two thousand (2,000) square feet in VC-1, VC-2, SRM and SRH districts and one thousand (1,000) square feet in URL districts in addition to the lot area requirement for other permitted uses in the applicable district.

b.	The minimum lot width and minimum yards shall be as specified in Section 503 for the applicable district.

c.	No separate cooking facilities shall be provided.

d.	Conversion of an existing building for rooming house or dormitory purposes shall meet the following requirements of Use B2 Residential Conversion:  Section 404.B2.c., d., h. and i.

e.	The Zoning Hearing Board shall determine the required amount of parking based on one (1) off-street parking space per occupant at the maximum occupancy rate. The required amount of parking shall be specified in the Zoning Hearing Board's order.

B4	Village Twin

A single-family semi-detached unit having only one (1) dwelling unit from ground to roof and only one (1) wall in common with another dwelling unit. It differs from other forms of semi-detached housing in the lot size and placement on the lot.

 


Minimum Lot Area
 District	(per dwelling unit)
 


Minimum Lot Width (per dwelling unit)
 
Maximum Building  Coverage
(percent)
 
VC-1 VC-2
 
15,000 sf
10,000 sf
 
60 ft.	15
50 ft.	20
 



Front
(ft)
15
15
 


Minimum Yards Side
(ft)
10
10
 



Rear (ft) 35
35
 


Maximum Height
(ft)
35
35
 

BS	Single-Family  Detached Cluster

Single-family detached dwellings with yards on all sides of the houses which are clustered to preserve common open space. Detached dwellings may include dwellings constructed on the lot, prefabricated dwellings, manufactured dwellings, modular dwellings and mobile homes.

a.	No more than one (1) single-family detached dwelling shall be placed on a lot and such detached dwelling shall be occupied by not more than a single family.




47
 

b.	The requirements of Section 502 Table of Performance Standards shall be met.

c.	Area and Dimensional Requirements

m


District		(sq. ft.l	(sq. ft.\	(feet)	(percent\	(ft.)	(ft.)	(ft.)	(ft)
RP	43,560	34,000	150	5	65	25	75	35
RA	30,000	24,000	125	5	60	20	60	35
SRC&RD	20,000	16,000	100	10	50	15	50	35
SRL	12,500	10,000	75	20	30	12	35	35
SRM&SRH	10,000	8,000	60	25	25	10	30	35

d.	In the RD, SRC, SRL, SRM and SRH districts, the one side yard may be reduced to five (5) feet provided that the total width of the two side yards shall equal the total required by the chart for the district.

e.	If the dwelling is a mobile home, the requirements of Section 404.81 .c shall be met.

f.	Parking: three (3) off-street parking spaces for dwellings having three (3) bedrooms or less; four (4) off-street parking spaces for dwellings having four (4) bedrooms or more.

B6	Performance Standard Subdivision

A type of cluster development in which the developer may choose to develop a variety of housing types subject to the regulations stated below and the requirements of Article V of this Ordinance. Performance standard subdivisions allow the grouping or clustering of dwelling units, permitting a variety of housing types to encourage better, more flexible designs. The subdivision as a whole must meet prescribed standards for open space, density and impervious surfaces.

a.	General Requirements

(1)	The requirements of Section 502 Table of Performance Standards shall be met.

(2)	Dwelling Unit Mix.  A mix of dwelling unit types is necessary to promote a balanced community. Therefore, a mix is required, based on the number of dwelling units as set forth in the accompanying table.


Minimum Required	Maximum	Minimum
Number of Dwellings	Number of D.U.	Percent Any	Percent
in Develogment	T)lges	D.U. T)lpe	D.U. T)'ge
1	60	1	100%	20%
61	150	2	60%	15%
151	-	400	3	40%	10%
401	or   more	4	40%	5%

(3)	Parking Requirements.  Units containing three (3) bedrooms or less shall provide  a  minimum  of  three  (3)  off-street  parking




48
 


spaces. Units containing four (4) bedrooms or more shall provide a minimum of four (4) off-street parking spaces.

(4)	The developer of a performance standard subdivision shall be subject to the maximum impervious surface ratio (on-lot) specified in subsection b for the applicable housing type. An individual lot owner may exceed this maximum impervious surface ratio (on-lot) by three (3) percent to make improvements to the lot.

b.	Requirements for Housing Types

(1)	Single-Family Detached--A single family detached dwelling unit with yards on all sides of the house. Detached dwellings may include dwellings constructed on the lot, prefabricated dwellings, manufactured dwellings, modular dwellings and mobile homes.

(a)	If the dwelling is a mobile home, the requirements of Section 404.81.c shall be met.

{b)	Area  and  Dimensional  Requirements

Minimum lot area:    10,000 square feet Minimum lot width at setback line: 70 feet Minimum yards:
front                  35 ft.
side                 10 ft.
rear                  40 ft.
Maximum impervious surface ratio (on-lot):  20%
Maximum building height:                        35 feet

(2)	Detached Dwelling--Off Center. A single family detached dwelling unit with yards on all sides of the house. The building is set close to one side property line with a side yard which may be reduced to five (5) feet and the other side yard shall be no less than fifteen (15) feet.

(a)	The  standards  noted  in  b(1)  above  for  single-family detached dwellings shall be met except for the side yard requirement.

(b)	A minimum building spacing of twenty (20) feet shall be provided between dwelling units.

(3)	Village House. A single family detached dwelling unit with yards on all sides of the house. It differs from other forms of detached housing in the lot size and placement on the lot. It is similar to houses found in historic villages and towns. The house is placed close to the street and is additionally distinguished by planting or architectural treatments.

(a)	Each unit shall meet one (1) or more of the following characteristics:

An unenclosed porch, running across at least 3/4 of the house front, being at least seven (7) feet in width.




49
 

(iQ   A front yard raised above sidewalk  grade  by at least thirty (30) inches and a retaining wall of at least eighteen (18) inches at the sidewalk  line.

(iiij A front yard enclosed by a wall or fence of permanent construction at least thirty. (30) inches in height and one (1) flowering shrub per sixty
(60)  inches across the width of the front  of the house.

(iv)	Hedge of shrubs planted eighteen (18) inches on center for width of yard facing street and two
(2) flowering trees.

(v)	One (1) canopy tree, one (1) !lowering tree, and one {1) flowering shrub per ninety {90) inches for width ci! yard facing street.

(b)	Dimensional Requirements

 
minimum lot area: minimum setbacks:





minimum lot width
 
6,000 sq. ft.
house	15 ft.
30 ft.
5 ft.
garage	25 ft.
30 ft.
5 ft.
 


front rear side front rear side
 
at setback:	50 ft.
maximum impervious surface ratio (on-lot):  30%
maximum building height:	35 feet

(c)	Landscaping Requirements

 
canopy trees flowering trees flowering shrubs hedge  shrubs
 
2 in. caliper
2	in. caliper
3	ft. high
3 ft. high
 

(4) Twin. A single-family semi-detached unit having only one (1) dwelling from ground to roof and only one (1) wall in common with another dwelling unit.

Area and Dimensional Requirements

Minimum lot area (per dwelling unit):  4,500 square feet Minimum lot width at setback line (per dwelling unit):  40 feet Minimum yards:
front	25 feet
side	10 feet
rear	25 feet
Maximum impervious surface ratio (on-lot):	40%
Maximum building height:	35 feet

 
(5)
 
Duplex. A single-family semi-detached dwelling unit with one dwelling unit located above another dwelling  unit. The dwelling units share a common lot area which is the sum of the required lot areas of all dwelling  units within the building.  There shall be no



50
 


more than two (2) dwelling units per structure and each unit shall have individual outside access.

Area and Dimensional Requirements

Minimum lot area per building:         6,000 sq. ft. Minimum lot width at setback line:            60 feet Minimum yards:
front	30 feet
side	15 feet
rear	20 feet
Maximum impervious surface ratio (on-lot):               40%
Maximum building height:                                      35 feet

(6) Patio House. A detached or semi-detached unit, with one (1) dwelling unit from ground to roof having individual outside access.	Except for the street setback, the lot shall be fully enclosed by a wall four to six (4 to 6) feet in height. All living spaces, i.e., living rooms, dens, and bedrooms, sliall open onto a private open area or patio.

 
Area and Dimensional Requirements

Minimum lot area:
Minimum lot width at setback line:
Minimum setback - street line:
Maximum impervious surface ratio (on-lot):
Maximum building height:
Minimum patio area (ratio to lot area):
Minimum patio dimensions:
 


4,ooo sq. ft.
40 feet
5 feet
40%
25 feet
65%
20 feet
 

(7) Atrium House.  The  atrium  house  is  a  single-family,  attached dwelling unit, one story high, with individual outside access.  The lot area shall be fully enclosed by a wall at least seven (7) feet high. A private yard, herein called an atrium, shall be included on each lot. All living spaces, i.e., Jiving  rooms, den and bedrooms, shall open into the atrium. A row of attached dwellings shall not exceed five (5)  dwelling units.

Area and Dimensional Requirements

 
Minimum lot area:
Minimum lot width at setback line: Minimum setback - street line:
Maximum impervious surface ratio (on-lot): Maximum building height:
Minimum atrium area (ratio to lot area):
Minimum atrium dimensions:
 
2,100 sq. ft.
40 feet
10 feet
70%
15	feet
35%
16	feet
 

(8)	Multiplex. An attached dwelling unit which may be arranged in a variety of configurations: side by side, back to back, or vertically. The dwelling units share a common lot area which is the sum of the required lot areas of all dwelling units within the building. The essential feature is the small number of units attached.  No more than six (6) units shall be attached in any structure, and structures shall average four (4) units each. Each unit shall have individual outside access.




51
 

Area and Dimensional Requirements

 
minimum lot area (per bldg.): minimum lot area (per dwelling unit): minimum lot width at setback line
(per building):
maximum impervious surface ratio (on-lot): minimum  building setback:
street parking area pedestrian walkway
minimum rear yard:
minimum building spacing: maximum building height:
 
8,000 sq. ft.
2,500 sq. ft.

80 feet
45%

30 feet
10 feet
5 feet
20 feet
30 feet
35 feet
 

(9)	Townhouse. A single-family attached dwelling unit with one dwelling unit from ground to roof, having  individual  outside access. A row of attached townhouses shall not exceed eight (8) dwelling  units.

Area and Dimensional Requirements

 
Minimum lot area: Minimum lot width:
 
2,000 square feet
24 feet
 
Maximum impervious surface ratio (on-lot):
Minimum building setback:
street parking area
pedestrian walkway Minimum  building spacing: Minimum rear yard:
Maximum building height:
 
55%

20 feet
30 feet
15 feet
30 feet
20 feet
35 feet
 

(1O) Apartments. A grouping of dwelling  units  sharing  common elements which may include common outside access. The dwelling units share a common lot area, which is the sum of the required lot areas of all dwelling units within the building: Apartments shall contain three or more dwellings in a single structure.

Area and Dimensional Requirements

 
minimum lot area (per building): minimum lot area (per dwelling unit): minimum street frontage:
minimum building setback:
street parking area
pedestrian walkway minimum  building spacing:
maximum number of units per building:
 
one acre 2,000 square feet
100 feet

50 feet
30 feet
5 feet
50 feet
16
 
maximum impervious surface ratio (on-lot): maximum  building height:
 
65%
35 feet
 








52
 

87	Mobile Home Park

A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes, subject to the following provisions:

a.	Area and Dimensional Requirements


Minimum Lot Area	

Minimum Lot Width at Building	

Maximum Building Coverage	


Front	

Minimum Yards Side	


Rear	
Minimum Distances Between Units
 	(sg. ft.)	Setback  (ft.)	%	(feet)	(feet)

Single-wide Units to 61'	

4800	

45	

25	

20	

5	

15	

30
Single-wide Units 61' or Longer	

5250	

45	


25	

20	

5	

15.	

30
Double-wide							
Units	5800	60	25	25	5	15	30
b.	Minimum site area: ten (10) acres.

c.	Mobile home parks must conform to the requirements for open space ratio, density, and impervious surface ratio, established for performance standard subdivisions in Section 502 Table of Performance Standards for the appropriate districts.

d.	The area between the ground level and the perimeter of the mobile home shall be enclosed by means of wood or aluminum skirting or a similar material.

e.	Each mobile home shall be placed on a permanent foundation of at least eight (8) poured concrete or masonry pillars set on a concrete base at least eight (8) inches thick. The pillars shall be spaced no more than ten
(10)	feet apart with the end piers being no farther than five (5) feet from the ends of the unit. The pillars shall be at least one (1) foot by two (2) feet in size and at least thirty-six (36) inches below grade. Each pillar shall have installed a tie-down ring to which the mobile home shall be secured.

f.	Every mobile home shall have access to an improved street in the mobile home park in accordance with the Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.

g.	The minimum number of spaces completed and ready for occupancy before the first occupancy is permitted shall be nine (9).

h.	No space shall be rented for residential use of a mobile home in any such park except for periods of thirty (30)days or more.

i.	Plans for any mobile home park shall be submitted in conformance with the Municipal Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance and the municipal ordinance regulating mobile home parks.

j.	Public sewerage shall be required.

k.	A zoning permit shall be required for each mobile home placed in a park.


53
 

I.	Minimum off-street parking: three (3) spaces for three (3) bedrooms or less; four (4) spaces for four (4) bedrooms or more.

68	Planned Residential Development (PRD)

PRD is a planned community in which a mix of residential and nonresidential uses is required. It has a minimum gross site area of fifty (50) acres and may include all types of dwellings permitted under performance standard subdivisions, Section
404.86. Commercial and other non-residential uses shall be incorporated in the total community design subject to the additional regulations in Article VII of this
Ordinance. A developer may apply for PRO; and the Governing Body may permit the PRD use concurrently with the approval of a Tentative Development Plan.

89	Urban Dwelling

A detached dwelling--off center, village house, twin, duplex, patio house, or atrium house as defined in Section 404.66.

a.	The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be. 7,000 square feet in the URL District. Single-family detached--off center dwellings must have a lot of at least 8,000 square feet in size.

b.	Existing single lots which do not conform to a. above, may be developed as urban dwellings if the lot is not less than the minimum lot area listed for that dwelling type in Section 404.86. If the lot is contiguous to another lot under the same ownership, the lots shall be consolidated to reduce the  nonconformity.

c.	All area and dimensional requirements in Section 404.86 shall be met for the specific dwelling type (except as noted in a and b above) .

d.	No parcel 20,000 square feet or greater in the URL District shall be developed as an urban dwelling. (It may be developed as a performance standard subdivision under the provisions of Section 404.66.)

e.	Parking: three (3) off-street parking spaces for dwellings having three (3) bedrooms or less; four (4) off-street parking spaces for dwellings having four (4) bedrooms or more.

81O	Life Care Facility

A life care facility is a form of residential use designed and operated for individuals requiring certain medical and nonmedical support facilities and services.

a.	Dimensional Requirements

 
minimum lot area: minimum front yard: minimum side yards: minimum rearyard: minimum lot width:
 
5   acres
75   feet
50   feet
50  feet
250   feet
 

b.	Maximum Density: The maximum density for a life care facility shall be the highest density permitted in Section  502 Table of Performance Standards for the applicable district. In the PC, CC and SC districts, the maximum density shall be four (4) dwelling units per acre.

c.	Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio: 25 percent.



54
 


d.	Maximum Height: 35 feet.

e.	Support Facilities and Services: A life care facility may include some or all of the following medical and nonmedical support facilities and services.

(1)	Retail Facilities shall be for use of residents and their guests  only.
No outside advertising is permitted. The life-care retail facilities may occupy no more than one-tenth (.1) percent of the total floor area. Retail facilities shall be limited to the following uses:

 
barber shop beauty parlor pharmacy commissary
 
newsstand gift shop
snack bar/coffee shop
thrift shop handicraft shop
 

(2) Life-Care Nursing Facility. A health care facility designed for the temporary and long-term care of the residents of the life-care facility. Nursing beds shall not exceed one (1) bed per three (3) dwelling  units.

{3) Social Services. Residents of  the  life care  facility  may  be provided with social services including, but not limited to, homemaker, personal care and financial management services.

(4) Other support facilities may include, but are not limited to, lounge areas, reading rooms, craft rooms, common dining facilities, exercise rooms and recreational rooms.

f.	Open Space and Passive Recreational Area. At least fifty (50) percent of the site area must be maintained as open space which shall notinclude detention basins, parking lots, accessory buildings or any impervious surfaces except those used for recreational purposes.   At least twenty
(20) percent of the site, which may be considered part of the open space, shall be developed for passive recreation. This area shall include outdoor sitting areas and pedestrian walks. No outdoor sitting areas shall be located on land subject to flooding or on slopes in excess of five (5) percent.

g.	Fire Protection. All rooms in the life-care facility  shall be provided with sprinkler systems for fire protection and shall contain and be served by wet charged stand pipes to the top floor.

h.	Location to Service. Due to the dependence Of the elderly on alternate means of transportation and the need for acquiring access to primary services, a life-care facility must be located within a quarter of a mile to the following  services:

 
post office drug store
regional shopping center grocery store
dry cleaner restaurant beauty parlor
 
barber shop house of worship
public transportation movie house
bank library
 

If this is not possible, the developer of a life-care facility shall submit to the municipality a transportation plan which shall outline a transportation service for the residents of the life-care facility, to be provided by the


55
 


owner or manager, providing access to these services at reasonable intervals. This plan must be approved by the municipality as a condition for approval of use.

i.	Safety Features. It is necessary in the design and development of a life­ care center, that. the safety and physical capabilities of the future residents be considered. The design features of the life-care center shall be such that potentially dangerous situations are minimized and the independence and mobility of the residents maximized. The following safety features shall be incorporated into the design of the life-care center as a condition of approval.

(i)	Handle type spigots and doorknobs.

(2)	Showers designed for wheelchairs, in place of tubs in at least thirty (30) percent of the units.

(3)	Non-skid surfaces in tubs and showers and on all flOO\S.

(4)	Control of water temperature to avoid accidental scalding.

(5)	Flush door entrances for easy wheelchair access.

(6)	Emergency signal systems in bathrooms and bedrooms connected with either an adjacent apartment or central office.

(7) Grab bars around all toilets and tubs, in addition, all grab bars and towel racks shall be made of non-corrosive metal and be able to withstand up to 250 pounds.

(8)	All cooking stoves shall be electric.   Burner controls  shall  be located in the front.

(9)	Electric outlets shall be located at levels at least twenty-four (24) inches above the floor.

(10)	All light fixtures shall be located on the walls at convenient levels, to avoid accidents that might otherwise occur in the repair of ceiling fixtures.

(i i)	There shall be ramps or elevators in addition to stairs.

(i 2) All elevators shall have slow closing doors with sensitive reopening mechanisms.

(i 3) Handrails shall be provided along all steps, hallways, ramps and sloped walks, both indoors and outdoors.

j.	Access for emergency vehicles shall be provided. One (1) parking space shall be provided at each entrance to the building that is not intended for service or kitchen use. These parking spaces shall be signed for the exclusive use of emergency vehicles.

k.	All applicable permits shall be secured from the Bucks County Department of Health, the Pennsylvania Department of Welfare, the Township and any other necessary agencies.





56
 

I.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for each employee on the largest shift plus one (1) off-street parking space for each four (4) beds of maximum capacity of the facility.

C.	Institutional and Recreational Uses C1	Place of Worship
Church,  synagogue  or  other  place  of  religious  worship,  provided  that  the following requirements are met:

a.	Area and Dimensional Requirements

Zoning	RP, RA, RD,	SRL, SRM, SRH	VC-1,	URL, CC
District	SRC,EXT	PC, SC, FC, Pl	VC-2 	 	
Min. Lot Size	Sac.	1 ac.	30,000 sq. ft.	20,000 sq. ft.
Min. Lot Width
Min. Front Yard	325 ft.
75 ft.	120 ft.
50 ft.	100 ft.
15 ft..	100 ft.
50 ft.
Min. Side Yard	30 ft.	25 ft.	20 ft.	15 ft.
Min. Rear Yard	100 ft.	75 ft.	25 ft.	50 ft.
b.	Access shall be to a collector or primary street.

c.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for each two (2) seats provided for patron use, or at least one (1) off-street parking space for each forty
(40)  square feet of gross floor  area used or intended to be  used for
service to patrons, guests or members, whichever requires the greater number of off-street  parking spaces, plus one (1) additional space for
each full-time employee.

C2	School

Religious, sectarian and non-sectarian, denominational private school or public school which is not conducted as a private gainful business and where the principal activity shall not be one which is customarily carried on as a business.

a.	Schools shall meet the minimum open space ratio and maximum impervious surface· ratio requirements for a performance standard subdivision in the residential district in which they are located. Schools in the RP, RA and RD districts shall be subject to a minimum open space ratio of 0.75 and a maximum impervious surface ratio of 0.1O.

b.	Schools shall have access to a collector or primary street, except when located in the URL or FC districts.

c.	Parking:

Kindergarten - One (1) off-street parking space for each faculty member and employee plus two (2) additional spaces per classroom.

Elementary school - One (1) off-street parking space for each faculty member and employee plus one (1) space per two (2) classrooms and offices.

Junior high school - One (1) off-street  parking space for each faculty member and employee plus one (1) space per two (2) classrooms and offices.




57
 
Senior high school - One (1) off-street parking space per faculty member and employee plus one (1) space per ten (1O) students of projected building capacity.

College and junior college - One (1) off-street parking space per faculty member and employee plus one (1) parking space for every two (2) non­ resident students at total enrollment. Parking for resident students shall meet the requirements for Use HS Dormitory.

C3	Commercial School

Trade or professional school, music or dancing school, or other schools not included in uses C2 or C10.

Parking: one (1) off-street parking space per faculty member and employee, plus one (1) space for every two (2) non-resident students, at total enrollment. Parking for resident students shall meet the requirement for Use HS Dormitory.

C4	Library or Museum

Library or museum open to the public or connected with a permitted educational use and not conducted as a private, gainful business where the principal activity shall not be one which is customarily carried on as a business.

Parking: one {1) off-street parking space per five (5) seats or one {1) off­ street parking space per two hundred and fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area where no seats are provided, plus one (1) space per employee.

C5	Reserved

CS	Recreational Facility

A recreational facility or park.

a.	The use shall not be  conducted  as a private  gainful  business.    The principal activity shall not be one which is customarily carried on as a business.

b.	Except for a snack bar, dining services and/or the service of alcoholic beverages shall not be provided, except under Use H9 Temporary Community Event.

c.	No outdoor active recreation area shall be located nearer to any lot line than the required front yard depth.

d.	Outdoor recreation areas shall be sufficiently screened and insulated so as to protect the neighborhood from inappropriate ·noise and other disturbances and shall not constitute a public nuisance.

e.	Where the recreational facility includes a rifle range, sporting clays, trap shoots and other uses involving the discharge of firearms, the following additional requirements shall apply:

{1)	A rifle range shall only be permitted in the PC or RP district, by special exception.

(2)	A minimum lot area of ten (10) acres shall be required.



58
 

(3)	The range shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the National Rifle Association's standards for the particular type of range.

(4) The range shall be operated in strict accordance with the National Rifle Association's standards for operation and safety.

(5) The range shall be used only for the type offirearms for which it is designed to accommodate (automatic weapons/firearms shall not be used, fired or discharged).

(6)	The range shall not be lighted for night time use.

(7) The safety of adjoining properties shall be a primary consideration in the location of the rifle range.

(8) A class "C" buffer shall be provided along all property lines of the range.

f.	Where  the  recreation  facility  includes  quasi-military  operations,  games, activities or training,  including  but  not  limited to,  paintball  or war  game activities, the following  additional requirements shall be met.

(1)	These activities shall only be permitted in the PC district by special exception.

 
(2)

(3)









(4)


(5)
 
A minimum lot area of ten (10) acres shall be required.

A buffer or "out of bounds" area shall be established within which no activities under this use shall take place no closer than one hundred fifty (150) feet to a street line or a property boundary. The buffer area shall be clearly delineated by placing plastic fencing, plastic tape or some other  material approved by the Zoning Hearing Board in a continuous band around the area where activities would be conducted. The marking of the buffer area shall be continuously maintained.

The activities are to occur only from the hours of 9:00  a.m. to
4:00 p.m.

No tournament shall take place during the first six (6) months of operation and thereafter, only upon approval of a further Special Exception by the Zoning Hearing Board wherein it is established, among· other considerations, that no violations of conditions of this Ordinance have occurred.
 

(6)     No retail sales shall be conducted from the premises  including, but not limited to the sale of clothing, weapons, ammunition (other than paintballs) and the like.

 
(7)
 
No building(s), except for sanitary facilities, shall be constructed in connection with this use.
 

(8)	Board of Health approval shall be obtained in accordance with the municipal sewage facilities plan (Act 537 Plan) for sanitary facilities on site.





59
 

(9)	No alcoholic beverages shall be permitted or consumed  on the site.

(1O)		No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be permitted to engage in these activities.

(11)	Rules of conduct shall be posted and enforced.

g.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for each five (5) persons of total capacity, or at least one (1) off-street parking space for each fifty (50) square feet of gross floor area used or intended to be used for service to customers, patrons, clients, guests or members, whichever requires the greater number of off-street parking spaces, plus one additional space for each employee.

C7	Golf Course

An area designed for the play of the game of golf containing greens, tees, fairways, bunkers and related areas. This use shall not include a miniature golf course.

a.	Minimum Lot Area

Regulation	18 hole	130 acres
Executive	18 hole	60 acres
Par3	18 hole	45 acres
Nine hole	70 acres
Par3	9 hole	25 acres

b.	The golf course may include the following accessory uses: practice driving ranges and putting greens; restrooms and rain shelters; maintenance facilities; golf cart storage; golf club and general storage facilities; caddy shack; golf club repair facilities; and pro shops.

c.	No building shall be closer than one hundred (100) feet to any lot line or street line.                                              ·

d.	No golf hole shall be closer than one hundred and fifty (150) feet to a lot line or street line, measured from the centerline of the hole.

e.	Clubhouse Facilities. Clubhouse facilities including locker rooms, restrooms and shower facilities; administrative, management and club membership offices; private dining facilities, including formal dining, grillroom, bar and lounge, and snack bar; and indoor and outdoor recreational facilities shall be permitted provided the following requirements are met:

 
(1)

(2)

(3)



(4)
 
·Such facilities shall be clearly accessory to the golf course. A minimum lot area of sixty (60) acres shall be required.
All clubhouse facilities shall be private and shall be available for use by only members of the golf course or country club and their guests.

Bucks County Department of Health approval shall be obtained in accordance with  the Township's Sewage Facilities Plen (Act 537).
 


60
 

f.	Parking: three (3) off-street  parking spaces for each hole. In addition, where a club house is proposed in conjunction with a golf course, one (1) off-street parking space for every five (5) persons of total capacity or at least one (1) off-street parking space for each fifty (50) square feet of gross floor area used or intended to be used for service to customers, patrons, clients, guests or members, whichever requires the  greater number of off-street  parking spaces.

CS	Private Club

A private club or lodge established for the fraternal, social, educational, civic, or cultural enrichment of its members, whose members meet certain prescribed qualifications for membership and pay dues.

a.	The use shall not be conducted as a private  gainful business. The principal activity shall not be one customarily carried on as a business.

·b.	The use shall be for members and their authorized guests only.

c.	Dining services and/or the service of alcoholic beverages may be provided for members. These services shall not be provided  to the general public.

d.	No outdoor active recreation area shall be located nearer to any lot line than the required front yard depth.

e.	Outdoor recreation areas shall be sufficiently screened and insulated so as to protect the neighborhood from inappropriate noise and other disturbances and shall not constitute a public nuisance.

f.	Where the facility includes a rifle range or other use involving the discharge of firearms, the provisions of Use CB.e. shall be met. Where the use would include quasi-military activities, the provisions of Use C6.f. shall be met.

g.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for every three (3) persons present at such facilities when they are filled to capacity,  or at least one
(1)	off-street parking space for each fifty (50) square feet of gross floor
area used or  intended to  be used for  service  to  members  and  guests, whichever  requires the greater number of  off-street  parking spaces,  plus
one (1) additional space for each employee.

C9	Community Center

An educational, social, cultural, civic or other similar facility subject to the following provisions:

a.	The use shall not be conducted  as a private gainful  business.   The principal activity shall not be one customarily carried on as a business.

b.	Except for a snack bar, dining services and/or the service of alcoholic beverages shall not be provided, except under Use H9 Temporary Community Event.

c.	No outdoor active recreation area shall be located nearer to any Jot line than the required front yard depth.






61
 
d.	Outdoor recreation arees shall be sufficiently screened and insulated so as to protect the neighborhood from inappropriate noise and other disturbances and shall not constitute a public nuisance.

e.	Community centers shall have access to a collector or primary street, except when located in the URL or CC districts.

f.		Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for each four (4) seats provided for patron use or at least one (1) off-street parking space for each fifty (50) square feet of gross floor area used or intended to be used for service to customers, patrons, clients, guests or members, whichever requires the greater number of off-street parking spaces, plus one (1) additional space for each employee.

C10	Day Care Center

A facility in which out-of-hoine day care is provided to four (4) or more children, disable.ct persons and/or elderly.

a.	In RP. RA, RD and residential districts, the use shall be conducted in a building designed to look like a single-family  detached residence.

b.	An outdoor recreation area shall be provided with a minimum area of two hundred (200} square feet for each child and one hundred (100} square feet for each disabled or elderly person. This outdoor play area shall be located to the side or the rear of the lot and shall not include any parking arees. The outdoor play area shall be fully enclosed by a four (4) foot high fence and shall be sufficiently screened and insulated so  as to  protect the neighborhood from inappropriate noise and other disturbance.

c.	Sufficient facilities for passenger loading and unloading shall be provided.

d.	This use  may  be permitted  as  accessory  to  a permitted  nonresidential use.

e.	A license from the  Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare  shall be required.

f.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for each teacher, administrator, and maintenance employee, plus one {1) space per six {6) children and disabled adults of total capacity.

C11	Hospital

An establishment licensed by the American Hospital Association which provides health services primarily for in-patient medical or surgical care of the sick or injured, including related facilities such es laboratories, out-patient departments, training facilities, central service facilities and staff offices as an integral part of the establishment.  A hospital is subject to the following additional provisions:

a.	The following uses are permitted in conjunction with a hospital provided such uses are complementary and clearly secondary to the hospital, C1 Place of  Worship, C2 School, C3 Commercial School, C9 Community Center, C1O Day Care Center, C12 Nursing Home, 01 Office, D2 Medical Office, E1 Retail Shop, E3 Service Business, Es Eating Place and E21 Parking Lot or Garage.




62
 

b.	Area and Dimensional Requirements

 
Minimum lot area: Minimum lot width: Minimum yards
 
1o acres 200 feet
 
front: side:
rear:
 
75 feet
100 feet
100 feet
 


c.		Care shall be taken  to  locate  emergency  and  service  entrances  where they  are not offensive to adjoining neighbors.

d.	Such use shall take access from collector or arterial highways only.

e.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for each patient bed; plus one
(1)	off-street parking space for each employee on the two major shifts.
When Uses C2, C3, C12, D1 and D2 are proposed in conjunction with a
.hospital,  the  parking  requirements  specified  in  Section  404  for  the particular use shall be met

C12	Nursing Homa

.A nursing facility or convalescent home licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of Health which is set up to provide Jong term health care to individuals who, by reason of advanced age, chronic illness or disabilities, are unable to care for themselves.

a.	A Jot area of not less than one (1) acre plus 1,000 square feet per resident is required, except that in the RA, RD, SRC, and SRL Districts three (3) acres plus 1,000 square feet per resident is required.

b.	No more than eighty (80) resident patients shall be accommodated at any one time in the RA, RD, SRC, SRL, SRM, SRH, VC-2, and URL Districts.

c.	Each nursing home facility must provide an outdoor sitting area which must be landscaped. The sitting area must be properly situated in terms of the microclimate (no extreme southernly exposure) and shall not be located on land subject to flooding or on slopes over a five (5) percent grade.

d.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space per two (2) patient beds, plus one (1) off-street parking space for each staff and visiting doctor; plus one (1) parking space for each employee (including nurses) on the two major shifts.

C13	Hallway House

A facility which provides living arrangements for persons with emotional, alcohol or drug related problems and who are receiving rehabilitative therapy and/or counseling. Also included in this use are facilities for teenage mothers and abused persons. The residents live in the facility for a short period of time, usually three (3) to twelve (12) months.

a.	The requirements for other permitted uses in Section 502 Table  of Performance Standards and the requirements in Section 503 Area and Dimensional Requirements shall be met for the applicable district.





63
 

b.	The number of persons living in such a facility shall not exceed ten (10).
Support staff which does not reside in the facility shall not be included in the maximum number of ten (1O).

c.	A halfway house must be sponsored and operated by a group, organization or corporation licensed by either the county or the state. Proof of compliance with all applicable county or state regulations shall be furnished to the zoning officer prior to the granting of the zoning permit.

d.	Na halfway house shall be constructed within a one-half (1/2) mile radius of any other halfway house (measured from unit to unit).

e.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space per bedroom plus one (1) space far each staff member on the largest shift.

C14	Cemetery
.	.
A burial place or graveyard including mausoleum, crematory or columbarium.

a.	Minimum lot area: ten (1O) acres.

b.	Na mare than ten (1O) percent of the lot area, to a maximum of five (5) acres, may be devoted to above-ground buildings not serving as burial markers or memorials, such as business and administrative offices, chapels, maintenance facilities and the like. This restriction includes parking facilities.

c.	No building or structure shall be located within fifty (SO) feet of a property line or street line.

d.	One (1) single-family detached dwelling for a full-time caretaker shall be permitted.

e.	For a pet cemetery, all animals shall be buried in caskets or containers of durable construction which are not subject ta breakage or deterioration. Every casket or container shall be placed at least three (3) feet below the existing grade. The owner or operator of the pet cemetery shall maintain at all times a current burial plot diagram showing all plots in use and this infonmation shall be available to the zoning officer for inspection upon request.

f.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for each employee and one (1) off-street space for each four (4) visitors in total capacity of the chapel.

C15	Recreational Camping Park

A property upon which two (2) or more campsites are located, established, or maintained for occupancy as temporary living quarters for recreation or vacation purposes.

a.	Minimum site area: ten (1O) acres

b.	Campsites shall be rented by the day or week only and occupants of such sites shall not remain in the same recreational camping park for more than fifteen (15) days. A recreational vehicle shall not be placed at a recreational camping park for more than three (3) months in any one (1) year.




64
 

c.	The maximum density shall be five (5) campsites per acre.

d.	The minimum campsite size shall be one thousand four hundred (1,400) square feet.

e.	A minimum offorty (40) percent of the site shall be set aside as common use areas for active or passive recreation.

f.	No buildings or campsites shall be located within fifty {SO) feet of a street line or one hundred (100) feet of any other property line.

g,	Sewage disposal methods shall conform with the requirements of  the Bucks County Department of Health and the municipal sewage facilities plan.

h.	One (1) detached dwelling shall be permitted for the. use of the owner or operator of the recreational camping park.

i.	One (1) retail shop may be permitted to supply goods and,commodlties to those using the park. The maximum floor area shall be limited to seven hundred and fifty  (750) square feet.

j.	At least  one  (1)  parking space for every two  (2) campsites  shall  be provided in a common parking area for spillover parking needs.

C16	Municipal Services

All municipal buildings, structures and uses including, but not limited to, governmental offices, garages for the storage of tools, equipment and vehicles, municipally sponsored police and emergency services, and the  use  of  land  for the stockpiling of materials used by the municipality  in its municipal functions.

Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for every four (4) seats  in meeting areas or one (1) off-street parking space for each two   hundred
(200) square feet of gross floor area, whichever requires the greater number of off-street parking spaces, plus one (1) off-street parking space
for every employee.

C17	Recreational Cabin/Cottage Development

A tract of land with cottages, cabins and related accessory structures used for recreational and seasonal purposes.

a.	Minimum site area:  one hundred (100} acres

b.	This use shall be limited to recreational and seasonal use of a residential character.

c.	No user may establish permanent residency, with the exception of  one
(1)	dwelling unit for the owner/operator of the development and one (1) dwelling unit far a caretaker/graundskeeper. No cabin or cottage may be used more than one hundred and eighty {180} days during any one (1) calendar year. The owner or operator of the development shall keep a record of the use of each cottage or cabin and these records shall  be made available to the Township for  inspection as requested by the Township.   See subsection x.





65
 


d.	Sewage disposal methods shall conform to the requirements of the Haycock Township Sewage Facilities Plan and the  rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources and the Bucks County  Department of Health.

e.	The maximum number of cabins and/or cottages shall not  exceed  one and six-tenths (1.6) cottages/cabins per acre of total site area minus the Mure rights-of-way  of existing public roads within or adjacent to the site.

f.		Cabins and cottages shall be detached units forming a single, habitable unit with facilities used or intended to be used for temporary living, sleeping, cooking and eating by one (1) family, as defined in Section 227 of this Ordinance.                       ·

_g.	Cabins and cottages shall not exceed eight hundred (BOO)  square feet  in
-  floor area	-

h.		When cabins and cottages are placed on individually  subdivided  lots, the following standards  shall apply:

 
minimum lot area:
minimum lot width at setback line: minimum yards:
front 1 side rear
 
10,000 square feet
70 feet

35 feet
15 feet
30 feet
 

The front yard shall be measured from the future right-al­ way of an internal street dedicated to the Township or from the edge of the cartway of a private street.

 
maximum impervious surface (on-lot): maximum building height:
accessory   buildings  and  structures standards specified in this subsection.
 
30%
25 feet
shall  conform  to  the
 

I.	Where cabins and cottages are not located on individually subdivided lots, the following standards shall apply:

building spacing:
between  cabins/cottages	30 feet
between accessory structures and cabins,
cottages, other accessory structures	12 feet
setbacks from internal streets: public, dedicated street-
from future right-of-way	35 feet private street	35 feet

j.		No cabin, cottage, dwelling units or accessory building or structure shall be less than two hundred (200) feet from an external public road, nor less than one hundred (100) feet from a property line of a property adjacent to the development. Class "A" buffer yard plantings, as specified in Section 505, shall be provided along external public roads. Class "8" buffer yard plantings shall be provided along other adjacent property lines.





66
 



k.	Cabins and/or cottages shall be placed on permanent foundations or on at least eight (8) poured concrete or masonry pillars set on a concrete base at least eight (8) inches thick. The pillars shall be spaced no more than ten (10) feet apart. The pillars shall be at least one (1) foot by two (2) feet in size and at least thirty-six (36) inches below grade.

I.	Accessory outdoor recreation areas shall be screened and insulated so as to  protect neighboring properties from inappropriate noise and other disturbances.  A Class "C" buffer yard, as specified in Section 505, shall be provided between recreation areas and neighboring properties. No activity within the development shall constitute a public nuisance.

m.	Access Improvements

(1)	Each cabin/cottage development shall- be provided with convenient access and egress from a puolic road. Such access/egress shall consist of an all-weather cartv{ay twenty-four
(24) feet wide, constructed to Township standards as described in the Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance and shall consist of six (6) inches, compacted thickness, of No. 4 crushed stone and screenings over  a graded and compacted subbase.                       -

(2)	Provisions for shoulders and drainage shall be made as applicable and all work shall be approved for design and construction by the Township.

 
(3)-







(4)




(5)


(6)




(7)
 
The main entrance shall conform to the standards of the Penn­ sylvania Department of Transportation and, when the entrance is located on a State road, shall be approved by PennDOT. When the entrance is located on a Township road, the entrance shall be approved by the Township and shall be consistent with the Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.

The entrance shall take into account the level of traffic on the public street and that to be generated by the development. Acceleration and deceleration lanes may be required as well as two (2) lane entrances and two (2) lane exits.

No vehicular parking shall be permitted in the cartway of any interior secondary or entrance road.

Interior roadways shall be constructed to the same standards as secondary roads except the cartway may be sixteen (16) feet in width unless designed far one-way traffic, in which case the cartway shall be ten (1O) feet.

All roads shall be laid out to provide convenient access for ambulances, police, fire fighting equipment and other public servants and shall be kept free of obstruction which would inhibit emergency  equipment.
 

n.	No cabin, cottage or othe_r permanent building or structure, except as specified in Section 507 of this Ordinance, may be located in the flood plain. Refer to Section 507 far regulations pertaining to the parking or placement of recreational vehicles in flood plain areas.



67
 


o.	Cabin/Cottage Sites

(1)	Each site shall be well drained and laid out in such a manner as to provide sufficient open  and graded space  for the accommodation of the cabin/cottage and shall provide parking space for two (2) vehicles/automobiles. The parking spaces shall not interfere with the convenient and safe movement of traffic.

(2)	Consistent with Section 504 of this Ordinance, trees for the provision of shade shall be disturbed as  little as possible and, wherever practicable, trees, underbrush, large rocks and other natural features should be left intact.  Natural  vegetative  cover shall also be retained, protected  and  maintained  wherever possible so as to facilitate drainage, prevent erosion or gullying and preserve the scenic attributes of the area. See Section 504, Environmental Performance Staridards.           -

(3)	Recreational vehicles  may be used as accessory uses to cabins/cottages and the vehicle shall be parked at least ten (1O) feet from each other, buildings and other structures. Any accessory structure such as attached awnings, carports, or individual storage facilities shall, for purposes of this separation requirement, be considered to be part of the vehicle.

(4) Each site shall contain two (2) stabilized vehicular parking pads of gravel, crushed stone, paving, or other suitable material. The parking space for each vehicle shall measure at least ten (1O) by twenty (20) feet.

p.	Recreational cottage/cabin developments  may  have  provisions  for outside amateur sports such as fishing, hiking, bicycling, baseball and swimming, but no facilities, temporary or permanent, may be provided for spectator seating. No activities which involve the discharge of firearms or involve quasi-military activities or games shall be permitted or take place on the site. Use of recreational facilities, including swimming pools, is limited to the users of cabins and/or cottages.

q.	Related Facilities

 
(1)




(2)


(3)
 
Developments may provide toilets, laundry facilities, shower baths, public telephones and maintenance/groundskeeping structures. Developments shall provide potable water and refuse disposal facilities.

Each development shall have an office in which use records and other required or emergency information is kept.

No retail store, restaurant, refreshment stand or building/ structure with vending machines or other residential or nonresidential use, except as specified under this use, are permitted.









68
 



r.	Nuisances

(1)	Noise. The operation of public address systems shall be prohibited. Athletic and similar events shall terminate not later than ten o'clock (1O:OO} p.m.

(2)	Open Burning. Neither owner nor user  shall burn refuse in outdoor fireplaces, incinerators, nor other facility in the open.

s.	Garbage and Refuse

(1)	The storage and collection of refuse shall be so managed as to prevent health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding, accident hazards, or air pollution.

(2)	All refuse shall be stored in leak-proof, nonabsorbent,  rust and corrosion resistant containers with tight lids.

(3)	Refuse containers shall be conveniently located throughout the development.

(4)	Refuse containers shall be washed after each emptying and shall be maintained in a clean and nonodorous condition, and shall prevent the breeding of insects therein.

(5)	All refuse shall be collected not less than twice weekly.

t.	Insect, Rodent and Weed Control

(1)	The development shall be kept free from cans, jars, buckets, old tires and other articles which may hold water and provide temporary breeding places for mosquitos. Mosquito control measures and supplemental larvicidal measures shall be undertaken by the owner when the need is indicated.

(2} Fly breeding shall be controlled by  eliminating  unsanitary practices which provide breeding places. Refuse containers shall be repaired or replaced when damaged. The area surrounding the containers shall  not be permitted to become littered with garbage nor saturated with waste liquid from garbage. All refuse containers shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.

u.	Responsibilities  of  Owner/Operator

(1)	No owner/operator· of a development shall cause or permit any services, facilities, equipment or utilities required under the provisions of this use to be removed from, shut off, or discontinued except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs are in process, or during temporary emergencies when discontinuance of service is authorized by appropriate government officials.

(2)	The owner/operator shall maintain in good repair all roads, water supply systems, drinking facilities, sanitary conveniences, sewers, storm drains, sanitary stations, sanitary sewage disposal


69
 

facilities,  electrical   equipment,  auxiliary   buildings,  or  other services, facilities, equipment or utilities.

(3)	The owner/operator shall clear the site, ditches, hedge rows and bushes of any broken glass, bottles, cans, refuse and other litter as often as may be necessary.

(4)	Every cabin/cottage development shall be under the supervision of the owner/operator or the authorized caretaker who, if not in residence, shall visit the site each day the site is occupied. The owner/operator may assume the duties of caretaker. If.the caretaker is not in residence, information shall be posted as to where the caretaker may be contacted, and also the telephone numbers and locations of the nearest ambulance, hospital, police department, and fire company.

- (5) The  owner/operator  shall  maintain  in  a  clean  and  sanitary condition, the site, all sanitary conveniences, auxiliary  buildings, and other services, facilities, equipment or utilities installed, collected  and properly  disposed of.

(6) It shall be the responsibility of the owner/operator  to  maintain order within the development, and the owner/operator shall have the right to terminate forthwith the occupancy of any cabin or cottage by users who violate any of the provisions of this Ordinance or cause a public nuisance.

v.	Responsibilities of Cabin/Cottage Users

(1)	The cabin or cottage and surrounding area occupied by a user shall be maintained in a clean condition. Refuse, garbage, paper, litter, broken glass, bottles, cans, caps from cans and bottles, hazardous materials, and other refuse shall be deposited in refuse containers.

(2)	Every dog or other pet permitted in the  development shall be kept under control at all times and shall not be permitted to create a public health or noise nuisance. Dogs shall not be permitted to run at large, unattended.

(3)	Sanitary sewage from recreational vehicles shall be  discharged only into individual sewer connections or sanitary stations. Temporary methods of sanitary sewage disposal shall not be permitted  in the  development.

(4)	Undue noise shall  not be permitted at any time, and particularly between the hours of ten o'clock  (1O:OO) p.m. and eight o'clock (8:00) a.m. No activity within the development shall constitute a public  nuisance.

(5)	Vandalism or other unseemly or rowdy behavior shall  not be permitted.

(6)	No live woody vegetation or other live plants shall be cut or removed from the  development.





70
 



w.	License

(1)	It shall be unlawful to operate a recreational cabin/cottage development in Haycock Township unless a license has been issued by the Board of Supeivisors and any necessary permits have been issued by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.  Such license shall be valid until one
(1)	year from date of issuance and a new application  shall be made each year thereafter.

(2)	Licenses are not transferable. Notice in writing shall be given the Board of Supervisors within ten (10) days after a development has been sold, transferred, given away, leased, or the controlling interest otherwise changed.

·	(3) Applications shall be accompanied by complete layout and construction drawings which shall conform to the provisions of this article and to the construction standards f the Haycock Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.

(4)	Additions, deletions or alterations to the development layout or facilities shall be approved by the Township by means of an application for a revision to the license. Such application shall be accompanied by appropriate drawings showing the proposed work.	·

(5)	All first applications and applications for revisions and alterations of a cabin/cottage development shall be accompanied by a fee as required by the Township.

x.	Records

The owner/operator shall keep and maintain a daily registration list which includes the name of the user for each cabin or cottage, the time and date of occupancy and the time and date of leaving. At any reasonable time, the Township shall have the right to inspect the registration list kept by the owner/operator personally. Such list shall be maintained in the office on site, shall be accurate and shall be kept current on a daily basis. The owner/operator shall retain the registration lists for a period of not less than two (2) years.

y.	In the event that the cabin/cottage development is owned and maintained in common by the owners of the cabins/cottages, the responsibilities of the development owner, as stated previously in this section, shall be the responsibilities of a property owners' association which shall be established.

z.	Recreational Cabin/Cottage Developments are permitted only by Special Exception in the Resource Protection Zoning District.

D.	Office Uses D1	Office
Professional, business or government office, other than uses C16 or D2.




71
 

a.	An office located in a zoning district other than PC, CC, SC or Pl shall not exceed a gross floor area of five thousand (5,000) square feet.

b.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for each two hundred and fifty
(250) square feet of gross floor area.

D2	Medical Office

Office or clinic for medical or dental examination or treatment of persons as outpatients, including laboratories incidental thereto.

a.	A medical office located in a zoning district other than PC, CC, SC or Pl shall not exceed a gross floor area of five thousand (5,000) square feet.

b.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for every one hundred and fifty (150} square feet of gross floor area, plus one (1) space for every doctor
. and full time employee.

D3	Office Park

An office park is a planned development of office and related uses which includes improvements for internal streets, coordinated utilities, landscaping and buffering.	·
a.	Area  and  Dimensional Requirements minimum Site area: ten (1O) acres
minimum frontage at street line--site:  150 feet
minimum setback from street lines--site:  100 feet minimum setback from property lines--site: 75 feet minimum setback--internal streets: 25 feet minimum building spacing:  50 feet

b.	. Permitted Uses: C1o Day Care Center, D1 Office, D2 Medical Office, E1 Retail Shop, E3 Service Business, E4 Financial Establishment, ES Eating Place, E9 Motel, Hotel and Inn, E11 Athletic Facility, E21 Parking Lot or Garage, and G2 Research.

c.	At least seventy (70) percent of the total floor space of the park shall be utilized for office uses.

d.	Accessory outside storage or display of materials, goods or refuse is not permitted within an office park.

e.	Individual uses may be located in detached and attached structures.

f.	All uses within the office park shall take access from an interior roadway.
Access for the park shall be from an arterial or collector highway.

g.	All parking and loading facilities shall be located to the side or rear of buildings.

h.	Lighting facilities shall be provided and arranged in a manner which will protect the highway and neighboring properties from direct glare or hazardous interference of any kind.






72
 


i.	All commonly owned elements shall  be  owned  and  maintained  in accordance with the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act or other ownership arrangement approved by the municipality.

j.	The applicant shall submit a plan for the overall design and improvements for the office park.

k.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area.

E.	Retail and Consumer Service Uses E1	Retail Shop
A shop or store with a gross floor area of ten thousand (i 0,000) square feet or less selling apparel, bcioks, confections, drugs, dry goods, flowers, foodstuffs, furniture,   gifts,   hardware,   toys,   household   appliances,   jewelry,   notions,  · periodicals, shoes, stationery, tobacco,  paint, cards, novelties,  hobby  and art supplies, music, luggage, sporting goods, pets, floor covering, garden supplies, plants, fabrics and automotive accessories. Also included within this use shall be the sale of soft drinks, beer and other alcoholic beverages in sealed  containers not for consumption on the premises.

a.	All products produced on the premises shall be sold on the premises at retail.

b.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for every one hundred and fifty (i 50) square feet of gross floor area, plus one (1) space for every employee.

E2	Large Retail Store

A store with a gross floor area of greater than ten thousand (i 0,000) square feet, selling commodities and goods to the ultimate consumer such as supermarkets, department stores and discount stores.     ·

a.	All products produced on the premises shall be sold on the premises at retail.

b.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for every two hundred and fifty
(250)  square  feet  of  gross  floor  area,  plus one  (1)  space for  every
employee.

E3	Service Business

Service  business  including,  barber,  beautician,  laundry  and  dry  cleaning,  shoe repair, tailor,  photographer, travel agency  and photocopy center.

Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for every one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area used or intended to be used for servicing customers, plus one (1) space for each employee.

E4	Financial  Establishment

Bank, savings  and  loan association,  credit  union  and other  financial establishments.
 

a.	Far each drive-In teller window, a stacking lane shall be provided to serve a minimum of eight (8) vehicles. The stacking lane shall not be used for parking lat circulation aisles, nor shall it in any way conflict with through circulation or parking.

b.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for every one hundred and fifty
(150) square feet of gross floor area,  plus one (1) space for every employee.

ES	Eating Place

Eating place for the sale and consumption of food and beverages without drive-in service and wtthout take-out service. All food and beverages are to be served by waiters and waitresses and consumed inside the building while patrons are seated at counters and tables. The sale of alcoholic beverages must be incidental to the sale and consumption of food.

Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for every fifty (50) square feet of gross floor area or one (1) off-street parking space for every three (3) seats, whichever requires the greater number of spaces, plus one (1) space far every employee on the largest shift.

E6	Drive-Ins and Other Eating Places

Eating place which utilizes an inside window, service area or cafeteria line where customers place their orders and food is served far consumption at seating areas within the building and for customer take-out service. This type of eating place may also have drive-through service.

a.	Where a drive-in window is proposed, a stacking lane shall ba provided to serve a minimum of eight (8) cars. The stacking lane shall not be used for parking lot circulation aisles, nor shall tt in any way conflict with through circulation or parking.

b.	Trash receptacles shall be provided outside the restaurant for patron use.

c.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for every fifty (50) square feet of gross floor area or one (1) off-street parking space for every two {2) seats, whichever requires the greater number of spaces, plus one (1) space for each employee on the largest shift.

E7	Repair Shop

Repair shop for appliances, lawn mowers, watches, guns, bicycles, locks, small business machines and other light equipment, but not including automobiles, motorcycles, trucks  and heavy equipment.

Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for every three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area, plus one {1) space for each employee.

EB	Funeral Home or Mortuary

An establishment for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of the deceased and ceremonies connected therewith before burial or cremation.

Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for each four (4) seats provided for patron use, or one (1) off-street parking space for every fifty  (50) square  feet  of  gross  floor   area  used  or  intended  to  be  used  in the
 


operation  of the  establishment,  whichever  requires the  greater   number of off-street parking spaces, plus one (1) space for each employee.

E9	Motel, Hotel and Inn

A building or group of buildings for the accommodation of transient guests, chiefly motorists, containing guest rooms for rent.

a.	Motels, hotels and inns may contain the following accessory facilities: eating place, tavern, conference and meeting rooms, and banquet rooms.

b.	· Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for each rental room or suite, plus one (1) off-street parking space for  each employee on the largest shift. In addition, parking shall be provided for the accessory facilities noted in a. above based on one (1) off-street parking space for every four
(4) persons of total capacity.

E1o	Indoor Entertainment

An entertainment or recreational facility operated as a gainful business and taking place within a building including a bowling alley, skating rink, billiard hall; movie theater, theater or other similar use.

Parking  Requirements

Movie Theater, Theater:  One (1) off-street  parking space for  every  three
(3) seats provided for patron use, plus one (1) off-street parking space for each employee.

Bowling Alley:  Five (5) off-street parking spaces for every bowling lane, plus one (1) off-street parking space for each employee.

. Other Uses: One (1) off-street parking space for every one hundred and twenty (120) square feet of gross floor area or one (1) off-street parking space for every three (3) seats, whichever is greater, plus one (1) off­ street parking space for each employee.

E11	Athletic Facility

An athletic facility with indoor and/or outdoor facilities. Activities may include the following: court games such as racquetball, handball, squash, tennis, basketball, and volleyball; facilities for exercise equipment and health clubs; swimming pools; and facilities related thereto.

a.	Outdoor active recreation areas shall be set back at least one hundred
(100) feet from any lot line if adjacent land is zoned for or is in residential
use.

b.	Outdoor recreation areas shall be sufficiently screened and isolated so as to protect the neighborhood from inappropriate noise and other disturbances and shall not constitute a public nuisance.

c.	Activities not permitted under this use include a rifle range, sporting clays, trap shoots, other uses involving the discharge of firearms or quasi­ military activities (operations, games or training, including but not limited to paintballs or war game activities).
 

d.		Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for every three (3) persons of total capacity or at least one (1) off-street parking space for every one hundred and fifty (150) square feet of gross floor area, whichever requires the greater number of spaces, plus one (1) space for each employee.

E12	Outdoor Entertainment

Outdoor entertainment or recreational facility operated as a gainful business and not including an athletic facility, outdoor motion picture establishment, or vehicular track or course.

a.	Recreation areas shall be set back at least one hundred (100) feet from any lot line if adjacent land is zoned for or is in residential use.

b.	Recreation areas shall be sufficiently  screened  and isolated so  as to
. protect  the  neighborhood  from  inappropriate  noise  and  other disturbances and shall not constitute a public nuisance.

c.	Where the outdoor entertainment facility  includes  quasi-military operations, games, activities or training, including but not limited to paintball or war game activities, the following additional requirements shall be met:

(1)	These activities shall only be permitted in the PC district, by Special Exception.

(2)	A minimum lot area of ten (1O) acres shall be required.

(3l        A buffer or "out of bounds" area shall be established within  which no activities under this use shall take place no closer_ than one hundred fifty (150) feet to a street line or property boundary. The buffer area shall be clearly delineated by placing plastic fencing, plastic tape or some other material approved by the Zoning Hearing Board in a continuous band around the area where activities would be conducted. The marking of the  buffer  area shall be continuously  maintained.

(4)	The activities are to occur only one (1) day per week on Sundays, from the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.

(5)	No tournament shall take place during the first six (6) months of operation and thereafter only upon approval of a further Special Exception by the Zoning Hearing Board wherein it is established, among other considerations, that no violations of conditions  of this Ordinance  have occurred.

(6)	No retail sales shall be conducted from the premises including, but not limited to the sale of clothing, weapons, ammunition other than paintballs, and the like.

(7)	No building(s), except for sanitary facilities, shall be constructed in connection with this use.

(8)	Board of Health approval shall be obtained in accordance with the municipal sewage facilities plan (Act 537 Plan) for sanitary facilities on site.




76
 

(9)		No alcoholic beverages shall be permitted or consumed  on  the site.

(1O)	No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be permitted to engage in these activities.

(11)	Rules of conduct shall be posted and enforced.

d.	Where the use includes a rifle range, sporting clays, trap shoots or other uses  involving the discharge  of firearms, the requirements of Section 404.E11.c.  shall be met.

e.	Parking: one off-street parking space for every three (3) persons of total capacity, plus one (1) space for every employee.

E13	Tavern

An establishment which serves alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption and which is licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor. Control Board. The sale of food shall be incidental to the primary use.

Parking: one {1) off-street parking space for each fifty (50) square feet of gross floor area or one (1) off-street parking space for every two (2) seats intended for use by patrons, whichever requires the greater number of spaces, plus one {1) off-street parking space for each employee on the largest shift.

E14	Lumber Yard

Lumber yard where lumber and associated products are sold and/or processed.

a.	This principal use may be combined with a mill only when located in the Pl zoning district.

b.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for each employee on the largest shift, or one (1) off-street parking space for every three hundred
(300) square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater.

E15	Veterinary Office or Clinic

Office of a veterinarian with associated animal kennel. In no event shall animal kennels be allowed as a primary use.

a.	No animal  shelter,  kennels  or  runs shall be located  closer than  two hundred (200) feet from any lot line.

b.	Parking: four (4) off-street parking spaces for each doctor, plus one (1) space for each employee.

E16	Service Station

An establishment for the sale of vehicular fuels and the sale and installation of lubricants, tires, batteries and similar automotive accessories.

a.	A minimum lot width of two hundred (200) feet shall be provided along each street on which the lot abuts.





77
 

b.	Access drives shall be at least eighty (80) feet from the intersection of any streets, measured from the intersection of the street lines.

c.	All activities shall be perfonrned within a completely enclosed building, except those to be performed at the fuel pumps.

d.	Fuel pumps shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet from any street line.

e.	All automobile parts and similar articles shall be stored within a building.

f.	Lubrication, oil changes, tire changes and minor repairs shall be performed within a building.

g.	Vehicles awaiting repairs shall not be stored outdoors for more than seven (7) days.

.h. _ The sale of convenience-type products. shall be. permitted  as  an accessory use subject to the following:

(1)	It shall be in lieu of the sale and installation of lubricants, tires, batteries and similar automotive accessories.

(2)	The  sale  of · convenience-type  products  shall be limited to  a maximum floor area of two thousand (2,000) square feet.

i.	Paint spraying or body and fender work shall not be permitted.

j.	The sale or rental of automobiles, trucks, trailers or other vehicles shall not be permitted.

k.	All fuel tanks shall comply with Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources (PaDER) regulations for such tanks.

I.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for every three thousand (300) square feet of gross floor area or four (4) off-street parking spaces for each service bay, whichever requires the greater number of spaces, plus one (1) space for each.employee. Off-street parking spaces are not to be a part Of, nor interfere with the accessways to the pump.

E17	CarWash

A facility for washing automobiles.

a.	A car wash shall include a water recycling facility.

b.	Car washes shall be designed with a stacking area to accommodate a minimum of eight (8) cars. The stacking area shall not in any way conflict with through circulation or parking.

c.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for each employee. E18	Automotive Sales
The sale, lease or rental of new or used automobiles, trucks (not exceeding one
(1)	ton), motorcycles, boats and recreational vehicles.

a.	Display areas shall not be located in the required front yard.



78
 

b.	Automobile repair work shall be permitted as an accessory use provided the requirements for Use E19 Automotive Repair are met.

c.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area and one (1) off-street parking space for each two thousand {2,000) square feet of total outside vehicle display area, plus one (1) space for each employee on the largest shift. This required parking shall not be used for the display of vehicles.

E19	Automotive Repair

Automobile repair garage, including paint spraying and body and fender work.

a.	All work shall be performed within a fully enclosed building.

b.	All automobile parts and similar articles shall be stored within a building.

c.	Vehicles awaiting repairs shall not be stored outdoors for more than thirty
(30) days.

d.	The sale  of automotive  accessories,  parts, tires,  batteries  and  other supplies shall be permitted in conjunction with this use.

e.	Parking:  one {1) off-street  parking space for each one hundred {100) square feet of gross floor area, plus one (1) space for each employee.

E20	Truck Sales

Truck and heavy equipment repair and sales.

a.	Display areas shall not be located in the required front yard.

b.	All repair work shall be performed within a fully enclosed building.

c.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of gross display area, plus one (1) space for each employee on the largest shift.

E21	Parking Lot or Garage

A lot of record upon which the parking or storing of motor vehicles is the primary use, provided:

a.	No sale, rental, service or repair operation of vehicles shall be performed.

b.	The parking or storage of heavy trucks (exceeding one (1) ton) or trailers shall not be permitted.

c.	AJI parking lots shall meet the design standards for automobile parking facilities in the municipal subdivision and land development ordinance.

d.	All parking garages shall meet the design standards in Section 518.c. of this Ordinance.	·

E22	Multiple Commercial Use or Shopping Center

A group of commercial establishments which is preplanned and designed as a complex of related structures and circulation patterns, subject to the following:



79
 

a.	The minimum Jot area required for the district in which the site is located shall be met.

b.	All minimum building setback requirements for the district in which the site is located shall be met. In the case of a district with no building setback requirements, the following setbacks shall be provided:

 
Front yard: Side yards: Rear yard:
 
30 feet
20 feet
25 feet
 

c.	Not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total lot area shall be occupied by buildings.

d.	Permitted Uses: D1 Office, 02 Medical Office, E1 Retail Shop, E2 Large Retail Store, E3 Service Business, E4 Financial Establishment, ES Eating
Place, E7 Repair Shop, E1o Indoor Entertainment, and F3 Terminal.  ·

e.	Any use of the same general character as any of the abqve permitted uses shall be permitted when authorized as a special exception by the Zoning  Hearing Board, subject to such reasonable restrictions as the Zoning Hearing Board may determine.

f.	The proposed development shall be constructed in accordance with an overall  plan and shall be designed as a single archttectural unit with appropriate  landscaping.

g.	Outdoor storage and displays shall conform to the provisions of Section 404.H7.

h.	The distance at the closest point between any two (2) buildings or groups of units of attached buildings shall be not less than twenty (20) feet.

i.	The proposed development shall be served by adequate water and public  sewage disposal facilities, the  adequacy  of  which  shall  be demonstrated and guaranteed to the satisfaction of the Governing Body.

j.	Lighting facilities shall be provided and arranged in a manner which will protect the highway and neighboring properties from any direct glare or hazardous interference of any kind.

k.	Parking: five (5) off-street parking spaces shall be provided and maintained for each one thousand (1,000} square feet, or portion thereof, of Gross Leasable Area.

Gross Leasable Area {GLA) is the total floor area designed for tenant occupancy and use, including basements, mezzanines, storage areas, and upper floors, if any, expressed in square feet and measured from the
center line of common partitions and fro.m outside wall faces.
E23	Adult Commercial Uses

An adult commercial store, adult entertainment cabaret, adult movie house, and other adult uses as defined below:

Adult Commercial Bookstore - Adult bookstore is an establishment with more than fifteen (15) square feet of floor area devoted to the display, selling and/or rental of pornographic  materials  which  are  pictures,  drawings,  photographs  or  other



80
 


depictions or printed matter and paraphernalia, which if sold knowingly to a minor under 18 years of age, would violate the criminal laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in effect at the same time.

Adult Entertainment Cabaret - A public or private establishment which is licensed to serve food and/or alcoholic beverages, which features live sex, topless dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers, or similar establishment to which access is limited to persons eighteen (18) years of age or older.

Adult Movie Houses - An enclosed building used regularly and routinely for presenting, displaying or exhibiting obscene matter for observation by patrons therein, or similar establishment to which access is limited to persons eighteen
(18)	years of age or older.

Other Adult Uses - Any business, activity or use, similar to or of the same general
.nature.as the uses listed above.

These adult commercial uses shall be subject to the following prollisions:

a.	The building or structure of such use shall be located no less than one thousand (1,000) feet from any residential use or district, public or private school, church, recreation facility or any other religious, institutional or educational use.

b.	No such use shall be located within two thousand (2,000) feet of a similar use.

c.	No pornographic material shall be visible from a window, door, or  exterior of ·the building.

d.	No person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age shall be permitted within a building whose operation would be considered an adult use.

e.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for each four (4) seats provided for patron use, or at least one (1) off-street  parking space for  each fifty
{50)  square feet  of  gross  floor  area  used or  intended  to  be  used  for
service to customers, patrons, clients, guests or members, whichever
requires the greater number of off-street parking spaces, plus one (1) additional space for each full-time employee.

E24	Outdoor Motion Picture Establishment

An open lot used for the showing of motion pictures or theatrical productions on a paid admission basis to patrons seated in automobiles. Such use may include facilities for the sale and consumption of food and nonalcoholic beverages.

a.	Such uses shall have frontage on an arterial or collector highway and all access shall be taken from the arterial or collector highway. The applicant shall provide an analysis of the physical conditions of the road system at
the proposed points of  access.   Improvements to insure safe turning
movements and traffic safety shall be provided by the applicant as required by the Governing Body. The applicant shall provide sufficient vehicle stacking area or a marginal access road to insure that entering
vehicles will be able to pull off the road.

b.	The motion picture screen shall be no closer to any property line than one and one-quarter (1.25} times the height of the picture screen or the



81
 

minimum yard requirements of the zoning district, whichever setback is greater. Other buildings shall be subject to the minimum yard requirements of the zoning district.

c.	The  motion  picture  screen shall  not be oriented towards  the  arterial  or collector  highway.	·

d.	The maximum impervious surface ratio is sixty (60) percent. E25	Vehicular Track or Course
A recreational facility that provides a motor powered vehicle to a patron, for a fee, to drive on a track- or course that is located on the premises. Far the purposes of this use, a motor powered vehicle is a motorcycle, all-terrain vehicle (three or four wheeled), go-cart, or other vehicle with two, three or four wheels of a similar nature. These vehicles are usually designed to accommodate only one person.

a.	Minimum lot area:  ten (1O)  acres.

b.	The property shall front on and take access from an arterial or collector highway.

c.	Only one person shall ride on a vehicle at a time.

d.	The track or course and all areas used by the vehicles shall be paved.

e.		There shall be no racing an the course or track; however, vehicles may be timed.

f.	A fence shall be placed around the entire course or track.  It shall be a minimum of four (4) feet in height.


g.	The noise level at the recreational facility shall not exceed the noise limlts specified in Section 508 of this Ordinance.   The application for such a use shall be accompanied by a certification from the manufacturer or a
qualified operator of a noise meter stating the noise level of the motor that will power the vehicle. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to demonstrate in advance that when the tract is in full use by the usual number of vehicles at the usual r.p.m., the noise levels of Section 508 will not be exceeded at the property line. This use shall not constitute a public nuisance.

h.	Such use shall only be operated between the hours of  1O:OO  a.m.  and
10:00 p.m.

i.	The sale of food and beverages, except from vending machines, shall be prohibited.

j.	Fuel for the vehicles shall not be stored within the enclosed track area.
The fueling  point  shall  be  equipped  with  fire fighting  equipment.
Approval shall be secured from the Pennsylvania State Fire Marshall for
the underground storage of fuel.

k.	Public address systems shall be prohibited.

I.	Parking:  one (1) off-street parking space for every three (3) persons  of total capacity, plus one (1) space for every employee.




82
 


E26	Flea Market

A periodic sales activity held within a building and/or outdoors, where transient retail merchants offer goods, new or used, for sale to the public. (This use does not include garage or yard sales as defined in Section 404.H2.i.)

a.	The minimum site area shall be two (2) acres.

b.	Outdoor sales areas shall not.exceed forty (40) percent of that portion of the site devoted exclusively to the flea market activity.

c.	Outdoor sales area shall not be located in the minimum front, side or rear yards and shall be set back at least 50 feet from any lot line or street line.

d.	Sales directly from vehicles shall be prohibited.

·e.	- Tables and other accessories which are used for outdoor sales shall be stored within a completely enclosed building when the flea market is not open.	•

f.	Goods for sale must be removed from the site when the flea market is not in use.

g.	A flea market shall not be open more than three (3) days in any one week.

h.	The area to be utilized for outdoor sales shall be physically delineated on the site by fencing, plantings, markers or other means acceptable to the Governing Body.

i.	OUtdoor sales areas shall not encroach upon required parking areas and shall not intertere with traffic movement on the site.

j.	The proposed flea market shall be served by adequate water supply and sewage disposal facilities, the adequacy of which shall be demonstrated and guaranteed to the satisfaction of the Governing Body.

k.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for every one hundred and fifty
(150) square feet of gross floor area and outdoor sales areas; plus one (1)
space for each merchant.

E27	Dwelling in Combination

A dwelling or dwellings within the same building as an existing or permitted office or commercial use.

a.	The maximum density shall be one and five-tenths (1.5) dwelling units per acre.

b.	The total floor area of the dwelling  untts shall not exceed that of  the commercial or office use.

c.	All septic systems must be approved by the Bucks County Department of Health as adequate for the proposed dwellings.

d.	Separate  cooking  and  sanitary  facilities  shall  be  provided  for  each dwelling unit.





83
 

e.		Parking: three (3) off-street parking spaces for dwellings having three (3) bedrooms or less; four (4) off-street parking spaces for dwellings having four (4) bedrooms or more. This parking is in addition to the parking required for the commercial or office use.

E28	Auction House

An establishment where items of merchandise, antiques, animals or vehicles are sold to the highest bidder.

a.	Any building, structure or enclosure for  the  keeping  of  livestock  or poultry  shall be situated not Jess than one hundred (100) feet from any street line or property line.

b.	For animal auctions, the applicant shall provide for the disposal of animal. waste.   The plan for waste disposal shall be submitted to the  Zoning Hearing Board for review and decision.

c.	For the auction of motor vehicles and farm equipment, display areas shall not be located in the required front, side or rear yards.

d.	The outside display of merchandise, vehicles or other articles for auction shall  not be located on any required parking space areas or shall not interfere with traffic movement on the site.

e.	Activities, noise and displays shall be screened from adjacent properties by a Class C Buffer, as specified in Section 505.

f.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for every one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area within all buildings plus frfty (50) off-street parking spaces  for any auction use which takes place outside of a building.

F.	Utility, SeNice and Transportation Uses F1	Utilities
Transformer station, pumping station, relay station, towers (transmission or relay), substations, switching center, sewage treatment plant and any similar or related installation, not including a public incinerator or a public or private land1ill. In addition to public utilities, this use includes private utilities in a subdivision or land development.

a.	In residential districts such uses shall be permitted only where all of the following conditions have been met. These requirements shall not apply to uses that are exempt under Section 619 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.

(1)	Such installation is essential to service such residential areas.

(2)	No public business office, storage building or storage yard shall be operated in connection with the use.

b.	Parking: two (2) off-street parking spaces, plus one (1) off-street parking space for each employee normally in attendance at the facility at any time.






84
 

F2	Emergency Services

Fire, ambulance,  rescue and other emergency  services of  a municipal or volunteer nature.

Parking: three (3) off-street parking spaces for every four (4) employees on the two major shifts at maximum employment, or four (4) off-street parking spaces for each fire truck where no community room is a part of the building, whichever requires the greater number of parking spaces. Where a community room is provided, two (2) off-street parking spaces for each fire truck plus one (1) off-street parking space for each fifty (50) square feet of gross floor area.

F3	Terminal

Railway station or bus station providing transportation services to  the  general public..

Parking: off-street parking spaces as the planning commission and Governing Body shall determine adequate to serve customers, patrons, visitors, employees and vehicles normally parked on the premises.

F4	Airport or Heliport

A place where aircraft can land and take off.

a.	Office, commercial and industrial uses may be permitted as accessory uses to an airport or heliport when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception.

b.	Approval shall be secured from the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Bureau of Aviation.

c.	No buildings, runways, taxiways, parking areas, warm-up pads, communication facilities, tie-down areas, repair facilities, refueling facilities or other facilities shall be located within the minimum front, side or rear yard setbacks.

d.	Parking: off-street parking spaces for the airport or heliport as the Zoning Hearing Board determine adequate to serve customers, patrons, visitors, employees and vehicles normally parked on the premises. In addition, parking for the accessory uses noted in a. above shall be provided based on the parking requirement for the specific use.

G.	Industrial Uses

G1	Manufacturing

Manufacturing,  including  the  production,  processing,  cleaning,  testing  and distribution of materials, goods, foodstuffs and products.

a.	All  manufacturing   uses   shall   meet  the   nuisance  standards   listed  in Sections 508 through 515 (Article V, Section C) of this Ordinance.

b.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for each employee on the largest shift plus one  (1) off-street parking space for each company vehicle stored on the premises plus one (1) off-street parking space for each ten (1O) employees on the largest shift for visitor parking.  Also, the



85
 

applicant shall illustrate on the land development plan that there is sufficient area on-site to accommodate the parking requirement based on one (1) space for every five hundred (500) square feet of gross floor area in order to ensure a sufficient amount of parking can be provided if the use or tenancy changes. In addition, the requirements in Section 517.d. shall be met.

G2	Research

Research, testing or experimental laboratory

Parking: one (1) off-street parking  space for each employee on the largest shift, or one (1) space for every two hundred and fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area, whichever requires the greater number of parking spaces, plus one (1) space for each company vehicle normally stored on the premises.

G3	Wholesale Business, Wholesale Storage, Warehousing

a.	Wholesale business, wholesale storage or warehousing, excluding retail sales.

b.	The conversion of this use to any other use must meet the use, area and dimensional requirements of the intended use as a principal use in the zoning district. The conversion may be permttted only as a Conditional Use.

c.	Parking: one (1)  off-street parking space for each employee on the largest shift plus one (1) off-street parking space for each company vehicle stored on the premises plus one (1) off-street parking space for each ten (1O) employees on the largest shift for visitor parking. Also, the applicant shall illustrate on the land development plan that there is sufficient area on-site to accommodate the parking requirement based on one (1) space for every five hundred (500) square feet of gross floor area in order to ensure a sufficient amount of parking can be provided if the use or tenancy changes. In addition, the requirements in Section 517.d. shall be met.

G4	Mini-Warehouse

A structure containing separate storage spaces which are leased to the general public for the purpose of storing items generally stored in residential structures.

a.	The maximum height of storage units shall be twelve (12) feet.

b.	The minimum building spacing shall be twenty-four  (24) feet.

c.	No structure shall exceed six thousand (6,000) square feet in size.

d.	Outdoor storage of automobiles, boats and recreational vehicles shall be permitted based on the following ratio: one (1) square foot of outdoor storage area for every two (2) square feet of indoor storage area. The outdoor storage area shall not be located in the required yards and shall not interfere with traffic movement through the complex. Outdoor storage areas shall be properly screened so as not to be visible from any adjacent streets or property.

e.	Such use shall be surrounded by a fence at least six (6) feet in height.



86
 

t.	One office and one dwelling unit shall be permitted as accessory uses.

g.	No business activity other than leasing of storage units shall be permitted.

h.	Storage of explosive, toxic, radioactive or highly flammable materials shall be  prohibited.

i.	The conversion of one (1) or more units to any other use must _meet the use, area and dimensional requirements for the intended use as a principal use in the zoning district. The conversion of a miniwarehouse use or complex may be permitted only as a Conditional Use.

j.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for each two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross floor area of storage. These parking spaces should be distributed equally throughout the storage facility. In addition, one (1) off-street parking space for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross floor area of storage shall be provided at the project office for use by prospective clients.  If living quarters for a caretaker are provided, two
(2) additional off-street parking spaces are required.

Gs	Printing

Printing, publishing, binding.

Parking: one (1) off-street parking  space for each employee on the largest shift, or one (1) off-street parking space for every two-hundred­ and-fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater, plus one (1) space for each company vehicle normally stored on the premises.

G6	Contracting

Contractor  offices  and  shops  such  as  building,  cement,  electrical,  heating, painting, masonry, and rooting.

Parking: one (1) off-street  parking space for each employee on the largest shift, or one (1) space tor each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater, plus one (1) space for each company vehicle normally stored on the premises.

G7	Truck Terminal

The use of land and/or structures for the storage of trucks and for the transfer of freight from one truck to another.

a.	Short-term warehousing of less than thirty (30) days may be permitted under this use.

b.	The truck termin I shall be licensed by the Public Utilities Commission.

c.	Trucks with compressors running twenty-four (24) hours a day shall be located within a quadrangle of buildings or walls.

d.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for each employee, or one (1) space for every five hundred (500) square feet of gross floor area, whichever requires the greater number of spaces, plus one (1) space for each company vehicle normally stored on the premises.




87
 

Ga	Crafts

Plumbing, carpentry, upholstery, cabinet-making, furniture-making and  similar crafts.

Parking:   one (1) off-street  parking space for  each employee  on  the largest shift, or one (1) off-street parking space for every five hundred
(500) square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater, plus one {1) space for each company vehicle normally stored on the premises.

G9	Outside Storage

A facility or principal land use for the storage of materials and items such as automobiles, trucks, boats and tractor trailers in industrial areas.

a.	No part of the street right-of-way, no sidewalks or other areas intended or
. designed for pedestrian use, no required parking areas, and no part of
the front yard shall be occupied by outside storage.

b.	Outside storage and display areas shall be shielded from view from all public streets and adjacent lots.

c.	A class C buffer, as specified in Section 505, shall be provided along the property lines with all adjacent uses.

G10	Mill

Mill where lumber and similar products are processed.

Parking:   one (1) off-street parking space for  each employee  on the largest shift  plus one  (1)  off-street  parking space for  each company vehicle stored on the premises plus one (1) off-street parking space for each ten (1O) employees on the largest shift for visitor parking.  Also, the applicant  must  illustrate  on the  land  development  plan that  there  is sufficient area on-site to accommodate the parking requirement based on one (1) space for every five hundred (500) square feet of gross floor area in order to ensure that a sufficient amount of parking can be provided if the use or tenancy changes.	In addition, the requirements In Section
517.d. shall be met. G11	Fuel Storage and Distribution
Fuel storage and distribution tanks and related buildings.

a.	Approval shall be secured from the Pennsylvania State  Police  Fire Marshall and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources (PaDER) for the underground storage of fuel.

b.	No retail sales shall be permitted on the premises.

c.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for each employee, plus one (1) space for each company vehicle normally stored on the premises.

G12	Industrial Park

An industrial park is a planned development of industrial and related uses which includes improvements for internal streets, coordinated utilities, landscaping and buffering.



88
 

a.	Area and Dimensional Requirements

minimum site area: ten (10) acres
minimum frontage at street line-site: 1SO feet minimum setback from street lines--site: 100 feet minimum setback from property lines--site: 7S feet minimum setback--internal streets:  30 feet minimum building spacing: SO feet

b.	Permitted Uses: C10 Day Care Center, D1 Office, D2 Medical Office, E4 Financial Establishment, ES Eating Place, E7 Repair Shop, E9 Motel, Hotel or Inn, E11 Athletic Facility, E1S Veterinary Office or Clinic, G1 Manufaciuring, G2 Research, G3 Wholesale Business, Wholesale Storage or Warehousing, GS Printing and G6 Contraciing.

c.	Uses may be located in attached or detached structures.

·d.   At least seventy (70) percent of the total floor space of the industrial park must be used for industrial uses.

e.	All  uses within the  industrial  park shall take  access  from  an  interior roadway. Access for the industrial park shall be from an arterial or collector highway.

f.	All parking and loading facilities shall be located to the rear or side of buildings.

g.	Lighting facilities shall be provided and arranged in a manner which will protect the highway and neighboring properties from direct glare or hazardous interference of any kind.

h.	All commonly owned elements  shall  be  owned  and  maintained  in accordance with the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act or  other ownership arrangement approved by the municipality.

i.	The applicant shall submit a plan for the overall design and improvements of the industrial park.

j.	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for each employee on the largest shift, or one (1) space for every five hundred (SOO) square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater, plus one (1) space for each company vehicle normally stored on the premises.

G13	Junk Yard

An area of land, with or without buildings, used for the storage of used or discarded materials, including but not limited to waste paper, glass, rags, metal, building materials, house furnishings, machinery, vehicles, or parts thereof. The deposit or storage of two (2) or more motor vehicles not having valid inspection stickers issued by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, excluding farm vehicles, or of two {2) or more wrecked or broken vehicles, or the major parts of two (2) or more such vehicles, shall only be stored in a licensed junk yard.

a.	The maximum lot area shall be ten (1O) acres.

b.	Such use shall be a minimum of one hundred {100) feet from any street line or  property  line and four  hundred  (400)  feet  from  any  existing residential use.



89
 

c.	The land area used for junk yard purposes shall not be exposed to public view from any public street or residence.

d.	A junk yard shall be entirely enclosed by a solid fence or wall, at least eight (8) feet but no more than ten (1O) feet high, constructed of plank boards, brick, cinder block or concrete, with access only through solid gates. Such gates shall be locked at all times when the junk yard is not in operation. Such fence or wall shall be kept in good repair and neatly painted in a uniform color.

e.	A dense evergreen buffer shall be provided on the outside perimeter of the fenced area. The buffer yard shall be one hundred (100) feet in width. Evergreens shall be four (4) to five (5) feet in height and planted on ten (10) foot staggered centers. The buffer yard plantings required by Section 505, Table 1: Determination of Buffer Yard Class and Table 2: Planting Options shall not be applicable. However, all other requirements of Section 505 shall be met.

f.	The contents of a junk yard shall not be placed or depositep to a height greater than eight (8) feet.

g.	All paper, rags, cloth and other fibers, and activities involving the same, other than loading and unloading, shall be within fully enclosed buildings.

h.	The storage of toxic chemicals, gases or explosive products or nuclear wastes shall be prohibited.

i.	Dumping of trash or landfill operations and burning of any materials shall be  prohibited.

j.	No material shall be placed in a junk yard in such a manner that it is capable of being transferred out of the junk yard by wind, water or other natural causes.

k.	All materials shall be stored in such a manner as to prevent the breeding or harboring of rats, insects, or other vermin. When necessary, this shall be accomplished by enclosure in containers, raising of materials above the ground, separation of types of material, preventing the collection of stagnant water, extermination procedures, or other means.

I.	No burning shall be carried on in any junk yard. Fire shall be prevented and hazards avoided by organization and segregation of stored materials, with particular attention to the separation of combustibles from other materials and enclosure of combustibles where necessary (gas tanks shall be drained), by the provision of adequate aisles, at least fifteen (15) feet, for escape and firefighting, and by other necessary measures.

m.	All vehicles must be drained of all liquids before they are placed in the junk yard. An impervious base, free of cracks and sufficiently large for draining liquids from all vehicles, shall be provided. The base should be sloped to drain to a sump or holding tank and liquid shall be removed from the site as often as is necessary to prevent overflow of the system. Curbing around the pad must be able to retain run-off from a 100 year, 24 hour storm. All hazardous liquids shall be properly disposed of according to the Department of Environmental Resources' Rules and Regulations.

n.	A zoning permit shall be obtained on an annual basis with application made by January 15 of each year. The permit shall be issued only after an



90
 


inspection by the zoning officer to certify that this use meet all provisions of this and other ordinances.

o.	Parking: · one (1) off-street parking space for each employee on the largest shift, plus one (1) space for each company vehicle normally stored on the premises.

G14	Extractive Operation, Mining

Extractive operations for sand, clay, shale, gravel, topsoil or similar operations, including borrow pits (excavations for removing material for filling operations).

a.	Minimum Lot Area: twenty-five (25) acres.

b.	When applying for a zoning permit or change of zoning or when submitting land development plans, the applicant shall provide the following plans and information:                                ·

Plans Required

(1)	Plan Of General Area (within a one (1) mile radius of site) at a scale of one thousand (1,000) feet or less to the inch with a twenty (20) foot or less contour interval to show:

(a)	Existing Data

(Q	Location  of  proposed site.
(iQ	Land   use   pattern  including   building   locations
and historical sites and buildings.
(iiij  Roads--indicating  major  roads  and  showing width, weight loads, types of surfaces and traffic data.

(b)	Proposed Uses or Facilities

 
(Q
(iij
(iiQ
\IV)
 
Subdivisions.
Parks, schools, and churches.
Highways (new and reconstructed).
Other uses potentially affecting or  affected  by
·	the proposed extractive operation.
 

(2)	Plan of Proposed Site at a scale of one hundred  (1 00) feet or less to the inch with a five (5) foot or less contour interval to show:

(a)	Basic Data

(Q	Soils  and  geology.
(iQ	Groundwater data and water courses.
(iiQ	Vegetati.on··with    dominant   species.
(iv)	Wind data--directions and percentage of time.

(b)	Proposed Usage

 
(Q
(IQ
 
Final grading by contours.
Interior road pattern, its relation to  operation  yard and  points  of  ingress  and  egress  to  state  and
township  roads.
 
 
 


OiO		Estimated  amount  of  description   of  aggregate and  overburden  to  be removed.
(iv)	Ultimate   use  and  ownership   of  site  after completion of operation.
(v)	Source and amount of water if final plan shows use of water.
(vO	Plan of operation  showing:
a.	Proposed tree screen locations.
b.	Soil embankments for noise, dust, and visual barriers and heights of spoil mounds.
c.	Method of disposition of excess water during operation.
d.	Location and typical  schedule  of
blasting.
e.	Machinery--type and noise levels.
f.	Safety  measures--monitoring  of  com­ plaints.

c.	Performance Standards

(1)	Operations.	Extractive operations shall  meet all development and performance standards of Article V.

 
(2)



(3)
 
Setbacks.  No excavation, quarry wall, storage or area in which processing  is conducted shall be  located wtthin  two  hundred
(200) feet of any lot line or street line.

Grading. All excavations, except stone quarries over twenty-five
(25)	feet in depth, shall be graded in such a way as to provide an
area which is harmonious with the surrounding terrain and not dangerous to human or animal life.
 

(a)	Excavations shall be graded and backfilled to the grades indicated by the site plan. Grading and backfilling shall be accomplished continually and as soon as practicable after excavation. Grading and backfilling may be accomplished by use of waste products of the manufacturing operation or other clean fill materials, providing such materials are composed of nonnoxious, noncombustible  solids.

(b)	Grading and backfilling shall be accomplished in such a manner that the slope of the fill or tts cover shall not exceed normal angle of slippage of such materials, or forty-five (45) degrees in angle, whichever is less. During grading and backfilling, the setback requirements in subsection (2) above may be reduced by one-haif, so that the top of the graded slope shall not be closer than one hundred (100) feet of any lot line or any street line. Stockpiles shall not exceed one hundred (100) feet in height.

(c)	When excavations which provide for a body of water are part of  the  final  use  of  the  tract,  the  banks  of  the excavation  shall be sloped to a minimum ratio of seven
(7) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical,  beginning at
 

least fifty  (50)  feet from  the  edge  of  the  water  and maintained into the water to a depth of five (5) feet.

(d)    Drainage, either natural or artificial, shall be provided so that disturbed areas shall not collect water or permit stagnant water to remain.

(4)	Access. Truck access to any excavation shall be so arranged as to minimize danger to traffic and avoid nuisance to surrounding properties.

(5)	Stone Quarry. Stone quarries whose  ultimate  depth shall  be more than twenty-five (25) feet shall provide the following:

(a)	A screen planting within the setback area as specified in subsection (2) above shall be required. Such a screen shall be no less than twenty-five (25} feet in width and setback from the excavation so as to keep the area next to the excavation planted in grass or grounp cover and clear of any obstruction.

(b)	A chain link (or equal)  fence at least ten (10) feet  high and with an extra slanted section on top, strung with barbed wire, shall be placed at either the inner or outer edge of planting completely surrounded the area.

(c)	Warning signs shall be placed on the fence at intervals of no more than one hundred (100) feet.

(6)	No ground vibration caused by blasting or machinery shall exceed the limits established by the Act of July 1o, 1957, P.L. 685, as amended, 73 P.S., Sections 164-168, and the rules and regulations adopted thereunder, with the exception that no blasting shall cause a peak particle velocity greater than one (1.0) inch per second, measured at any property line.

(7)  No blasting shall occur between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; no blasting shall occur on Saturday or Sunday.

(8)	Buffering: A berm with an average height of fifteen (15) feet and a maximum height of fifty (50) feet shall be provided along all boundary lines. The slope of  the sides of the berm shall not exceed a three-to-one (3:1) ratio. Berms shall be constructed no closer than twenty-five (25) feet to a lot line or street line. Berms shall be planted and erosion control measures shall be taken as may be approved by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service. In addition, the  buffer requirements of Section 505 of this Ordinance shall be met. Buffer plantings shall be located between the berm and the property line.

(9)	Parking: one (1) off-street parking space for each employee on the largest shift, plus one (1) off-street parking space for each company vehicle normally stored on the premises.

d.	Rehabilitation and Conservation Requirements

(1)	The owner, operator, lessee of any extractive operation shall, at the  time  of  application  for  a  zoning  permits  submit  to  the



93
 


municipality its reclamation plan as submitted to the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources. No permit shall be issued where said reclamation plan provides for quarrying in areas of the site not permitted by this Ordinance.

 
(2)
 
Along with said plan, the applicant shall Include a timetable for the reclamation proposed for the site in general with an actual timetable for reclamation of slopes as may be found reasonable by the Zoning Hearing Board within the setback areas.
 

(3) Owner, lessee, or operator of any extraction operation within the municipality shall, within six {6) months from the date of this Ordinance or receipt of a zoning permit authorizing said extraction operation, whichever is the latter, submit a plan which shall include descriptions and plans for suitable after-conditions or after-uses for all the land affected.

(4)	Plans for the rehabilitation uses may include the following after- uses among others:                                       '

(a)	Open areas suitably graded and covered with  suitable shrubs, grasses, or trees;

(b)	Recreation land, ponds, and lakes;

(c)	Agriculture of any type;

(d)	Sites for residential use.

(5)	Rehabilitation shall commence within one {1) year following the completion or the discontinuance for a period of one (1) year of any extractive operation (or the completion of the excavation of a portion of an entire operation which can feasibly be restored separately from other portions of the operation and which is not necessary to the operation). Such rehabilitation shall be completed within five (5) years from the date rehabilitation commenced except where a longer period of time is specifically authorized as part of the rehabilitation program.

(6)	Rehabilitation shall Include removal of all debris, temporary structures, and stock piles.

(7)  A layer of arable soil of sufficient depth to sustain grass, shrubs, and trees shall be provided in those parts of the operation where feasible to do so. Grass, shrubs, and trees native to their area shall be planted thereon within six (6) months after the providing of arable soil.

(8)	Where the extraction operations are to be filled as part of the rehabilitation process, no material shall be used for fill purposes other than earth, stone, sand, concrete, or asphalt.

(9)	Water accumulation upon the site may be retained after the completion of such operations where the excavation cannot be reasonably drained by gravity flow, provided that adequate provision shall be made to avoid stagnation, pollution, and the danger of improperly controlled release of such waters from the site.



94
 

(10) Upon receipt of the rehabilitation plans, the municipality shall review the plans ta insure compliance with all provisions of this performance standard. Upon approval thereof, the municipality shall issue a certificate indicating approval of the plans as submrtted or amended, and the approved plans should be permanently files in the official records of the municipality.

(11} Plans may be amended from time to time by approval of the municipality upon application of the owners.

(12) A performance bond may be required by the municipality in an amount determined by the municipality to be sufficient to insure the rehabilitation of the affected site in accordance and compliance with the standards for the issuance of any original permit or annual renewal permit in accordance with the provisions of the plan of rehabilitation as submitted pursuant to this Ordinance, if the bond posted with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources or other agency is not kept in force or if the municipality is not named therein. The municipality may require that the bond posted with any state agency may not be withdrawn or reclaimed without municipal approval. With the approval of the municipality, and far such period or periods as may be specified, an owner may be permitted ta past his awn band without corporate surety.           ·

G15	Resource Recovery Facility

A facility or land use that is used far any one or a combination of the following: composting, incineration, material separation, recycling or trash transfer as defined below. Municipal waste landfill operations are not included under this use and open burning of any materials shall specifically be prohibited.

a.	Related definitions

(1)	Composting Facility:  A facility for the composting of the organic matter in municipal waste.

(2)	Incinerator: An enclosed device using controlled combustion with a primary purpose of thermally breaking down municipal waste and which is equipped with a flue.

(3)	Material Separation and/or Refuse Derived Fuel (RDF) Facility: The extraction of materials from municipal waste for recycling or for use as refuse derived fuel (RDF).

(4)	Recycling   Facility:	A   business  that   accumulates  source­ separated, recyclable material such as paper, glass, aluminum and/or plastic that is no longer useful for  its intended purpose. The materials are then sold to another business as a raw material . which can be used to manufacture a new product.

(5)	Transfer Station: A facility where municipal waste is delivered for the purpose of transferring and/or compacting the material into larger vehicles for transport ta a final disposal site or processing facility.	A transfer station may include the separation and collection of material for the purpose of recycling.

b.	Minimum lot area: ten (1O} acres.



95
 

c.	Any such use shall be a minimum of two hundred (200) feet from any public road as measured from the ultimate right-of-way of the road and two hundred (200) feet from any property line. Addltionally, any resource recovery facility shall be a minimum of three hundred (300) feet from any residential zoning district or occupied residential dwelling unit.

d.	Parking areas, vehicle storage, maintenance or accessory buildings shall be a minimum of one hundred (1OD) feet from any property line.

e.	Operation of a resource recovery· facility shall at all times be in full compliance with the statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the Rules and Regulations of the- Department of Environmental Resources (PaDER) and all provisions of this Ordinance and all other applicable ordinances. In the event that any of the provisions of this Ordinance are less restrictive than any present or future Rules or Regulations of PaDER, the more restrictive PaD.ER regulations shall supersede and control.

f.	Litter control shall be exercised to confine blowing lltter to the work area and a working plan for clean up of litter shall be submitted to the municipality. To control blowing paper, there shall be erected a fence having a minimum height  of six (6) feet, with openings not more than three inches by three inches (3" x 3"), twenty (20) feet inside all boundaries. The entire area shall be kept clean and orderly.

g.	Access to the site shall be limited to those posted times when an attendant is on duty. In order to protect against indiscriminate and unauthorized dumping, every resource recovery facility shall be protected by locked barricades, fences, gates or other positive means designed to deny access to the area at unauthorized times or locations. Such barricade shall be at least six (6) feet high and shall be kept in good repair and neatly painted in a uniform color. This limitation of access may be waived by the Zoning Hearing Board for recycling drop-off stations where public access is essential for the operation.

h.	Unloading of municipal waste shall be continuously supervised by  a facility operator.

i.	Hazardous waste as included on the list of hazardous waste as maintained by the Department of Environmental Resources shall not be disposed of in a resource recovery facility.

j.	All parts of the process--unloading, handling and storage of municipal waste--shall occur within a building. However, certain separated, non­ putrescible, recyclable materials like glass, aluminum, and other materials may be unloaded, handled or stored outdoors when authorized  by the Zoning Hearing Board. All outdoor storage shall meet the standards of subsections c and Ihereof.

k.	Paper shall be stored within an enclosurei.

I.	Any materials stored outdoors shall be properly screened so as not to be visible from any adjacent streets or properties.

m.	No material shall be placed or deposited to a height greater than the height of the fence or wall herein prescribed.





96
 

n.	No municipal waste shall be processed or stored at a recycling facility. For types of resource recovery facilities other than a recycling facility, municipal waste shall not be stored on the site for more than seventy-two
(72)  hours.

o.	A contingency plan for disposal of municipal waste during a plant shutdown must be submitted to the municipality and approved by the Zoning Hearing Board.

p.	Leachate from the municipal waste and water used to wash vehicles or any part of the operation shall be disposed of in a manner in compliance with Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources' regulations. If the leachate is to be discharged into a municipal sewage treatment plant appropriate permits shall be obtained from the applicable agencies and authorities.	In no event shall the leachate be disposed of In a storm sewer, to the ground, or in any other manner inconsistent with the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources' regulations.

q.	Waste from the resource recovery facility process (such as, but not limited to, ash from an incinerator) shall be stored in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried from the site by wind or water. Such residual waste shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from any property line and stored in leak proof and vector proof containers. Such residual processed waste shall be disposed of in a sanitary landfill approved by PaDER or in another manner approved by PaDER.

r.	A dense evergreen buffer shall be maintained as a permanent visual screen outside of the fenced area. The visual screen shall begin at the ground and extend to the height of the fence.  Evergreens shall be four
(4) to five (5) feet In height and shall be planted in two rows ten {1O) feet apart on ten (1O) foot staggered centers. The lower branches of mature trees shall not  be  removed.    In addition,  the  buffer  requirements  of
Section 505 of this Ordinance shall be met.

s.	Municipal waste landfill operations are not included under this use and open burning of any materials shall specttically be prohibited.

t.          The nuisance standards of Article V of this Ordinance shall be met.

u.	A traffic impact study and a water impact study shall be required.

v.	A zoning permit shall be obtained on an annual basis with application made by January 15 of each year. The permit shall be issued only after an inspection  by  the  zoning  officer  to  certify  that  this  use  meets  all provisions of this and other ordinances.

w.	A certificate of pollution insurance in compliance with all applicable sections of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act (Act 101 of 1988), as amended, shall be required on an annual basis.                                ·

G16	Municipal Waste Landfill

A facility using land for disposing of municipal waste. The facility includes land affected during the lifetime of the operation including, but not limited to, areas where disposal or processing activities actually occur, support facilities, borrow areas, offices, equipment sheds, air and water pollution control and treatment systems,   access   roads,   associated    on-site    and   contiguous   collection,



97
 

transportation and storage facilities, closure and post-closure care and maintenance activities and other activities in which the natural land surface has been disturbed as a result of, or incidental to, the operation of the facility. The term does not include a construction/demolition waste landfill or a facility tor the land application of sewage sludge. (PA Code Title 25, Environmental Resources, Part I, Chapter 271.1, as amended).

a.	Minimum lot area: fifty (50) acres.

b.	The municipal waste landfill operation shall be setback from any property line or street right-of-way line at least three hundred (300) feet.

c.	Direct access to an arterial road shall be required·for the operation of a municipal waste landfill.

d.	A traffic impact study shall be required.

e.	Operation of any municipal landfill shall at all times be in full compliance with the Statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and the Rules and Regulations of the Department of Environmental Resources and all provisions of this Ordinance and all other applicable ordinances. in the event that any of the provisions of this Ordinance are less restrictive than any present or future Rules or Regulations of the Department, the more restrictive Department Rules or Regulations shall supersede and control in the operation of such municipal waste landfill.

f.	Suitable measures shall be taken to prevent fires by means and devices mutually agreeable to the Department of Environmental Resources and the Municipality.

g.	Municipal waste shall not be burned at a municipal waste landfill.

h.	A municipal waste landfill operation shall be under the direction at all times of a responsible individual who is qualified by experience or training to operate a landfill.

i.	Measures shall be provided to control dust and a working plan for clean up of litter shall be submitted to the municipality. To control blowing paper, there shall be erected a fence having a minimum height of six (6) feet, with openings not more than three inches by three inches (3" x 3"), twenty (20) feet inside all boundaries. The entire area shall be kept clean and orderly. Cracks in, depressions in or erosion of cover shall be repaired daily.

j.	Access to  the site shall  be limited to those  posted  times  when  an attendant Is on duty. .In order to protect against indiscriminate and unauthorized dumping, every municipal waste landfill shall be protected by locked barricades, fences, gates or other positive means designed to deny access to the area at unauthorized times or lpcations.

k.	Unloading of waste shall be continuously  supervised.

I.	Hazardous materials, as listed on the Federal Hazardous Waste List promulgated under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act as defined in CFR Title 40 Chap. 1, Part 261, SubPart D dated July 1, 1984 as amended, shall not be disposed of in a municipal waste landfill.





98
 

m.	The disposal of sewage liquids and solids and other liquids shall be specifically prohibited in a municipal waste landfill.

n.	Litter control shall be exercised to confine blowing litter to the work area and a working plan of clean up of litter shall be accomplished.

o.	Salvaging shall be conducted by the operator only and shall be organized so that it will not interfere with prompt sanitary disposal of waste or create unsightliness or health hazards.. The storage of salvage shall be controlled in a manner that will not permit the inhabitation or reproduction of disease transmitting organisms.

p.	The entire site, including the fill surface, shall be graded and provided with drainage facilities to minimize runoff onto and into the fill, to prevent erosion or washing of the fill, to drain off rain water falling onto the fill, and to prevent the collection of standing water. The operator shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 75 and Chapier 102 of Title 25, Pennsylvania Code, as amended, and applicable municipal ordinances so that there is no adverse off-site impact from the drainage of surface water.

q.	Operation of any municipal waste landfill shall at all times be in full compliance with the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law, Act 157 of 1980 as amended.

r.	A dense evergreen buffer shall be provided outside of the fenced area.
Evergreens shall be four (4) to five (5) feet in height and shall be planted in two rows ten (1O)  feet apart on ten (10) foot staggered centers.	In
addition, the buffer requirements of Section 505 of this Ordinance shall be met.

s.	A zoning permit shall be obtained on an annual basis with application made by January 15 of each year. The permit shall be issued only after an inspection  by the zoning officer to certify that this  use meets all provisions of this and other ordinances.

t.	A final inspection of the entire site shall be made by the Department of Environmental Resources and the Municipality and their authorized representatives to determine compliance with applicable Department of Environmental Resources Rules and Regulations Title 25, Chapter 273, as amended, and approved plans and specifications before the earth­ moving equipment is removed from the site. Any necessary corrective work shall be performed before the municipal waste landfill project is accepted as completed. Arrangements shall be made tor the repair of all cracked, eroded and uneven areas in the final cover during the first two
(2) years following completion of the municipal waste landfill. A bond shall be posted to ensure that all corrective work is completed.

u.	A certificate of pollution insurance in compliance with all applicable sections of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act (Act 101 of 1988), as amended, shall be required on an annual basis.










99
 


H.	Accessory Uses

H1	Accessory Home Occupation

A customary home occupation for gain. An accessory home occupation is an accessory use that shall be clearly subordinate to the existing residential use of the property. Such uses shall meet the general standards and the specific standards related to the use as set forth below.

a.	General Standards. The following shall apply to all home occupations:

(1)	A home occupation must be conducted within a single-family detached dwelling which is the bona fide residence of the principal practitioner or in an accessory building thereto which is nonmally associated with a residential use. The home occupation shall be carried on wholly indoors.

(2)	The maximum amount of floor area devoted to this home occupation shall not be more than twenty-five (25) percent of the ground floor area of the principal residential structure (excluding the ground area covered  by an attached garage or such other similar building), or six hundred (600) square feet, whichever is less.

(3) In no way  shall the appearance  of the  residential structure  be altered or the occupation within  the  residences  be  conducted  in a manner which would cause the premises to differ from its residential character by the use of colors, materials, construction, lighting, show windows, signs or advertising visible outside the premises to attract customers or clients, other than a sign as permitted in Article  IX.

 
(4)
 
All commercial vehicles shall be parked on-lot. Only one commercial vehicle may be parked outside of a garage  or an enclosed  structure.
 

 
(5)










(6)




(7)
 
Off-street parking spaces are not permitted in the front yards. A ten (1O) toot wide driveway providing access to parking areas in the side or rear of the property may be located in the front yard. All off-street parking areas must be located at least ten (1O) feet from any property line. Off-street parking lots with three (3) or more spaces shall be buffered from abutting residences by evergreen  hedge  material  placed  on three  (3)  foot  centers.
Alternately, a four (4) to five (5) foot fence  may be erected which
provides a visual screen.

There shall be no exterior display of goods or storage of materials or refuse resulting from the operation of the home  occupation. All display or storage of materials, refuse and equipment shall be located within  an enclosed  building.

No equipment or process shall be used in a home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, dust or electrical interference detectable to the nonmal senses off the Jot. No equipment or process shall be used which creates visible or audible interferences in any radio or television receivers off the premises.




100
 

(8)	Frequent and repetitive servicing by commercial vehicles for supplies and materials shall not be permitted.

(9)	Home occupations shall not include the following: animal hospitals, commercial stables and kennels, funeral parlors or undertaking establishments, tourist homes, restaurants, furniture stripping, and rooming, boarding, or lodging houses.

(10)	A zoning permit shall be required for all accessory home occupations.

b.	Specific Use Standards.   The following  shall apply to specific types of accessory home occupations.

(1)	Use H1a Professional Offices

A professional office is a service oriented business use conducted within an enclosed area specifically designed far the functional needs of the use, wherein the professionat services of the practitioner is the saleable commodity offered ta the client. Professional offices include, but are not limited to, the fallowing: Office facility of a salesman, sales representative or a manufacturers representative. Office facility of an architect, engineer, broker, dentist, physician, psychiatrist, insurance agent, land surveyor, lawyer, musician, real estate agent, or accountant. Office facility of a minister, rabbi or priest providing that the office is open to the public or congregation.

(a)	No more  than two (2) persons, other than resident members of the immediate family, may be employed or subcontracted at the residence.

(b)	In addition to the off-street parking spaces required in this Ordinance for the particular residential use concerned, a professional office shall provide one (1) off­ street parking space for each employee, plus one (1) additional space for each two hundred (200} square feet of office space.

(2)	Use H1b Personal Service

A service business including, but not limited to, barbers, beauticians or photographers.

(a) Beauty parlors and barber shops may be permitted as a special exception provided no more than two (2) beauty parlor or barber chairs are provided.

 
(b)


(c)
 
No more than one (1) person, other than resident members of the immediate family, may be employed.

In addition to the off-street parking spaces required in th is Ordinance for the particular residential use concerned, personal services use shall provide one (1) off-street parking space for each employee, plus one (1) additional space for each two hundred (200) square feet of service space.
 




101
 


(3)	Use H1c Instructional Service

An instructional service is a home occupation in which the practitioner provides the client with special instruction in a specific area of study.

(a)	Instructional services involving a maximum of four (4) students at a time are permitted. In the case of musical instructions, no more than two (2) students at a time shall be permitted and shall be limited to single-family detached dwellings.

(b)	No persons shall be employed other than resident members of the immediate family.

(c)	In addition to the off-street parking spaces required in this Ordinance for the particular residential use concerned, an instructional service shall provide one (1) off-street parking space per two (2) students being instructed at any one time.

(4)	Use H1d Home Crafts

Home crafts are business activities whereby the commodity tor sale is completely manufactured and may be sold on the site by the resident craftsman.

Home crafts may include, but are not limited to, the following: artists, sculptors, dressmakers, seamstresses and tailors; and include such activities as model making, rug weaving, lapidary work and furniture making.

(a)	No more than two (2) persons other than resident members of the immediate family may be employed.

(b)	In addition to the off-street parking spaces required in this Ordinance for the particular residential use concerned, a home craft shall provide one (1) off-street space per three hundred (300) square feet of total floor area used for the home occupation.

(5)	Use H1e Family Day Care

A family day care use is a facility in which care is regularly provided for four (4) to six (6) children or adults at any one time, who are not relatives of the caregiver, where the care areas are being used as a family residence.

(a)	Prior to the issuance of a permit by the zoning officer, the, applicant. must obtain a registration certificate from the Department   of   Public   Welfare,   Bureau   of   Child Development Programs, for uses involving the care of children.

(b)	This use shall be conducted in a building designed for residential occupancy and for the safety and well-being of the occupants.




102
 

(c}   For uses involving the care of children, minimum  outdoor play area of two hundred (200} square feet of contiguous area shall be provided for each child as a recreational area for the children. This area shall not include· any impervious surface or parking areas.

(d) If a family day care use is located adjacent to a non­ residential use, a parking lot or on a street with a classification higher than a secondary street, the outdoor play area must be enclosed by a four (4) foot high fence which is deemed appropriate by the municipality. The outdoor play area should be located to the side or rear of the  property.

(e} No more than  two  (2)  persons  other  than  resident members of the immediate family may be employed.

(f) Parking standards: In addition to the off-street parking required for a single-family home at least one (1) additional off-street parking space is required for each employee and one (1) space for the loading and unloading of children or adults.

(g) The use may be expanded,  by special exception, to a Group Day Care Home which is a facility in which care is provided for more than six (6) but no more than eleven (11} children or adults at any one time, where the child care areas are being used as a family residence. The following criteria shall be met:

(0   All standards noted above for Family Day Care uses shall be met.

(iQ         The regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Welfare shall be met.

(iiO Prior to the final approval of the use by the Zoning Hearing Board and the granting of a permit by the zoning officer, the applicant must obtain a license from the department of Public Welfare,	Bureau of Child Development Programs.		Licensure is certification of compliance with Chapter H, Section BC of the Department of Public Welfare's Social Services manual by this Department to the Applicant subject to licensure under Article X of the Public Welfare Code.

(Iv}	Minimum lot area: two (2) acres.

(6)	Use H1f Trades

The use of a residence as a base of operation for the business. Trades for this home occupation include but are not limited to: electrician, plumber, carpenter, mason, painter, roofer, and similar occupations.





103
 


(a)	The  area  of  the  office,  storage   of  materials  and equipment (excluding  vehicles)  shall  not  exceed  the limitations of subsection a(2) above.

(b)	No manufacturing, processing or sales shall be conducted on the property.

(c)	In addition to. the off-street parking spaces required in this Ordinance. for the particular residential use concerned, a trades business shall provide one (1) off­ street space for each employee and one (1) off-street parking space for each business vehicle.

(7)	Use H1g Repair Service and Other Home Occupations

A repair shop for appliances, lawn mowers, watches, guns, bicycles, locks, small business machines and other goods but not including automobile, truck  and motorcycle repairs. Other home occupations not specified in uses H1a through H1f above.

(a)	No additional people other than resident members of the immediate family may be employed.

(b)	In addition to the off-street parking spaces required in this Ordinance for the particular residential use concerned, this accessory use shall provide one (1) off­ street space per two hundred (200) square feet of total floor area used for the home occupation.

H2	Residential Accessory Building, Structure or Use

Residential accessory building, structure or use including but not limited to:

a.	Garages or parking spaces for the parking of passenger automobiles including noncommercial trucks and vans with loading capacities not exceeding one (1) ton.

b.	Garages, enclosed structures or parking for commercial vehicles.

(1)	Only one (1) commercial vehicle, tractor or tractor/trailer combination shall be permitted on a Jot. In the RP, RA, SRH, VC- 1 or SC zoning districts, an owner or resident shall not park a commercial vehicle on a property  when the commercial vehicle meets any of the following criteria:

(a)	has a gross vehicle weight of 80,000 pounds,

(b)	has an overall length of 48 feet, or

(c)	has a wheelbase of more than 40 feet.

(2)	Any nonlicensed, noninspected, commercial vehicle, tractor or trailer shall meet the provisions of Section 404.H2.d. of this Ordinance.

(3)	No vehicle shall be left unattended with the engine running.





104
 

(4)	No vehicle equipped with a refrigeration unit shall be parked on the property with the refrigeration unit running.

c.	Structures such as fences, walls or signs.

d.	Buildings such as storage sheds, bath houses and private greenhouses or unenclosed (without walls} decks, porches and patios.

(1)	New and existing buildings or structures may extend into the minimum side or rear yards to a distance of ten (1O) feet from a lot line or street line.

(2)	No such building or structure shall exceed two hundred eighty­ eight (288) square feet of gross floor area.

e.	Parkirig or Storage of Recreational Vehicles and Other Recreational Equipment:	Recreational vehides and recreational equipment shall include, but not be limited to, the following: travel trailers, truck-mounted campers, motor homes, folding tent campers, autos, buSSli!S or trucks adapted far vacation use, snowmobiles, minibikes, all-terrain vehicles, go­ carts, boats, boat trailers, and utility trailers. Recreational vehicles or units shall be parked and/or stored either in a driveway, to the rear or side of the dwelling, in a garage, or in a roofed structure.

f.	Boarding Accommodations: The keeping of roomers, boarders or lodgers as an accessory use.

(1)	No more than two (2) roomers, boarders or  lodgers shall be accommodated.

(2)	Such use shall  be  permitted  only  in single-family  detached dwellings.

(3)	The roomers, boarders or lodgers shall live within the principal residential building.

(4)	No separate cooking facilities or dwelling units may be created.

(5)	One (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for each roomer,  boarder or lodger.

g.	Swimming Pool: A structure designed to contain a water depth of twenty­ four (24) inches or more and intended for swimming or recreational purposes. A swimming pool shall be permitted as an accessory use to a principal  residential  use, provided:

(1)	A zoning permit shall be required to locate, construct or maintain a swimming pool.

 
(2)



(3)
 
A swimming pool shall be located no closer to a property line or the street line than the minimum front, side or rear yard requirements or twenty-five (25) feet, whichever is less.

An outdoor swimming pool, including an in-ground, above­ ground/on-ground pool, and hot tub/spa, shall be provided with a fence or barrier that completely surrounds  the pool. The minimum height of the fence/barrier shall be four (4) feet. The maximum distance between the bottom of the fence/barrier and
 



105
 


the grade, pool deck or pool structure directly below the fence/barrier shall be two (2) inches. The fence/barrier shall be constructed of material which inhibits climbing for access to the pool.

(4)	Outside access points shall be provided with gates that comply with the requirements of subsection (3) above. An access gate shall be self-closing and have a self-latching device.

(5)	There shall be no cross-connection with any public sewerage system.

(6)	It shall be the property owner's responsibility to ensure the safety of users of the pool.

h.	Tennis  Court:   One  (1)  or  more tennis  courts  shall be permitted  as  an
_   accessory use to a principal residential use, provided:

(1)	A zoning permit shall be required to locate, construct or maintain a tennis court.

{2)  A tennis court shall be located no closer to a property  line or  a street line than the minimum front, side or rear yard requirements or twenty-five  (25) feet, whichever  is less.

(3)	Light shall be shielded or otherwise designed to cause no glare or disturbance on neighboring properties_

(4)	Fences provided to surro1,md a tennis court may be higher than seven (7) feet above the natural grade where the fence is not located in the minimum front, side or rear yard. .fences, greater than seven (7) feet in height above the natural grade, which are located within fifty (50) feet of a property or street line, shall be provided with buffer screening between the fence and the property or street line. One (1) evergreen tree (as specified in Section 505, Table 3.C.) shall be planted on twenty (20) foot centers or one (1) hedge or shrub (as specified in Section 505, Table 3.D or E) shall be planted on four (4) foot centers.

i.	Garage or Yard Sales:  The temporary display and sale of goods and craft items on a residentially  used property.

 
(1)



(2)
 
Such temporary uses shall be limited to occurrences of not more. than three (3) days.   Such occurrences shall be limited to not more than four (4) occurrences in a calendar year.

Signs advertising garage or yard sales shall not be larger than eight (8) square feet in area. Such signs shall be placed not more than forty-eight (48) hours before the sale and shall be removed within forty-eight (48) hours from the end of the sale. Signs shall not be placed on a utility pole. A sign permit is not required, but the requirements of this Ordinance shall be met.
 

j.	Accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet in height.






106
 

H3	Accessory Apartment

A separate dwelling unit subordinate in size to the principal single-family detached dwelling unit. The accessory apartment may be contained in the principal residence or in an accessory building. A mobile home, as defined in Section 245, shall not be used for an accessory apartment.

a.	Not more than thirty (30) percent of the total floor area of the principal residence shall be occupied by the accessory apartment. If the apartment is located in an accessory building, the maximum floor area of the apartment shall be six hundred and fifty (650} square feet.

b.	Not more than one (1) accessory apartment shall be permitted per lot.

c.	The lot must conform to the minimum lot area requirement for Use 81 Single-Family Detached Dwelling in the applicable zoning district.

d.	The single-family detached dwelling or the accessory building in which the apartment is located shall meet the minimum yard requirements for Use B1 Single-Family Detached Dwelling in the applicable zoning district.

e.	The principal residence must maintain the appearance of a detached dwelling with a single front entrance. The dwelling units may share the single front entrance or additional entrances may be placed on the side or rear of the structure. Exterior stairways and fire escapes shall be located on the rear wall in preference to either side wall and in no case on a front wall or on a side wall facing a street.

f.	Separate  cooking,  sleeping,  living  and  bathroom  facilities  shall  be provided for each dwelling unit.

g.	Trash receptacles  shall  not  be  visible  from  the  street  or  abutting properties except on scheduled pick-up days.

h.	All septic systems must be approved by the Bucks County Department of Health as suitable for the additional dwelling  unit. For units served by public sewer, certification should be provided from the servicing authority that adequate service is available for the additional dwelling unit.

i.	Parking: The required off-street parking for the principal dwelling, plus one (1) additional off-street parking space per bedroom shall be provided for the accessory apartment shall be provided.

H4	School Bus Shelter

A structure for the use of students waiting for a bus.

a.	Maximum floor area: 65 square feet.

b.	' Such structures shall be located at least five (5) feet from any street line and fifteen (15} feet from any other lot line. In addition, such structures shall meet the requirements of Section 523 of this Ordinance regarding traffic visibility across comers.

HS	Dormitory

An accessory building for the residency of students, religious orders, teachers or others engaged in the primary activity of the institution where individuals need to



107
 

live on the site. The density in such areas shall be based on persons per acre since dormitories are not family dwellings.

a.	Each dormitory resident shall have a minimum of one hundred  eighty
(180) square feet of space within the building.

b.	The density on an institutional site shall not exceed twelve (12) residents per acre.

c.	No more than twenty-five (25) percent of any institutional tract shall be devoted to dormitory use, including required parking areas.

d.		Parking: 0.40 parking spaces per resident shall be provided; however, if the institution has administrative policies which restrict vehicle ownership, the Governing Body shall establish the parking requirement.

H6	. Nonresidential Accessory Building, Structure or Use

Accessory buildings, structures, or uses customarily incidental to nonresidential uses, not including outside storage or display. Where a principal use is permitted by special exception or conditional use, any accessory use shall also require a special exception or conditional use.

Parking shall conform to the most closely related use in Section 404. H7	Outside Storage and Display
Outside storage or display, other than storage as a principal use of the land, necessary but incidental to the normal operation of a principal use.

a.	No part of the street right-of-way, no sidewalks or other areas intended or designed for pedestrian use, no required parking areas, and no part of the front yard shall be occupied by outside storage or display.

b.	Outside storage and display areas shall occupy an area of less than one­ half (0.5) the existing building coverage.

c.	Outside storage areas shall be shielded from view from all public streets, and adjacent lots in residential use.

d.	Uses requiring more substantial amounts of land area for storage or display may be exempt from the provisions of subsection b. above when granted as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board.

(1)	No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the Jot area shall be used in outdoor storage or display.

 
(2)


(3)
 
Outside storage and display areas shall not encroach  upon the front yard or any buffer yard.

In particular, uses appropriate under this provision include, but are not limited to, A2 Nursery, A7 Agricultural Retail, E14 Lumber Yard, E18 Automotive Sales, F3 Terminal and G7 Truck Terminal.
 

(4)  Among the uses that shall not be appropriate for inclusion under this provision are E1 Retail Shop, E2 Large Retail Store, E7 Repair Shop,   E16   Service   Station,   E19  Automotive   Repair,   G3




108
 

Wholesale Business, Wholesale Storage and Warehousing,  G6 Contracting and Ga Crafts.

HS	Temporary Structure or Use

Temporary structure, building or use. A temporary permit shall be required for structures or uses necessary during  construction  or  other  special circumstances of a nonrecurring  nature.

a.	The time period of the initial permit shall not exceed six (6) months. This permit may be renewed for three (3) month time periods, not to exceed a total of thirty (30} months from the initial permit. Extensions must be approved by the Zoning Hearing Board.

b.	A manufactured or mobile home may be installed during the construction of a principal residence provided the mobile unit will be removed prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit for the permanent dwelling.

c.	A garage  or other accessory  building,  partial structure  or temporary structure may be used for ·dwelling purposes subject to the following:

(1)	Cooking and sanitary facilities must be provided.

(2)	Sewage  disposal  methods  must  be approved  by  the  Bucks County Department of Health.

d.	Such structure or use shall be removed completely upon expiration of the permit without cost to the municipality.

H9	Temporary  Community  Event

A temporary activity including, but not limited to, flea markets, public exhibitions, auctions, carnivals, circuses, picnics, air shows and suppers for fund raising, and similar organizational  events and meetings.

a.	Such temporary uses shall be limited to occurrences of not more than seven (7) days per occurrence. Such occurrences shall be limited to not more than four (4) occurrences in a calendar year for each organization or property. There shall be at least a thirty (30) day period between such occurrences.

b.	Signs advertising a temporary community event shall be permitted in accordance with Article IX.

c.	Such uses may be permitted as conditional uses. The applicant shall provide the Governing Body with plans to ensure adequate parking, emergency access, road access, sanitary facilities, refuse collection, security, lighting, noise control, and clean-up after the event.

d.	The provisions requiring conditional use approval by the. Board of Supervisors shall not apply to a governmental or quasi-governmental body.

H10	Air Landing Field

A private, noncommercial air landing field.





109
 



a.	Approval  of the Pennsylvania  Department  of  Transportation,   Bureau  of Aviation  shall be secured.

b.	No air landing field shall be established if its flight pattern will overlap with the flight pattern of any existing air landing field.

c.	There  shall  be  no  rental  or  hangar  space  or  commercial  activities, including storage facilities or instruction in conjunction with this use.

d.	The air landing field shall not be located within the minimum yard setbacks for the applicable district.

H11	Satellite  Dish  Antenna,  Aerials,   Masts,  Radio  and  Television  Towers  and Flagpoles

a.	Such structures shall be set back from all property lines a distance of at
. least one and one-half (1.5) times the height of the siructure.

b.	Such structures shall be anchored to the ground.

c.	Such structures  shall  not exceed the  maximum  height  limitations  for principal buildings in the district.

d.	The following additional reg_ulations shall apply to satellite dish antennas:

(1)	No more than one (1) satellite dish antenna shall be permitted on any lot.

(2)	The diameter of a satellite dish antenna shall not exceed nine (9) feet when proposed as an accessory use to a residential use or to any use in RD, RA, RD, FC, VC-1, SRC, SRL, SRM, SRH, VC-2
and URL ·districts.   When separately  supported,  the total  height
of the satellite dish antenna shall not exceed twelve (12) feet.

(3)	The diameter of a satellite dish antenna shall not exceed 23 feet when proposed as an accessory use to any use in the PC, CC, SC, Pl and Ext districts.

(4)	A satelllte dish antenna shall not be located in the front yard of a residential structure.

(5)	When separately supported, the satellite dish antenna shall be screened by staggered plantings of evergreen trees or hedge which present a solid visual barrier to any adjoining residential uses and to the street.

(6)	Roof mounting of a satellite dish antenna is only permitted by condltional use subject to the following:

(a)	The applicant must demonstratii that anchoring the antenna to the ground would result in the obstruction of the antenna's reception window; furthermore, such obstruction involves factors beyond the control of the applicant.

(b)	For residential uses, the antenna shall be located on a portion of the roof sloping away from the front of the lot and no part thereof shall project above the ridge line.



110
 

(c)	A  satellite  dish  antenna  shall  not  be  mounted  on  a chimney.

(d)	The applicant must provide a certified statement from a registered engineer that the proposed installation is adequately designed for structural integrity and proper anchoring.

H12	Kennel/Livestock - Hobby

The keeping of dogs, cats and other domestic animals for hunting, training, or exhibition at organized shows and competttions; the keeping of livestock  and poultry for private purposes, other than associated with Uses A 1 or A3.

a.	Such use shall be accessory to Use B1 Single-Family Detached and shall not be operated as a gainful business.

b.	Minimum lot area: two (2) acres.

c.	No more than five (5) dogs or ten (1O) cats or no more than fifteen (15) smaller domestic animals shall be kept under the permanent care of the occupants.

d.	No more than two (2) head of livestock or no more than twenty-five (25} fowl shall be kept under the permanent care of the occupants.

e.	Animal shelters and runs shall not be located closer to the property line than fifteen (1 5) feet.

f.	Any barn,  animal  shelter  or  other  building/structure  for  the  keeping  of animals or fowl shall be situated not less than fifty (50) feet from any street line, property line, dwelling  or well.

g.	Animals shall not.be permitted to run at large, except under a managed exercise program.

h.	Animal shelters and runs shall be properly cleaned and maintained to prevent the creation of any nuisance, health hazard or odor.

i.	Except for the sale of young animals born to pets kept under the permanent care of the occupants, no animals shall be·sold or offered for sale on the property.

H13	Noncommercial Kennel

The keeping of dogs, cats or other small animals ordinarily kept in the home for private purposes.

a.	A noncommercial kennel shall be established as an accessory use only.

b.	No more than five (5) dogs, ten (1O) cats or other small animals ordinarily kept in the home shall be kept under the permanent care of the occupants.

c.	Animal shelters and runs shall not be located closer to the property line than fifteen (15) feet or the minimum yard requirement, whichever is less.

d.	Animals shall not be permitted to run at large.



111
 


e.	Animal shelters and runs shall be properly cleaned and maintained to prevent the creation of any nuisance, health hazard or odor.

f.	Except for the sale of young animals born to pets kept under the permanent care of the occupants, no animals shall be sold or offered for sale on the property.

g.	A zoning permit shall not be required for this use. H14	Bed and Breakfast
The use of a detached dwelling for the accommodation of over night guests tor a
fee.

a.	Such use shall be accessory to a single-family detached dwelling only.

. b.	Minimum lot size

(1)	Inthe RP, RA, RD and SRC districts, the·minimum.lot size shall be three (3) acres.

(2)	In the FC, VC-1, SRL, SRM, SRH, VC-2,  URL and  SC  districts, the minimum lot size shall be one (1) acre.

c.	The maximum number of guest rooms in the RP, RA, RD and  SRC districts shall be six (6). In all other districts, the maximum number of guest rooms shall be four {4).

d.	There shall be no use of show windows for display or advertising visible outside the premises to attract guests, other than a single, non­ illuminated sign which may not exceed four (4) square feet.

e.	Nonresident employees shall be limited to two (2) in addition to the resident members of the family.

f.	No external alterations, additions, or changes to the exterior structure shall be permitted, except as required by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry or tor safety reasons as required by any other governmental agency. Fire escapes or external stairways shall be located either to the rear or to the side of the residence.

g.	There shall be no separate kitchen or cooking facilities in any guest room.
Food served to guests on the premises shall be limited to breakfast and afternoon tea only. There shall be no restaurant facilities on the premises
open to the public.

h.	The maximum, uninterrupted length of stay at a bed and breakfast facility shall be fourteen (14) days.

i.	The use of any  outdoor  amenities  provided on the premises, such as  a swimming  pool or tennis court, shall be restricted  to the  resident  family and its guests and to  the  guests  of  the  establishment.	If the  outdoor amenities  are  within  one   hundred  (100)  feet  of  a  property   line,  an evergreen  hedge  or  row  of evergreen  trees  shall  be  planted  along the property line, which will block the view  of the recreation facilities from the adjacent  property.





112
 
..





j.	A zoning permit shall not be granted unless the applicant has obtained a valid Bucks County Department of Health permit for this intended use. If the proposed use is to be served by a public sewage system, the applicant shall submit documentation from the servicing authority that adequate service is available for the proposed use.

k.	There  shall  be one  (1)  off-street" parking space  per  guest  bedroom provided on the premises, in addition to other off-street parking spaces required by this Ordinance. The off-street parking  spaces  shall  be located either to the rear of the main dwelling or screened from the roadway and adjacent properties by fencing or natural vegetation.

H15	Off-Street Parking

Off-street parking subjei:t to the provisions and requirements  of Article V.

Parking of commercial vehicles on residential Jots shall be subject to the requirements of Section 404.H2.b.

H16	Signs

Signs subject to the provisions and requirements of Article IX.











































113
 





































































114
 

ARTICLE  V.	PERFORMANCE   STANDARDS

Section 500	Compliance

All uses and activities shall comply wfth the standards of this Article.

A.	GENERALPERFORMANCESTANDARDS

Section  501	Site Capacitv Calculations

The following site capacity calculations shall be submitted with all applications for subdivision or land development. Through these calculations, the net buildable site area, the maximum number of dwelling units, the maximum amount of impervious surfaces, and the required open space shall be determined.

a.	Base Site Area - Calculate the base site area.  From the total site area subtract
-future road rights-of-way; existing utility rights-of-way: land which is not contiguous or which is separated from the parcel by a road, railroad, or major stream which acts as a major barrier to common use; or land shown on previous subdivision or land development plans as reserved _for open space.

Total Site Area=	acres acres
Base Site Area =	acres

b.	Land with Resource Restrictions and Resource Protection Land - Calculate the land with resource restrictions and the resource protection land. In the event that two or more resources overlap, only the resource with the highest open space ratio shall be used in the calculations.

 



Resource Flood Plains
Flood Plain Soils
Steep Slopes: 8-15%
15 - 25%
25% or more Woodlands
Lakes and Ponds Lake Shore Areas Pond Shore Areas Watercourses Wetlands
Wetland Margins
 


Open Space Ratio 1.00
1.00

.60
.70
.85
.80
1.00
.70
.80
1.00
1.00
.80
 
Acres of Land in Resources
 
Resource Protection Land
(AcresX Open Space Ratio)
 

 
Land with Resource Restrictions Resource  Protection  Land
 
acres.
 

acres.
 

c.	Recreation Land - Calculate land for recreation.

While some of the open space may be resource protection land, it is required that at least a portion of the public or common open space be usable for active recreation.






11 5
 

 
Base Site Area
Subtract Land with Resource Restrictions Remainder
Multiply by 1/3 Minimum Open Space Ratio Recreation Land
 
acres acres
=	acres
x	acres
=	acres
 

d.	Combine Resource Protection Land and Recreation Land

 
Resource Protection Land Add Recreation Land
Resource Protection and Recreation Land
 
acres
+	acres
=	acres
 

e.	Standard Minimum Open Space - Calculate the standard minimum open space.

 
Base Site Area
Multiply by Open Space Ratio
 
acres
x	(Section 502)
 
Standard Minimum Open Space	=
 
acres
 

f.	Required Open Space - Determine the required open space.

The required open space is the resource protection and recreation  land or the standard minimum open space, whichever is greater.
acres

g.	Unusable Land - Calculate the unusable land.

If the Resource Protection and Recreation Land is less than the Standard Minimum Open Space, there is no unusable land. If the Resource Protection and Recreation Land is greater than the Standard Minimum Open Space, the unusable land is the difference.

 
Resource Protection and Recreation Land Subtract Standard Minimum Open Space Unusable Land
(Enter zero if calculation is less than zero}
 
acres acres
=	acres
 

h.	Net Buildable Site Area - Calculate the net buildable site area.

 
Base Site Area
Subtract Unusable Land
Net Buildable Site Area	=
 
acres acres acres
 

i.	Number of Dwelling Units - Calculate the maximum number of dwelling units.
For nonresidential uses, skip to subsection j.

 
Net Buildable Site Area Multiply by Maximum Density Number of Dwelling Units
(do not round up)
 
acres
x	(Section 502}
=	dwelling    units
 

j.	Impervious Surfaces - Calculate the maximum area of impervious surfaces.

 

Net Buildable Site Area
Multiply by Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio
 
acres
x	(Section 502}
 
Impervious Surfaces	=
 
acres
 





116
 

k.	Buildable Portion of the Site - Calculate the buildable portion of the site.

 
Base Site Area
Subtract Required Open Space
Buildable Portion of the Site	=   	

I.	Site Capacity Summarv
 

acres acres acres
 

 
Net Buildable Site Area (h)
Maximum Number of Dwelling Units (i) Maximum Impervious Surfaces (j) Required Open Space (f)

Section 502	Table of Performance Standards
 
acres
dwelling units acres
 		acres
 

The following table establishes the performance standards for the various zoning districts. All of the applicable standards for a zoning district shall be met. If after doing the calculations in the preceding section, one or more of the calculated standards or the standards in any other section of this ordinance is greater than on this table, the strictest standard shall govern.

a.	Minimum Open Space Ratlo--For uses where this is applicable, the figure in the column shall be the minimum amount of open space provided. However, if in doing the calculations in Section 501, the open space ratio in subsection d is greater than the standard in this column, then the greater shall become the minimum required.

b.	Maximum Density (DU/Acre}--The number in this column shall be the maximum allowable density for residential uses. This number may be increased  only  under the provisio_ns of Section 506.

c.	Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio-This number shall be the maximum amount of impervious surface for a use or development.

d.	Minimum Site Area--This is the minimum acreage required in order to qualify for a particular permitted use. For example, in order to qualify far a single-family cluster in the RP district, the site must be a minimum of ten (1O} acres.

e.	Minimum Lot Area--This column refers to the minimum area of land on which a use can be located. For all proposed residential uses required to have a minimum lot area greater than one (1} acre, there shall be a contiguous and usable area within the overall  lot of  at least one  (1)  acre  for  the  principal  building,  accessory buildings, driveways, parking areas and on-site sewer and water systems {where these on-site services will be used). This area shall not contain flood plains, flood plain soils, lakes, ponds, watercourses or wetlands.  For all proposed residential uses required to have a minimum lot area of one (1) acre or less, there shall be a contiguous and usable area within the overall lot of at least the minimum lot area required by Section  404 or 502, which does not contain any of these  noted natural features.  For all proposed non-residential  uses, the proposed lot area shall contain a contiguous  and  usable area of  at  least the minimum  lot area required in Section 502 which  does  not  contain  any  of  these  noted natural features.   All uses, activities and buildings  on lots with natural features  shall comply  with  the  requirements  of  Section  504  Environmental  Performance Standards.








117
 
TABLE  OF PERFORMANCE  STANDARDS

 


District	Use
 
Minimum Open Space Ratio
 
Maximum Density DU/Acre
 
Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio
 
Minimum Site Area
 
Minimum Lot
Are a
 
RP	B1-Slngle Family Detached	-	.44	.10	2 acres	2 acres
BS-Single Family Cluster	.7S	.21	.05	10 acres	1 acre**
Other Permitted Uses•	-	.OS	5 acres	5 acres

RA	Bl-Single Family Detached	-	.44	.10	2 acres		2 acres BS-Single Family Cluster	.so	.so	.10	4 acres	30,000 sq. It.** Other Permitted Uses•	-		-	.10	2 acres		2 acres

RD	B1-Slngle Family Detached	-	.87	.11	1 acre	1 acre
BS-Single Family Cluster	.so	.90	.10	4 acres	20,000 sq. It.**
Other Permitted Uses•	-	-	.1S	2 acres	2 acres
FC	All Permitted Uses•	-		-	.1S	3 acres	1 acre SRO		B1-Single Family Detached	-	.44	.10	2 acres	2 acres
BS-Single Family Cluster  _	.50	.90	.10	4 acres	20,000 sq. It.**
BS-Performance Standard
Subdivision
Other Permitted Uses•

VC-1	B1-Slngle Family Detached	-	1.9	.19	20,000 sq. ft.	20,000 sq. ft.
B4-Village Twin	-	2.3	.25	30,000 sq. ft	1S,000 sq. ft.
Other Permitted Uses•	-	-	.so	30,000 sq. ft.	30,000 sq. It.

SRL	Bl-Single Family Detached	-	1.9	.19	20,000 sq. ft.	20,000 sq. ft.
BS-Single Family Cluster	.25	2.2	.20	4 acres	12,SOO sq. ft.**
BS-Performance Standard
Subdivision	.55	2.7S	.25	5 acres
Other Permitted Uses•	-	-	.20	1 acre	1 acre

SRM	B1-Slngle Family Detached	-	1.9	.20	15,000 sq. ft:	1S,000 sq. It.
BS-Single Family Cluster	.15	2.2	.25	4 acres	1o,ooo sq. ft.**
BS-Performance Standard
Subdivision	.45	3.8	.30	S acres
Other Permitted Uses•	-	.25	1 acre	1 acre
 

SRH	B1-Single Family  Detached
BS-Single Family Cluster BS-Performance Standard
 

12,000 sq. ft.
10,000 sq. ft.**
 
Subdivision	.35	4.5	.33	S acres	-
Other Permitted Uses•	-	-	.30	30,000 sq. ft.	30,000 sq. ft.

VC-2	Bl-Single Family Detached	-	2.3	.20	15,000 sq. ft.	15,000 sq. It.
B4-Village Twin	-	3.2	.30	20,000 sq. ft	1o,ooo sq. ft.
Other Permitted Uses•	-	-	.50	30,000 sq. ft.	30,000 sq. ft.

URL	B1-Slngle Family Detached	-	3.2	.27	9,000 sq. ft.	9,000 sq. ft.
BS-Performance Standard
Subdivision	.30	6.0	.39	20,000 sq. ft.	-
Other Permitted Uses•	-	-	.35	20,000 sq. ft.	20,000 sq. ft.

PC	All Permitted Uses•	-	-	.8S		1 acre		1 acre cc	All Permitted Uses*	-	-	.9S	2,500 sq. ft.	2,500 sq. ft. SC	All Permitted Uses•	-	-	.50		1 acre		1 acre
Pl	All Permitted Uses•	-	-	.60	1 acre	1 acre
'EXT	All Permitted Uses•	-	-	-	2 acres	2 acres

•	Unless a greater standard is specified in Section 404 Use Regulations.
**	For Use BS Single Family Cluster, the minimum lot area shall be the minimum average Jot area.
The minimum lot area for Single Family Cluster is specttied in Section 404.BS.
 

Section 503	Area and Dimensional Requirements

The following table establishes the pertormance standards for the various zoning districts except where  greater or lesser standards are established in Section 404. In order for the standards in Section 404 to apply, all requirements in that section must be met.

Minimum	Minimum Yards*	Maximum	Maximum
DISTRICT	Lot Width
(Ft.l{Ft.)	Front
(Ft.)	Side
(Ft.)	Rear
(Ft.)	Floor Area
Ratio	Building Height
RP	200	75	30	75		35
RA	200	75	30	75		35
RD	200	75	40	75		35
FC	150	50	30	50	.20	35
SRC	200	75	40	75		35
VC-1	100	15	20	25		35
SRL	150	50	30	50		35
SRM	150	50	30	50		35
SRH	100	50	25	50		35
VC-2	100	15	20	25		35
URL	100	40	20	40		35
PC	150	50	30	50	.40	35
cc	
30			
20	
3.00	
65
SC	150	30	30	50	.25	35
Pl	150	50	30	50	.40	35
EXT.	200	150	50	50	.10	35

•	The minimum front yard along an arterial highway shall be one hundred (100) feet and the minimum front yard along a collector highway shall be sixty-five (65) feet. In boroughs and in village zoning districts, a minimum front yard requirement shall be established by the Governing Body after consultation with the Planning Commission.

Section 504	Environmental Pertormance Standards

All uses and activities established after the effective date of this Ordinance shall comply with the following standards. Site alterations, regrading, filling or clearing of any natural resources prior to the submission of applications for zoning or building permits or the submission of plans for subdivision or land development shall be a violation of this ordinance. In the event that two or more resources overlap, the resource with the greatest protection standard (the least amount of alteration, regrading, clearing or building) shall apply to the area of overlap.

a.	Flood Plain:. Such areas shall remain undeveloped, except for minor road crossings where design approval is obtained from the Municipality and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources and where no other reasonable access is available. See Section 507 Flood Plain Regulations.

b.	Flood Plain Soils: Such areas shall remain undeveloped, except for minor road crossings  where  design  approval  is  obtained  from  the  Municipality  and the


119
 


Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources and where no other reasonable access is available. Flood plain soils shall not be used where the one hundred year flood plain (with a floodway and flood fringe) has been delineated. See Section 507 Flood Plain Regulations.

c.	Steep Slopes:  In areas of steep slopes, the following standards shall apply:

(1)	8% to 15%. No more than forty  percent (40%) of such areas shall be altered, regraded, cleared or built upon.

(2)	15% to 25%.  No more than thirty percent (30%) of such areas shall be altered, regraded, cleared or built upon.

(3)	25% or steeper. No more than fifteen percent (15%) of such areas shall be altered, regraded, cleared or built upon.

(4)	·Areas of steep slope that are less than three thousana  (3,000)  square feet shall be exempt from these standards.

d.	Woodlands: No more than twenty (20) percent of such areas shall be altered, regraded, cleared or built upon. The remaining eighty (80)  percent  shall  be maintained as permanent woodland.

e.	Tree Protection Zone: Such areas shall not be altered, regraded, compacted or built upon, nor used for storage or parking of vehicles.

f.	Lakes, Ponds and Watercourses: Such areas shall remain undisturbed, undeveloped and free-flowing. Such areas shall not be altered, regraded, filled, piped, diverted or built upon, except for minor road crossings where design approval is obtained from the Municipality and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources and where no other reasonable access is available.

g.	Lake Shore Area: The shorelines of lakes, to a distance of three hundred (300) feet from the shorelines, shall contain no more than ten (1O) percent impervious surfaces. At least seventy (70) percent shall remain undeveloped in which no alteration, regrading, filling or development shall be permitted.

h.	Pond Shore Area: The shorelines of ponds, to a distance of one hundred (100) feet from the shorelines, shall contain no more than ten (10) percent impervious surfaces. At least eighty (80) percent shall remain undeveloped in which no alteration, regrading, filling or development shall be permitted.

i.	Wetlands: The following standards shall apply to wetlands:

(1)	Delineation of Wetlands.  When the National Wetlands Inventory (NWI) Maps indicate wetlands on a site or when a site contains hydric soils1 or
an area with a predominance of wetlands vegetation,2 an on-site investigation shall be conducted to determine if wetlands are present on the site. A landowner or an applicant shall use one of the following methods to delineate wetlands:



1	See Section 237 for a list of hydrlc soils.

2	See Appendix A for a plant list of common wetland species found in Bucks County. These species are reliable indicators of wetlands when found dominating a site (e.g. comprising more than 50% of the vegetation).



120
 

(a)	Wetland boundaries shall be delineated through an on-site assessment which shall be conducted by a professional soil scientist or others of demonstrated qualifications. Such a person shall certify that the methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts, including the presence  of wetlands vegetation, hydric soils and/or hydrologic indicators. A study shall be submitted with sufficient detail to allow a thorough review by the municipality. The study must be approved by the Governing Body.

(b)	A wetlands delineation validated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. In the event that a wetlands delineation validated by the U. S. Army Corps of  Engineers is shown to vary from a wetlands boundary derived from subsection (a) above, the Corps delineation shall govern.

(2)	-Wetlands of one (1) acre or greater in size shall remain as permanent open  space.  Such  areas  shall  not  be  altered,  regraded, filled,  piped, diverted  or  built  upon,  except  for  minor  road crossings  where  design approval  is  obtained from the Municipality, where State and Federal permits have been  obtained,  and where  no other  reasonable  access  Is available.

(3)	Wetlands of less than one (1) acre in size shall not be altered, regraded, filled, piped, diverted or built upon except where State and Federal permits have been obtained.

j.	Wetland Margin: For wetlands of one (1) acre or greater in size, a wetland margin shall be provided. The wetland margin shall extend one hundred (100} feet from the wetland boundary or to the limit of the hydrlc soils, whichever is less. At least eighty (80} percent shall remain undeveloped in which no alteration, regrading, filling or development shall be permitted.

In addttion, any  Department of  Environmental  Resources'  regulations  (under Chapter 105} concerning activities in wetland margins shall be met.

k.	Storm Water: All uses shall limit the rate of stormwater run-off so that the rate of run-off generated is no more than that of the site in its natural condition. Where farm field or disturbed earth is the existing condition, meadow shall be used as the starting base for such calculations instead of the actual condttions. All run-off calculations shall be based on 1oo year, 24 hour storms. The method for such calculations shall be that contained in the United States Department of Agriculture, Soils Conservation "Engineering Field Manual, Notice #4" of April 30, 1971, as amended.

I.	Soil Erosion and Sedimentation: All uses shall protect streams, lakes and ponds from sedimentation damage and control erosion in accordance with the "Clean Streams Law P.L. 187," Chapter 102, except that in addition, all subdivisions and land developments shall submtt a soil erosion and sedimentation plan as part of the preliminary subdivision or land development plan even where these are less than twenty-five (25) acres in extent.

m.	Sewage Disposal: All sewage disposal systems, regardless of type, shall meet the requirements and procedures of the Municipal Sewage Facilities Plan, the Bucks County Department of Health and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources. The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this section for all applications for zoning or building permits.




121
 


n.	The Permanent Removal of Topsoil: The permanent removal of topsoil from any parcel of land shall be prohibited, except in Extraction Districts and as follows:

(1)	During actual construction on premises, that portion of the topsoil present which covers an area to be occupied by permanent structures or permanently located materials of an impervious nature or ponds and takes may be considered excess, and may be removed by the owner.

(2)	During regrading operations conducted upon premises, whether or not carried on in conjunction with on-site construction, excess topsoil remaining after restoring proper topsoil cover to the areas of the parcel upon which regrading operations were conducted may be removed by the owner.

(3)	Areas of the  site  not  occupied  by  permanent  structures,  Impervious surfaces, ponds or lakes shall be provided with a top layer of arable soil to
· a compacted depth of not less than six (6) inches.

o.	Permanent Removal of Subsurface Solids: The permanent removal of subsurface solids, whether soil, clay, or mineral in nature, for other than on-site construction or grading purposes shall be permitted. However, the provisions of Section 504.n., above, shall be met for the restoration of topsoil.

Section 505	Buffer Yards

a.	Buffering serves to soften the outline of buildings, to screen glare and noise, and to create a visual and/or physical barrier between conflicting land uses. Buffer yards are required between uses and along existing and proposed streets. The extent of b_uffering required shall be determined by the type of use proposed and the adjacent uses or streets surrounding the proposed development.

To  determine  the  required  buffer yard  and planting schedule,  a three  step procedure should be followed:

 
Step 1 -­
Step 2 -
Step 3 -

Step 1 -
 
Site Analysis and Determination of Buffer Yard Class: Selection of the Planting Option for the Buffer Yard Class: Selection of the Plant Materials from the Plant Materials List.

Site Analysis and Determination of Buffer Yard Class:
 

For each property boundary, the applicant shall determine the adjacent land use. Land use information shall be determined by an on-site survey. Table 1 specifies the buffer yard class for each boundary.

The applicant shall match his proposed land use with the corresponding adjacent land use for each property boundary. The letter indicates the buffer yard class.

Step 2 -   Selection of the Planting Option for the Buffer Yard Class:

After determining the buffer yard class, the applicant shall select a planting option from Table 2. For each buffer class, several planting options are avallabte, one of which the applicant shall select to meet the buffer yard requirement for each boundary.

Step 3 -  Selection of the Plant Materials from the Plant Materials List.

For each planting option, any of the plant materials outlined in Table 3 may be utilized.  Minimum plant size, given either in height or in caliper, is indicated on



122
 

this table. The Planning Commission may permit other plant types if they are hardy to the area, are not subject to blight or disease, and are of the same general character and growth habit as those listed in Table 3. All plant material shall meet the standards of the American Association of Nurserymen.

The applicant shall not be required to provide a buffer yard should existing planting, topography, or man-made structures be deemed acceptable for screening purposes by the Planning Commission or the Zoning Officer.

b.	General  Requirements

(1)	Location of Buffer Yard

(a)	The buffer yard shall be measured from the property line or the near street line where a street serves as the property line.

{b) The buffer yard may overlap the required front, side or rear yards and, in case of conflict, the larger yard requirements shall apply.

(c)  The buffer yard may be part of the lot area assigned to a dwelling unit; however, the portion of the lot area containing the buffer yard must be in addition to the required minimum lot area. A deed restriction shall be placed on the lot in accordance with Section 533 of this Ordinance.

(d) No more than thirty (30} percent of the required open space area shall be located in the buffer yard.

(2)	All buffer yards shall be maintained and kept clean of all debris, rubbish, weeds and tall grass.

(3)	No structure, sign, manUfacturing or processing activity, commercial activity, parking, or storage or display of materials shall be permitted in the buffer yard.

(4)	Existing Buffer: All existing deciduous and coniferous trees larger than two (2) inches in caliper and/or six (6} feet in height may be considered to contribute to the definition of an existing buffer on the property. If the amount of existing plant material that size or greater equals any of the planting requirements, the equivalent reduction of required plant material may be taken. In all cases, existing plant material of the above caliper and
height shall be preserved in any buffer yard except where clearance is required to insure adequate sight distance. Any removal shall, where feasible, involve relocation rather than clearing.

(5) Plant materials shall be permanently maintained and any plant material which does not live shall be replaced.

(6) Planting design: It is encouraged that plant materials in buffer yards be planted in natural clusters that will give privacy but do not block views or vistas. The exception shall be commercial or industrial uses bordering residential uses. Here a dense, visual screen is required. Thus, plant material shall be at least four (4) feet high when planted and be of such species as will ultimately produce a screen at least eight (8) feet high.

(7) The plant material shall be so placed that at maturity it will be no closer than three (3) feet from any property or street line.




123
 



(8)     A clear sight triangle shall be maintained at all street intersections and at all points where private accessways intersect public streets In accordance wfth Section 523.

(9) The  screen planting shall be broken only at points of vehicular  or pedestrian access.

(1O) Prior to the issuance of any zoning permit, complete plans showing the arrangement of all buffer yards and the placement, species and size of all plant materials to be placed in such buffer yard shall be reviewed by the Zoning Officer to ascertain that the plans are in conformance with the terms of this Ordinance.

c.	Special Buffer Yard Requirements:  The following requirements shall supersede the buffer yard requirements of Table 1: Determination of Buffer Yard Class.

(1)	·Buffer Yard Requirements in and Around Villages

(a)	A Class "C" buffer yard shall be provided tor any use proposed adjacent to a VC-1 Village Center District, a VC-2 Village Center District or a VE Village Expansion {Overlay) District.

 
(b)
 
Within a VC-1 Village Center District or a VC-2 Village Center District, a nonresidential use shall provide a Class "A" buffer yard where such use abuts a residential use.
 

(2)	Buffer Yard Requirements along Expressway and Arterial Streets

(a)	.	Where a residential use is proposed adjacent to an expressway or arterial street, a Class "C" buffer yard shall be provided.

(b)	Na screen planting shall be required along expressway or arterial streets which form district boundary lines provided that:

(0	The proposed use is nonresidential;

00		No outdoor processing, manufacturing or commercial activity and no outdoor storage or display of material shall be so located as ta be visible from the property  across the expressway  or arterial street; and

OiO		The front of the building faces the expressway or arterial street.




















124
 






Tabkl 1:  Delermlnallon or	EXISTING/ADJACENT   LAND   USE
Buffer Yard Ct.ass:
............	n..ld.nw	"'"'-	.....ucio-,J.....,	v.._"""	v  t.....
 
(U-. Al. 5,.	iu.-•1.-4.....isr	...........	,
 
.......,	.,....	.........	UllYly.	lndu.11...,	!'IP. n.t.. no. :!I.RC.        FC,PC.CC,
 
..... • o.ntrr	<--"°""'"	M'<llr.....,..i..iio..	sin.. 'nu, SJUI. a.  :SC, f>1 & EX1
URL Dl.."kt•	"'"'""'
.	A	n	D	D	D	D	I	B
 
AorkMw"'*
iu-.- Al,, ...
p	....._...
 
.,.... • .....,.,.
 
-	e	"	A	A	A	A	A	A	A

A
 
(Oto-• 1, 4' ....... II"
0
p
Mo.t>W W
0	A	n	A	B	e	n	B	n	I	n	B
s
E	N..ll.l.l.:.l.t......._....-.f	A	D	e	A	A	A	A	e	I	n	A
D
Oln..	A	n	e	A	A	A	A	I	n	A
l
A	t .....-...1-.IC--	A	c	c	n	A	A	A	A	I	c	A
N
D	l.MM!y •nd	A
· lr......,.....i..ttoo.
u	..........	n	c	c	c	B	•	A	A	I	c	e
E



 
•A:J    Jn'9tldv.A
A,.5. """'"'*""' ........
AD    Fiwm Suppa1 Facilily
 
DI $ng;lo-Frwnilf DeutdlOd
B4    VJb11'1 Twii
OS   5no Fllmil)' Oobdtod Cllt.1or
 




.....
..Q..J.
 

Table  2:	Planting Options

The options below indicate the amount of plant material that is required per linear foot of property line. Plantings shall be placed within the minimum width of the buffer area. The Planning Commission may permit staggering or grouping of plant materials provided a satisfactory buffer is achieved.


 
BUFFER YARD CLASS
 


WIDTH  OF
BUFFER   YARD	OPTIONS		(choice  of  one  within  class category)
 


A	25 feet	(1)	1 canopy tree per 40 feet; plus
1 evergreen tree per 60 feet

(2)	1 flowering tree per 40 feet; plus 1 evergreen tree per 60 feet ·



B	
50 feet	
(1)	
1 canopy tree per 40 feet; plus
1 flowering tree per 60 feet; plus 1 evergreen tree per 60 feet
		. (2)	1 canopy tree per 40 feet; plus
			1 flowering tree per 60 feet; plus
			1 hedge on Jot line (3 foot  centers except  as
			noted in Table 3.D)
		
(3)	
1 flowering tree per 40 feet; plus
			1 evergreen tree per 25 feet

c	
100 feet	
(1)	
1 canopy tree per 40 feet; plus
1 evergreen tree per 20 feet; plus
			1 shrub per 4 feet
		(2)	1 flowering tree per 40 feet; plus
			1 evergreen tree per 20 feet; plus
			1 hedge on lot line (3 foot centers except as
			noted in Table 3.D)
		(3)	1 flowering tree per 40 feet; plus
			1 evergreen tree per 20 feet; plus
			1 berm 4 feet high











126
 

Table 3:	Plant  Materials  List
A.	Canopy Trees (2 inches caliper minimum) Acer ginnala ·Amur Maple
Acer platanoides • Norway Maple Acer rubrum • Red Maple
Acer saccharum ·Sugar Maple
Betula alba· European White Birch
Fagus grandffofia • American Beech
Fagus sylvatica • European Beech Fraxinus americana • White Ash
Fraxinus pennsylvania lanceolata • Green Ash Ginkgo biloba • Ginkgo (male only)
Gleditsia triacanthos inermis • Thornless Honey Locust
Liquidambar styracfflua ·Sweet Gum Llriodendron tulipifera • Tulip Tree Phelfondendron amurense • Amur Cork Tree Platanus acerttolia • London Plane Tree Quercus alba· White Oak
Quercus borealfs • Red Oak
Qercus coccinea ·Scarlet Oak
Quercus palustris -Pin Oak Quercus phellos - Willow Oak
Robina psuedoacacia inermis • Thornless Black Locust Sophora japonica - Japanese Pagodatree
Tifia-Linden • all species hardy to the area Zelkova serrata·Japanese Zelkova
8. -		Flowering Trees (2 inches caliper minimum) Amelanchier canadensis·Shadblow Serviceberry
Camus florida • Flowering Dogwood
Camus kousa ·Kousa Dogwood
Cornus mas • Carnelian Cherry
Crataegus phaenopyrum • Washington Hawthorn Koelreuteria paniculata • Golden Rain Tree
Laburnum vossi • Goldenchain
Magnolia soulangeana ·Saucer Magnolia Magnolia virginiana·Sweetbay Magnolia
Malus baccata • Siberian Crab
Malus floribunda - Japanese Flowering Crab Malus hopa • Hepa Red-Flowering Crab Oxydendrum arboreum • Sourwood
Pyrus calferyana Bradford - Callery Pear Prunus kwanzan - Kwanzan Cherry
Prunus yedoensis - Yoshino Cherry
C.	Evergreen Trees (4 feet high minimum}* flex opaca • American Holly
Picea abies - Norway Spruce Picea omorika • Serbian Spruce
Picea pungens • Colorado Spruce Pinus nigra ·Austrian Pine
Pinus strobus - White Pine Pseudotsuga menziesii • Douglas Fir Tsuga canadensis - Canada Hemlock

•	It is recommended that two or more species of evergreen trees be used in a buffer yard.


127
 


D.	Hedge (4 feet high minimum)

Crataegus intricata - Thicket Hawthorn Forsythia intermedia - Border Forsythia
Rharnnus frazula colurnnaris - Tallhedge Buckthorn Syringa chinensis - Chinese Lilac
Syringa vulgaris - Common Lilac
Juniperus virginiana - Upright Juniper Pinus strobus - White Pine (1 per 5 feet) Pyracantha lalandi - Laland Firethorn Taxus cuspidata - Upright Yew
Taxus hicksi - Hicks Yew
Tsuga canadensis - Canadian Hemlock (1 per 5 feet)
Thuja occldentalis - American Arborvitae (1 per 5 feet)
E.	Shrubs (4 feet high minimum) Euonymus alatus - Winged Euonymus
Hamamelis vernalis - Vernal Witch Hazel
Hamamelis virginiana - Common Wrtch Hazel
flex verticillata - Winterberry
Rhamnus frangula - Glossy Buckthorn
Viburnum dentatum - Arrowwood Viburnum Viburnum lantana - Wayfaring Tree Viburnum

Section 506	Performance Standard Bonuses

An increase in the density or impervious surface ratio may be achieved by meeting the specific criteria outlined below. All other standards of this Ordinance must be met in order to get the bonuses. The various oonuses are additive. For example:

Suburban Residential Low District

 
Base Density

Density Bonuses Open Space Fire Equipment
 
2.75


10%
_fflg
15%
 

Permitted Density                           2.75 X 1.15 = 3.16 (rounded to nearest hundredth)

a.	Open Space--A density bonus of ten (1O) percent shall be permitted when the open space ratio is increased by five percentage  points  (for example,  from  .35 to
.40), provided that such an increase is  not the result of meeting the minimum open space requirements of Section 501 Site Capacity Calculatjons.  This density
bonus shall apply to uses Bs Single-Family Detached Cluster, B6 Performance Standard Subdivision, 87 Mobile Home Park and BS Planned Residential Development (PF!D) only.

b.	Low or Moderate Income Housing--A density bonus shall be permitted for the provision of housing subsidized by the federal government for low or moderate income families or the elderly, as defined by various federal housing subsidy programs. For each subsidized dwelling unit, an additional dwelling unit may be built. The maximum density bonus shall be twenty (20) percent. This density bonus shall apply to uses B6 Performance Standard Subdivision and BB Planned Residential Development (PRD) only.




128
 

c.	Moderate Income Housing--A density  bonus shall  be  permitted for the  provision of moderately priced dwelling units. Moderately priced dwelling units  are defined as units affordable to households earning between sixty (60) and eighty  {80) percent Of the county's median household income, with the average moderately priced dwelling  unit  affordable to  households  earning  seventy-five  (75)  percent of the median income. For each moderately priced dwelling unit, an additional dwelling unit may be built. The maximum density bonus shall be twenty-five (25) percent. To ensure the orderly development Of moderately priced dwelling units, the equitable distribution of benefits and sustained  affordability,  the  developer shall provide a process for  screening  and  qualifying  households  and  for regulating the sale and re-sale of the moderately priced units, subject to the approval of the Governing Body. The designated moderate income units shall have their moderate market value established by an independent appraisal.

d.		School Site--A density bonus of ten (10) percent shall be permitted for the provision of a school site. Fifty {50) percent Of the area cf the school site may be counted towards meeting the minimum open space requirement for the development. The proposed site shall meet the approval of the Quakertown Community School District, Governing Body, local planning commission, county planning commission and state board of education. It shall be the option Of the Quakertown Community School District to accept such dedication. This density bonus shall apply to uses B5 Single-Family Detached Cluster, B6 Performance Standard Subdivision, B7 Mobile Home Park and·B8 Planned Residential Development (PRO) only

e.	Wat.er Systems: A maximum water system density bonus Of five (5) percent shall be permitted far residential developments when a developer dedicates any cf the fallowing  facilities:

(1)	Dedication Of an existing water company, its facilities and service area to the  municipality.

(2)	Construction  and  dedication  of  wells  and/or  standpipes   needed  to provide water pressure.

(3)	Construction of a trunk service main, sized to municipal specifications to serve a segment of the development district.

All designs shall pe subject to the approval of the municipal engineer, planning commission, water authority, and Governing Body. This provision specifically does not apply to the dedication of normal service mains which are required Of all developments.

f.	Fire Equipment or Facilities--A density bonus of five (5) percent shall be P!lrmitted for  residential  developments  where  the  developer  provides  a  cash  contribution per dwelling  unit to the Governing  Body for  disbursement  for fire  equipment  or facilities.  An impervious surface ratio bonus of 1ive (5) percent or a floor area ratio bonus Of ten  (1O)  percent  shall  be  permitted for  nonresidential  developments where the developer  provides a cash contribution  per square foot of building area to the Governing Body for disbursement  of fire equipment  or facilities.   The cash contribution shall be in accordance with  a fee  schedule  adopted  by resolution of
the Governing Body.

g.	Planned Residential Development (PRD)--Where the Governing Body grants tentative approval for a PRO, a density bonus shall be permitted as follows:

 
Density Bonus
5%
10%
15%
 
Acreage 50-124
125-199
200 or more


129
 


B.	FLOOD PLAIN PERFORMANCE STANDARDS

Section 507	Flood Plain Regulations

No development  as defined Jn Section 221  other  than those  permitted  herein  shall hereafter be permitted in an area designated as flood plain as defined in this Ordinance.

a.	Purpose

The purpose of these provisions is to prevent the loss of property and life, the creation of health and safety hazards, the disruption of commerce and governmental services, the extraordinary and unnecessary expenditure of public funds for flood protection and relief, and to protect the tax base by:

(1)	Regulating uses, activities, and development which, acting alone or in combination  with   other   existing  or  future   uses,  activities,  and
-development,  will  cause  unacceptable  increases  in flood  heights,
velocities and frequencies.

(2)	Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities and development from locating within areas subject to flooding.

(3)	Requiring all those uses, activities, and development that do occur in flood prone areas to be protected and/or floodproofed  against flooding and flood damage.

{4) Protecting individuals from buying lands  and  structures  which  are unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards.

b.	Warning and Disclaimer of  Liability

{1) The degree of flood protection sought by the  prov1s1ons  of  this Ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This Ordinance does not imply that areas outside the flood plain districts or that land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damages.

(2)   This Ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the municipality or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.

c.	Establishment of Flood Plain

For the purposes of this Ordinance, various flood plain areas are identified which are subject to the provisions of this section. These flood plain areas are:

{1)		Floodway: That portion of the flood plain including the watercourse channel and adjacent land areas which must be reserved to carry the 100- year recurrence-interval flood without cumulatively increasing that flood elevation more than one (1) foot.

(2) Flood Fringe: That portion of the flood plain  which  is  outside  the Floodway.





130
 

(3)	Approxjmate 100 - Year Flood Boundarv: That portion o1 the flood plain as identified in the Flood Insurance Study for which no detailed flood profiles or 100-year-flood elevations have been determined.

(4)		Flood Plain Soils: Areas subject to periodic flooding and listed in the Soil Survey of Bucks and Philadelphia Counties Pennsylvania, U.S. Department of Agriculture; Soil Conservation Service, July, 1975, as being "on the flood plain" or "subject to flooding'.

The following soil types are flood plain soils:

 
Alluvial land
Alton gravelly loam, flooded Bowmansville silt loam
Hatboro silt loam

d.	Boundaries o1 the Flood Plain
 
Marsh Pope loam
Rowland silt loam
 

(1)	The following studies shall be used to identify the flood plain.' The study which indicates a flood plain of greater delineation shall be used; unless a detailed study which identifies a floodway and flood-fringe has been prepared, in which case, such detailed study shall be used.

(a)	The Flood Insurance Study prepared by the Federal Insurance Administration and the accompanying Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps.

(b)	The Soil Survey of Bucks and Philadelphia Counties, Pennsylvania prepared by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, July, 1975.

(c)	A study prepared  by  a  registered  engineer  expert  in  the preparation of  hydrological  studies.   Such hydrological  studies shall  be subject to the review and approval of the Governing Body on recommendation of the municipal engineer.

(2)	The delineation of any of the flood plain areas may be revised by the municipality where natural or man-made changes have occurred and/or more detailed studies conducted or undertaken by the U.S. Army Carps of Engineers, a River Basin Commission, a registered engineer or others of demonstrated qualifications document the need for such change. However, prior to any such change to the Flood Insurance Study, approval must be obtained from the Federal Insurance Administration and the Pennsylvania Department of Community Affairs.

e.	General Provisions

(1)	The flood plain areas described above shall be overlays to the existing underlying zoning districts ilnd the flood plain provisions shall serve to supplement the underlying zoning provisions. Where there is a conflict between the provisions or requirements of any flood plain requirement and those of the underlying zoning, the more restrictive provisions and/or those pertaining to the flood plain area shall apply. However, in all cases the flood plain requirements shall be met.

(2)	In the event any provision concerning a flood plain regulation is declared inapplicable as a result of any  legislative or administrative  actions  or



131
 


judicial discretion, the basic underlying zoning district provisions shall remain applicable.

(3)	Under no circumstances shall any use, activity and/or development adversely affect the capacity of the channels or floodways of any watercourse, drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or system.

(4)	No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind shall be made to any watercourse channel until all adjacent municipalities which may be affected by such action have been notified by the municipality, and until all required permits  or approvals have been first obtained from the Department of Environmental Resources, Bureau of Dams and Waterway Management.

In addition, the Federal Insurance Administration and Pennsylvania Department of Community Affairs, Bureau of Community Planning, shall be notified by the municipality prior to any alteration or relocatlon of any watercourse.

f.	Approximate 1OO-Year Flood Boundary and Flood Plain Sciils Regulations

Any proposed use, development or activity in approximate 100-year flood boundary areas and flood plain soils areas  shall be subject to all standards specified in this section for floodway areas unless a hydrological study is prepared thereby identifying the floodway and flood fringe areas. Such study shall be prepared by  a registered engineer expert in the preparation of hydrological studies. The hydrological study shall be subject to the review and approval of the Governing Body on recommendation of the municipal engineer.

g.	Use Regulations

(1)	Uses Permitted by Right

The following uses and activities are permitted in the flood plain provided that they are in compliance with the provisions of the underlying zoning district and are not prohibited by any other ordinance and provided that they do not require structures, fill or storage of materials or equipment.

(a)	Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.

(b)	Public and private recreational uses and activities such as parks, day camps, picnic grounds, golf courses, boat launching and swimming areas, hiking, bicycling and horseback riding trails, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, tennis courts, and liunting and fishing areas.

(c)	Yard areas for residential and non-residential uses.

(d}         Temporary uses such as circuses, carnivals, and similar activities.

(2)	Uses Permitted by Special Exception

The following uses and  activities are permitted in the flood plain by special exception provided that they are in compliance with the provisions of the .underlying district and are not prohibited by any other




132
 


ordinance and provided that all applicable flood plain requirements are met:

(a)	Utilities, public facilities and improvements such as streets, bridges, transmission lines and pipe lines.

(b)	Water related uses and activities.

(c)	Storage of materials and equipment provided they are not buoyant, flammable or explosive, and are not subject to major damage by flooding, and provided such material and equipment is firmly anchored to prevent flotation or movement. Storage of materials and equipment listed in subsection k. hereof shall be prohibited in the flood plain.

(d)	Pervious parking areas

h.	Existing Structures in the Flood Plain

A structure or use of a structure or premises which lawfully existed before the enactment of  these provisions, but which is not in conformity with these provisions, may be continued subject to the following conditions:

(1)	Existing structures and/or uses may be expanded when permitted as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board.

 
(2)
 

Existing structures and/or uses located in any floodway shall not be expanded or enlarged unless the effect of the proposed expansion or enlargement on flood heights is fully offset by accompanying improvements.
 

(3) Any increase in area shall not exceed an aggregate of twenty-five (25) percent of the area of the structure and/or use, during the life of the structure and/or use.

(4)      The modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to an existing structure shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and any other applicable ordinances.

i.	Special Requirements for Mobile Homes

Mobile homes are defined in Section 245 of this Ordinance. For flood plain management purposes, the term moblle home shall also include park trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicles and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days.

(1)	No mobile home shall be permitted in the flood plain except as a nonconforming use which predates the enactment of this Ordinance.

(2)	Within any floodway area, replacement of, or expansion of an existing mobile homes shall  be prohibited.

(3)	Within any flood fringe area, replacement of or expansion of an existing mobile home shall  be:

(a)	placed on a permanent foundation;





133
 


(b)	elevated so that the lowest floor of the mobile home is one and one-half (1.5) feet or more above the elevation of the 100 year flood;

(c)	anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.

j.	Prohibited Activities in the Flood Plain

The commencement of any of the following activities; or the construction, enlargement, or expansion Of any structure used, or intended to be used, for any of the following activities shall  be prohibited within the flood plain:

(1)	hospitals

(2)	nursing homes

(3)	-jails or prisons

k.	Development Which May Endanger Human Life

Any new or substantially improved structure which will be used for the production or storage Of any Of the following dangerous materials or substances or which will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply (more than ten (1O)) gallons or other comparable volume or any amount of radioactive substances) of any of the dangerous materials or substances, including but not limited to the following and other such materials or substances identified for exclusion from flood plain· areas by the· agencies of the Commonwealth or the Federal Government, on the premises, shall not be permitted in any identified flood plain area.

(1)	Acetone
(2)	Ammonia
(3)	Benzene
(4)          Calcium carbide
(5)	Carbon disulfide
(6)	Celluloid
(7)          Chlorine
(8)	Hydrochloric acid
(9)	Hydrocyanic acid
(1O)       Magnesium
(11)	Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen
(12)	Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel, oil, etc.)
(13)	Phosphorus
(14)	Potassium
(15)	Sodium
(16)	Sulphur and sulphur products
(17)	Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides and rodentlcides)
(18)	Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise
regulated

I.	Special Exceptions and Variances

When development is allowed in the flood plain, either by special exception or variance, the following standards shall be met.

(1)	No development shall be permitted in the floodway that would result in any increase in the 100-year flood elevation.




134
 

{2)	No new construction or development  shall be located within  the area measured fifty  {50)  feet  landward from the top-of-bank  of any water
.  course.

{3)	Elevation   Requirements

(a)	Residential Structures

Within any flood plain area, the lowest floor Qncluding basement) of any building shall be at least one and one-half (1.5) feet above the one-hundred year flood elevation. Fully enclosed spaces below the lowest floor shall be prohibited. A document certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, which certifies that the proposed building is in compliance with the elevation requirements shall be submitted to the. Zoning Officer.

.(b)	Non-Residential Structures

(0 Within any identified flood plain area, the lowest floor (including basement) of any non-residential structure, or any substantial improvement to an existing non­ residential structure, shall be at least one and one-half {1 1/2) feet above the one hundred (100) year flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space enclosed by such structure  shall remain either completely or essentially dry during any flood up to that height.	Fully enclosed spaces below the lowest floor shall be prohibited.

00		Any non-residential structure, or part thereof, having a lowest floor which is not elevated to at least one and one­ half {1 1/2) feet above the one hundred (100) year flood elevation, shall be floodproofed in a completely or essentially dry manner in accordance wilh the W1 or W2 space classification standards contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations• published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972), or with some equivalent standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be accompanied by a statement certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect which states that the proposed design and construction are in conformance with the above referenced standards.

(4)	Fill

	(a)	The cross-sectional area of the flood plain shall not be reduced by more than three (3) percent. The three (3) percent shall be allocated to one and one-half {1.5) percent on either side of the centerline of the watercourse. Such fill shall not cumulatively increase the 100-year flood elevation more than one (1) foot.
	(b)	
Fill shall consist of soil or small rock materials only; solid waste landfllls shall not be permitted.
	(c)	Fill shall be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
		resistance to erosion, scouring, or settling.



135
 


(d) Fill shall be no steeper than one {1) vertical to two (2) horizontal, unless substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to, and approved by, the Zoning Officer.

(e) Fill shall be used to the extent to which  it does not adversely affect adjacent properties.

(5)	Drainage

Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system shall insure proper drainage along streets, and provide positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.

(6)	Water and Sanitary Sewer Facilities and Systems

(a)	All new or replacement water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
·	or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of flood waters.

(b)	Sanitary sewer facilities and systems  shall  be  designed  to prevent the discharge of untreated sewage into flood waters.

(c)	No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any identified flood plain area. Na expansion of any an-site sewage system now located either wholly or partially in the flood plain shall be permitted.

(7)	Other Utilities

All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.

(8)	Streets

The finished elevation of all new streets shall be at least one (1) foot above the one hundred {100) year flood elevation.

{9)	Storage

No materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or, in times of flooding, could be Injurious ta human, animal, or plant life shall be stored within any identified flood plain area.

(1O)	Placement  of Buildings  and Structures

All buildings and structures shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of flood water.                                                               ·

(11)	Anchoring

(a)	All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. The zoning officer shall



136
 

require the applicant to submit the written opinion of a registered professional engineer that the proposed structural design meets this criteria.

(b}        All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or components located below the one hundred (1OD} year flood elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to  prevent flotation.

{12)	Floors, Walls and Ceilings

(a}       Wood flooring used at or below the 100-year flood elevation shall be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing structural damage to the building.

 
(b}
 
Plywood used at or below the 1DO-year flood elevation shall be of a "marine" or water-resistant variety.
 

(c)      Wails and ceilings at_ or below the 100-year flood elevation shall be designed and conStructed Of materials that are water-resistant and will withstand  inundation.

(d)   Windows, doors, and other components at or below the 100-year flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant material.

(13)	Paints and Adhesives

(a} · Paints or other finishes used at or below the 100-year flood elevation shall be of "marine" or water-resistant quality.

(b}        Adhesives used at or below the 100-year flood elevation shall be of a "marine" or water-resistant variety.

(c) All wooden components  (doors,  trim,  cabinets,  etc.}  shall  be finished with "marine" or water-resistant paint or  other finishing materials.

(14}	Electrical  Components

(a}      Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three (3) feet above the 100-year flood  elevation.

(b} Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be dropped from above.

(15)	Equipment

Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating untts, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or  apparatus shall not be located below the 100-year flood elevation.

{16)	Fuel Supply Systems

All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to prevent the infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharges from the system into flood




137
 


waters.  Additional  provisions  shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the event that flood water infiltration occurs.

m.	Variances

If compliance with any of the requirements of this Section would result in an exceptional hardship for a prospective builder, developer, or landowner, the Zoning Hearing Board may, upon request, grant relief from the strict application of the requirements. Requests for variances shall be considered by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the following:

(1)	No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use or activity within any floodway that would cause any increase in the one hundred (100) year flood elevation.

(2)	No variance shall be granted for any  of the requirements  pertaining to
.Development  Which  May  Endanger  Human  Life  (subsection  k.)  or Prohibited Activities in the Flood Plain (subsection j.).

(3)	If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary to provide relief.

(4)	In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall attach whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards It considers necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and to -achieve the objectives of this Ordinance.

(5)	Whenever a variance is granted, the Zoning Hearing Board shall notify the_ applicant in writing that:

(a)	the granting of the variance  may  result in increased premium rates for flood insurance;

(b)	such variances may increase the risks to life and property.

(6)	In reviewing any request for a variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider, but not be limited to, the following:

(a)	that there is good and sufficient cause;

(b)	that failure to  grant the variance  would  result  in exceptional hardship to the applicant;

(c)	that the granting of the variance will neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense; nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the  public, or conflict with any other applicable state statute or regulation, or local ordinance or regulation.

(7) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be maintained by the municipality. In addition, a report of all variances granted during the year shall be included in the annual report to the Federal Insurance Administration.

(8) Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all  structures  shall  be designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the 100-year flood.



138
 

C.	NUISANCE STANDARDS

Section 508	Noise

a.	Terminology--All technical  terminology  not  defined  below  shall  be  defined  in accordance with applicable publications of the American National Standard Institute  (Acoustical  Terminology,   ANSI,   [S1.1-1960]  (R1976)  with   Its  latest approved  revisions.

(1)	Ambient Sound: The all encompassing noise associated with a given environment being a composite of sound from many sources near and far, excluding the sound source.

(2)	Continuous Sound: Any sound which is steady state, fluctuating, or intermittent with a recurrence greater than one time in any one hour interval.

(3)	Impulsive Sound: Sound of short duration, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay and an occurrence of not more than one time in any one hour interval.

(4)		Land Use: The actual real use of land and buildings regardless of the zoning or other classification attributed to such land and buildings.

(5)	Normal Resjdential Activities: Any sound which is generated as a result of an owner or occupier of a residence exercising his normal and usual right
to enjoy, maintain, repair, o.r improve said residence or the real property
upon which the residence is located.

(6)	Sound Source: The noise source which is being evaluated to determine its conformance with permissible sound levels.

b.	Standards--For the purpose of measuring sound in accordance with the applicable provisions of these regulations, test equipment methods and procedures shall conform to the standards as published by the American National
Standard Institute (ANSI, Standard Specification for Sound Level Meters, S1.4- 1971 and ANSI S1.13-1983, "Standard Methods for the Measurement of Sound Pressure Levels") with its latest revisions or may be done manually as follows:

(1)	Observe the ambient sound on a sound level meter for five seconds and record the best estimate of central tendency of the indicator needle, and the highest and lowest indications.

 
(2)
 

Repeat the observations as many times as necessary to provide that observations be made at the beginning and at the end of a fifteen (15) minute period and that there shall be at least as many observations as
there are decibels between the lowest low indication and highest high indication.	·
 

 
(3)


(4)



(5)
 
Calculate the arithmetical average of the observed central tendency indications. This value is the ambient sound level.

Observe a sound level meter for five seconds with the sound source operating and record the best estimate of central tendency of the indicator needle, and the highest and lowest indications.

Repeat the observations as many times as necessary to provide that observations be made at the beginning and at the end of a fifteen (15)


139
 


minute period and that there shall be at least as many observations as there are decibels between the lowest low indication and highest  high indication.

(6) Calculate the arithmetical average of the observed central tendency indications. This is the sound level of the ambient sound plus the sound source (Total Sound LeveQ.

(7) If the difference between the ambient  sound and the sound source is 1OdBA or greater, the measured sound level Is an accurate measurement of the sound source. This value should be compared to the permitted sound levels in Table 1.

(8)	Due to the logarithmic nature of sound, if the difference between the ambient sound level and the Total Sound Level is less than 1OdBA a correction factor shrul to be applied.  The correction factors are noted in
.the table below:

 
Total Sound Level minus ambient sound level
10
9
a
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
 
Correction factor to be subtracted from Total Sound Level
0
1
1
1
1
2
2
3
4
7
 

(9)	The .Total Sound Level less the correction  factor  is  compared to  the permitted sound levels in Table 1.

c.	Sound Levels by Receiving Land Use--No person shall operate or cause to be operated within the Municipality any source  of  continuous  sound  in such a manner as to create a sound level which exceeds the limits set forth for the receiving land use when measured at or beyond the property boundary of the receiving land use, during the times specITied in Table I.

Table  I.	Continuous  Sound   Levels  by  Receiving   Land  Use

 

Receiving  Land Use Category
I.	Residential, Public Space, Open Space, Agricultural, or Institutional
 
Sound Level
TIME	Limit
1.)  7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m.	55 dBA

2.)   1o:oo p.m. - 7:00 a.m.	50 dBA plus
 
 		Sundays & Legal Holidays
 
II.	Office, Commercial or Business



Ill.  Industrial
 
1.)  7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m.	65 dBA

2.)   1o:oo p.m. - 7:00 a.m.	60 dBA plus
Sundays & Legal Holidays
At all times	70 dBA
 





140
 


For any source of sound which emits an impulsive sound, the excursions of sound pressure level shall not exceed 20 dBA over the maximum sound level limits set forth in Table I above, provided that in no case shall they exceed 80 dBA, regardless of time of  day or night or receiving land use, using the '1ast" meter characteristic of a Type II meter, meeting the American National Standard Institute  specifications  S1.4-1971.

d.	Specific Prohibitions

The following acts and the causes thereof are declared to be in violation of this Ordinance.

(1)	Operating, playing, or permitting the operation or playing of any radio, television,  phonograph,  sound  amplifier,  musical  instrument,  or  other
such device between the hours of 1O p.m. and 1o a.m. in such a manner
as to create a noise disturbance across a real property line.

(2)	Owning, possessing, or harboring any animal which frequently or for any continued duration howls, barks, or makes any other sound so as to create a noise disturbance  across any  real property  boundary  or to
constitute a public nuisance.

(3)	Performing any construction operation or operating or permitting the operation of any tools or equipment used in construction, drilling or demolition work between the hours of 7 p.m. and 7 a.m. or at any time an Sundays if such operation creates a noise disturbance across a real property boundary line. This section does not apply to domestic power tools or to vehicles which are duly licensed, registered, and inspected far operation an public highways.

(4)	Repairing, rebuilding, modifying, testing or operating a motor vehicle, motorcycle, recreational vehicle or powered model vehicle in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a real property boundary.

(5) Operating or permitting the operation of any mechanically powered saw, drill, sander, grinder, lawn or garden tool, or similar device (used outdoors) between the hours of 9 p.m. and 7 a.m. so as to cause a noise disturbance across a real property boundary.

e.	Exceptions--The  maximum  permissible  sound  levels  by  receiving  land  use established in Section 508.c shall not apply to any of the following noise sources:

(1)	The  emission  of  sound  for  the  purpose  of  alerting  persons  to  the existence of an emergency.

(2)	Work  to  provide  electricity,  water,  or other  public  utilities  when  public health or safety are involved.

(3)	Normal residential activities.

(4)	Licensed game hunting activities on property where such  activities are authorized.

(5)	Agriculture.

(6) Motor vehicle operations on public streets (covered in Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Regulations, Title 67, Chapter 450 governing established sound levels, effective August 27, 1977).



141
 



(7)	Public celebrations, specifically  authorized by the Municipality.

Section 509	Smoke. Ash, Dust, Fumes. Vapors and Gases

a.	There shall be no emission of smoke, ash, dust, dirt, fumes, vapors or gases which violate the Pennsylvania Air Pollution Control Laws or other regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.

b.	The emission of smoke, ash, dust, dirt, fumes, vapors or gases which can cause any damage to human health, to animals, to vegetation, or to property, or which can cause any soiling or staining of persons or property at any point beyond the lot line of the use creating the emission, is herewith prohibited.

Section 510

No use shall produce heat perceptible beyond its lot lines.

Section 511	Odor

a.	No use shall emit odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be offensive at any point on or beyond its lot lines.

b.	Subsection a. above shall not apply to odors normally created as part of an agricultural or horticultural use except that no animal waste produced off of the property shall be stockpiled unless processed to eliminate all offensive odors.

Section 512	Glare

No use shall produce a strong, dazzling light or a reflection of a strong, dazzling light beyond its lot lines.

Section 513	Vibrations

No vibration shall be produced which is transmitted through the ground and is discernible without the aid of instruments at or at any point beyond the lot lines,  with the exception of vibration produced as a result of temporary construction activity.

Section 514	Storage and Waste Disposal

a.	No storage of flammable or combustible liquids in excess of thirty (30) gallons shall be permitted unless written approval has been obtained from the Director of the Pennsylvania State Police, Fire Marshall Division. This requirement shall not apply to domestic fuel oil heating systems.

b.	No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or manner that they may be transported off the lot by natural causes or forces, nor shall any substance which can contaminate a stream or watercourse or otherwise render such stream or watercourse undesirable as a source of water supply or recreation, or which will destroy aquatic life, be allowed to enter any stream or watercourse. Disposal of sewage, septage or sludge must meet the requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.

c.	All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust, or which constitute a fire hazard, or which may be edible or otherwise attractive to rodents or insects, shall be stored  outdoors only if enclosed in containers adequate to eliminate such hazards.


142
 



Section 515	Radjoactivity and Electrical Disturbance

a.	Any use which emits dangerous or harmful radioactivity shall be prohibited. If any use is proposed which incorporates the use of radioactive material, equipment, or supplies, such use shall be in strict conformity with Title 25 of the Pennsyivania Department of Environmental Resources Rules and Regulations.

b.	No use shall produce an electrical disturbance which adversely affects tlie operation of any equipment beyond its property line. This requirement shall not apply to electronic and electrical equipment which meet the applicable standards of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), the Underwriters Laboratories (UL), and the Electronics Industries Association (EIA).





















































143
 


D. PARKING PERFORMANCE STANDARDS

Section  516	General Regulations Applicable to Off-Street parking Facilities

a.	Exlstjng Parking--Structures and uses in existence at the date of adoption of this Ordinance shall not be subject to the requirements of this Section so long as the kind or extent of use is not changed, provided that any parking  facility  now serving such structures or uses shall not in the future be reduced below such requirements.
b.	Change in Regujrements--Whenever there is an alteration of a structure or an expansion of a use which increases the parking requirements according to the standards of Section 404, additional parking shall be provided for the alteration or expansion in accordance with the requirements of that section.

Whenever there is a change of use which Increases the parking requirements according to the standards of Section 404, the total amount ot parking required for the new use shall be provided in accordance with the  requin:iments of that
section.                              .

c.	Conflict with Other Uses--No parking area shall bi! used for any use that interferes with its availability for the parking need it is required to serve.

d.	Continuing Character of Obligation--All required facilities shall be provided and maintained so long as the use exists which the facilities were designed to serve. Off-street parking facilities shall not be reduced in total extent after their provision, except upon the approval of the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception and then only after proof that, by reason of diminution in floor area, seating area, or change in .other factors controlling the regulation of the number of parking spaces, such reduction is in conformity with the requirements of this Ordinance. Reasonable precautions shall be taken by the owner or sponsor of a particular use to assure the availability of required facilities to the ·employees or other persons whom the facilities are designed to serve. Such facilities shall be designed and used in such a manner as to at no time constitute a nuisance, a hazard, or an unreasonable impediment to traffic.

e.	Joint Use--Two (2) or more uses may provide for required parking in a common parking  lot if the total space provided is not less than the sum of the spaces
required for each use individually.  However, the number of spaces required in a
common parking facility may be reduced below this total by special exception if it can be demonstrated to the Zoning Hearing Board that the hours or days of peak parking  needed for  the  uses are  so  different  that  a  lower  total  will  provide
adequately for all uses served by the facility.

f.		Location of Parking Spaces--Required off-street parking spaces shall be located on the same lot or premises with the principal use served. Where a nonresidential use cannot meet this requirement, the required off-street parking may be located within three hundred (300) feet of the premises to which they are appurtenant; however, pedestrian access from the parking facility to the nonresidential use shall be provided.

g.	Fractional Measurements--lf in  determining the number of required off-street parking spaces there results a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half (0.5) shall be disregarded and any fraction over one-half shall require one space.

h.	Maintenance of Parking Areas--For parking areas of three (3) or more vehicles, the area not landscaped and so maintained, including driveways, shall be graded,


144
 

surfaced with asphalt or other suitable material, and drained to the satisfaction of the Municipal Engineer to the extent necessary to prevent dust, erosion, or excessive water flow across streets or adjoining property. All off-street parking spaces shall be marked so as to indicate their location. Failure to keep parking areas in satisfactory condition (i.e., free from holes or clearly delineated) shall be considered a violation of this Ordinance.

Section 517	Reduction of Non-Residential Parking Requirements

In order to prevent the establishment of a greater number  of parking spaces than is actually required to serve the needs of non-residential uses, the Governing Body, after consulting with the Planning Commission and Municipal Engineer, may permit a conditional reduction of parking space if the following conditions are satisfied:

a.		This conditional reduction of parking shall apply to Use 03 Office Park, Use E22 Multiple Commercial Use, Use G3 Wholesale Business, Wholesale Storage or Warehousing and Use G12 Industrial Park. The Governing Body may permit a conditional reduction of parking for other uses where it deems appropriate.

b.	The design of the parking lot, as indicated on the land development plan, must designate sufficient space to meet the parking requirements of  this  Ordinance. The plan shall also illustrate the layout for the total number of parking spaces.

c.		The conditional reduction shall provide'for the establishment  of  not  less than eight (80) percent of the required number  of parking spaces, as specified in this Ordinance. This initial phase of the parking provision shall be clearly indicated on the land development  plan.

d.	The land development plan shall indicate that the maximum impervious surface ratio will be met if the total number of required parking spaces is provided.

e.	The balance of the parking area conditionally reserved shall not include areas for required buffer yards, setbacks, or areas which would otherwise be unsuitable for parking spaces due to the physical characteristics of the land or other requirements of this Ordinance.   This parking area which is reserved shall be
located and have characteristics so as to provide amenable open space should  it be determined  the additional  parking spaces  are  not  required.    The  developer
shall provide a landscaping plan for the reserved area with the land development plan.

f,	The developer shall enter into a written agreement with the Governing Body that after eighteen (18) months following the issuing of the last occupancy penmit, the additional parking spaces shall be provided at the developer's or owner's expense should it be determined that the required number of parking spaces are necessary to satisfy the need for the particular land development. This agreement shall apply to any future owners of the property.

g.	At the time of the above stated agreement, the developer or owner shall post a performance bond or other securities to cover the cost of the installation of the remaining parking spaces.   Eighteen {18)  months after the  issuance  of  the  last
occupancy permit the Governing Body, with recommendations of the Municipal Engineer and the Planning Commission, shall determine  if the additional spaces shall be provided by the developer or if the area shall remain as open space.

g.	Land which has been determined and designated by the Governing Body to remain as open space rather than as required parking shall not be used to provide parking spaces for any addition or expansion but shall remain as open space.




145
 


Section 518	Design Standards

a.	Parking lots-All off-street parking lots with a capacity of three (3) or more vehicles shall comply with the standards for automobile parking facilities inthe Quakertown Area Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.

b.	Parking areas in villages--All off-street parking areas for nonresidential uses in the VC-1 and VC-2 Districts shall meet the following requirements:

(1)	All off-street parking spaces shall be located to the side or rear of principal buildings to screen the view of parked cars from the street and to allow the space in front of buildings to be used for pedestrian paths and landscaping.	No off-street parking spaces shall be located in front of principal buildings.

(2)	Plant material sufficient to screen the parking  areas from view  in the
. village shall be required.	·

c.	Parking garages--The design standards specified below shall be required for all parking garages established after the effective date of this Ordinance.

(1)	The minimum dimensions of stalls and aisles shall be as follows:

(a)	Stall width shall be at least ten (10) feet. Parking stalls next to a wall or pmar shall be one (1) foot wider.

(b)	Stall depth shall be at least twenty (20) feet with said dimensions measured on the angle for all angle parking, and twenty-two (22) feet for parallel parking.

(c)	Minimum width of aisles providing access to stalls for one-way traffic only, varying with the angle of the parking, shall be:

 
Angle of Parking

Parallel
30 degrees
45  degrees
60 degrees
90 degrees
 
Minimum AisleWidth

12 feet
12 feet
15 feet
18 feet
20 feet
 

(d)		Minimum width of aisles providing access to stalls for two-way traffic shall be twenty-four (24) feet.

 
(2)
 
Parking areas shall be designed to permit each motor vehicle to proceed to and from the parking space provided for it without requiring the moving of any other motor vehicles.

(a)	The width of accessways shall be:

(i)	A minimum of twelve (12) feet for one-way use only;

00	A minimum of twenty-four (24) feet for two-way use;

010	A maximum of thirty-five (35) feet  at  the street  line  and fifty-four  (54} feet at the curb line.

(b}          Parking is prohibited along the length of an accessway.



146
 

(3)	There shall be a minimum transition of twelve (12) feet on all ramps where they meet the parking floor.

(4)	Maximum grades:  parking floor - five (5) percent
ramp - ten (10) percent
ramp transition - five (5) percent

(5)	On circular ramp systems; the minimum outside radius an all turns shall be thirty-four (34) feet.

(6)	Garage entrance

(a)	There shall be a minimum stacking area beyond the entrance control point for ten (1O) cars. The stacking areas shall not be in a public street, nor shall it interfere with vehicular circulation in the vicinity of the common parking garage.                                     ·

(b)	The grade of the ramp shall begin at least twenty-five {25) feet beyond the control point.

(7) Parking garages shall be subject to all minimum building setback requirements of this Ordinance.

Section  519	Off-Street Loading

a.	Off-street loading facilities shall be provided for any use hereafter established or enlarged which customarily receives or distributes goods or materials by trucks.

b.	The off-street loading facilities provided shall be sufficient to accommodate the maximum number of trucks that will normally be loading, unloading or stored on the premises at any one time.

c.	Off-street loading facilities shall be appropriately dimensioned and located with relation to the types of deliveries and pick-ups anticipated. Loading or unloading which takes place on a platform or dock raised to the height of a truck bed shall be designed to conform to the specifications for a loading berth. Loading or unloading which takes place at ground level shall be designed to conform to the specifications for a loading space.

(1)	Each loading berth shall be at least fourteen (14) feet in width and fifty­ five {55) feet in length and have at least fifteen (15) feet of vertical clearance.

(2)	Each loading space shall be at least twelve (12) feet in width and thirty­ five {35) feet in length.

d.	Off-street loading facilities required by this Ordinance shall, in all cases, be on the same Jot or parcel of land as the use they are intended to serve.

e.	Off-street loading facilities shall have adequate and unobstructed access to a street, service drive or alley. Such facilities shall have adequate maneuvering space and shall be so arranged that they may be used without blocking or otherwise interfering with the use of automobile accessways, parking facilities, fire lanes or pedestrian ways or backing out onto a street.

f.	The maximum width of driveway openings measured at the street line shall be thirty-five (35) feet; the minimum width shall be twenty (20) feet.




147
 


g.	Off-street loading facilities shall be graded, surfaced with asphalt or other suitable material, and drained to the satisfaction of the Municipal Engineer to the extent necessary to prevent dust, erosion or excessive water flow across streets or adjoining property.

h.	All required facilities shall be provided and maintained so long as the use exists which the facilities were designed to serve. Off-street loading facilities shall not be reduced in total .extent after their provision, except upon the approval of the Zoning Hearing Board and then only after proof that such reduction is in conformity with the requirements of this Ordinance. Reasonable precautions shall be taken by the owner or sponsor of a particular use to assure the availability of required facilities to the delivery and pick-up vehicles they are designed to serve. Such facilities shall be designed and used in such a manner as to at no time constitute a nuisance, a hazard, or an unreasonable impediment to traffic.

i.	All off-street loading facilities shall be located to the side or rear of the building.

j.	Lighting of off-street loading .facilities shall be provided. All artificial lighting used to illuminate loading facilities shall be so arranged that no direct fays from such
. lighting fall .upon any  neighboring property or streets.













































148
 

E. DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS

Section 520	Lot Area or Yard Required

The lot or yard requirements for any new building or use shall not include any part of a lot that is required by any other building or use to comply with the re_quirements of this Ordinance. No required lot or area shall include any property, the ownership of which has been transferred subsequent to the effective date of this Ordinance, if such property was a part of the area required for compliance with the dimensional requirements applicable to the lot from which such transfer was made.

Section 521	Minimum Lot Area

Where a minimum lot area is specified, no primary building or use shall be erected or established on any  lot of lesser size than as specified in Sections 404 and 502, except as specified in Article VIII Nonconformities.

Section 522	Minimum Lot Width

a.	Where a minimum lot width is specified, no primary building shall be erected on any part of a lot which has a width less than that specified in Sections 404 and 503, except  as specified in Article VIII Nonconformities and as permitted in subsections b and c below.

b.	On lots fronting  on the turn-around of a permanent cul-de-sac, the planning commission may  permit the  minimum lot width to be measured at a greater distance from the street line than the building setback line. The building setback line shall be measured parallel to the street line. However, such lots fronting on the turn-around of a permanent cul-de-sac shall have a minimum straight line distance or forty-five (45) feet between the points of intersection of the lot lines
·and the street line.



BUILOIHQ	'
SITIACl<  LINI---.,_

I I I
LOT  LINI	I	I
\	I
\
'


SUHT LJNa
(  .o.w. );-----1-./



c.	Lane Lot--A parcel of land which does not have the required minimum lot width at the minimum front yard line but has direct access to a public street through a narrow strip of land which is part of the same lot. The lot lines of the narrow portion of the lot (the lane) are parallel or nearly parallel.

Lane Lots may be permitted for tracts of land with limited frontage that would limit the number of lots with the required lot width, but with sufficient area in the rear of the tract for an additional lot or two. Lane lots are not permitted in a subdivision where a street could reasonably be developed to serve the lots with each meeting the minimum. lot width requirement.



149
 

(1)	A lane lot shall be used for single-family detached dwellings only.

{2) Each lot shall have a separate lane; however, the use of common driveways shall be permitted.

(3)    If the proposed lane lot is not large enough  to further  subdivide  under the zoning requirements at the time the subdivision is proposed, then the "lane" shall have a minimum width of twenty-fwe (25) feet at the street line of a public street and shall not narrow to a lesser dimension. However, if the proposed lot is large enough to further subdivide under
the zoning requirements at the time the subdivision is proposed, then the minimum Jene width shall be fifty (50) feet at the street line and shall not narrow to a lesser dimension.

(4) The area of the lane  shall  not  be  included  in  the  calculation  of  the minimum lot area.

(5)	The front yard setback for a lane lot shall be a distance equal to the front yard requirement for the district in which the lot is located and shall be measured from the point where the lot first obtains the minimum lot width measurement.

(6)	No mare than two (2) lane lots shall be permitted in the subdivision of a tract of land even if lots are subdivided from the tract at different times.

(7)	Only one tier of lane lots shall be permitted on a tract.

Section  523	Traffic Visibility Across Corners

a.	In all districts, no structure, fence, planting or other obstruction shall be maintained between a horizontal plane two (2) feet above curb level and a horizontal plane seven (7) feet above curb level so as to interfere with traffic visibility across the corner within that part of the required front or side yard which is within a horizontal clear-sight triangle bounded by the two street lines (rights-of­ way) and a straight line drawn between points on each such line twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection of said lines or extension thereof. When one or both streets which form the intersection are classified as collector or arterial highways, the clear-sight triangle bounded by the two street lines and a straight line drawn between points on such line shall be fifty (50) feet from the intersection of said lines or extension thereof.

 
'I
CLEAR-SIGHT  !
TRIANGLE!
 




STREET LINE
(right-of-way)
 

CLEAR·SIGHT TRIANGLE
'-..
 

-
I-2 5 ·----j
 
_t_	.
1-.    --so·
 
..,_............_.._.........--...."

CARTWAY	)
I
!
'!
;
 
(_............... .


a-::
c::i
 
..........   .......................................  .
CLEAR·SIGHT	1
TRIANGLE
 
150
 

b.	At each point where a private accessway intersects a public street or road, a clear­ sight triangle of ten (1O) feet measured from the point of intersection of the street line and the edge of the accessway shall be maintained within which vegetation and other visual obstructions shall be limited to a height of not more than two (2) feet above the street grade.                                      .

Section 524	Future Rights-of Way

a		Future right-of-way widths are established for those roads wherein the existing legal right-of-way is less than that indicated below for the particular class of road. The centerline of each future right-of-way shall be considered the same centerline as the existing right-of-way. The specific classification for each road is shown on the "Map  of Highway Classification, Quakertown Area,' which accompanies and is hereby made a part of the Ordinance.

b.	Streets and their future rights-of-way shall be as follows:

(1)	Thoroughfares:

(a)	Expressway--Future right-of-way shall be as determined by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.

(b)	Arterial Highways--Future rights-of-way shall be a minimum of one hundred twenty  (120) feet.

(c)	Collector Highways--Future rights-of-way  shall be eighty (80) feet.

(1)	Local Streets:

(a)	Primary Streets-Future rights-at-way shall be sixty (60) feet.

(b)	Rural Roads and Secondary Streets--Future rights-of-way  shall be fifty (50) feet.

(c)	Marginal Access Street--The PC, FC and SC Districts are intended for development with marginal access streets. Future rights-of-way shall be fifty (50) feet.

Section 525	Exceptions for Existing Building Alignment

A proposed building may be constructed nearer to the street than the required minimum front yard depth under the following conditions:

a.	There shall be existing buildings which are nearer to the street than the required front yard depth on the lots on either side at the lot which would contain the proposed building.

b.	The proposed building would front on the same side of the same street in the same block as the existing buildings on lots on either side.

c.	The existing buildings on the lots on either side would be no greater than fifty
(50) feet from the proposed building.

d.	The proposed building may be constructed at a front yard depth that is not less than the average of the front yard setbacks of the existing buildings on the lots an either side.




151
 


Section 526	Yard Requirements

No portion of a building or structure including porches, decks, patios and terraces shall be built within the required minimum front, side or rear yards, except as permitted in Section 404, 527 and 528.

Section 527	Projections into Yards

a.	Chimney flues, columns, sills, cornices, gutters and similar features, excluding fire escapes, may project into the required front yard not more than two {2) feet.

b.	Chimney flues, fire escapes, columns, sills, cornices, gutters and similar features may project into required side or rear yards up to one third (1/3) of the width of the projection, but not more than four (4) feet in any case.

Section 528	Fences and Driveways in Yards

The provisions of Section 526. shall not apply to fences or hedges less \han seven (7)
feet above the natural grade. Driveways shall be permitted in front, side and rear yards.

Section 529	Exceptions to Building Height

The height of buildings is regulated to. prevent loss of life or excessive property damage through the inability of fire equipment to reach upper stories or roofs. Therefore, no building shall exceed the maximum building heights specified in Articles IV and V, except church spires, belfries, silos, water towers, solar energy systems, antennas, television towers, masts, aerials, flagpoles or other structures necessary for providing water, electricity, heat, cooling, radio or similar facilities provided they are not used for human occupancy and are set back one and one­ half (1.5) times their height {from ground level to the top of the structure) from any property lines.



































152
 

F. OPEN SPACE IN RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS

Section 530	General Requirements

a		Single-family detached clusters, performance standard subdivisions, mobile home parks, and planned residential developments (PRDs) shall meet the open space requirements of this Ordinance. The plan shall contain or be supplemented by such material as required to establish the method by which open space shall be perpetuated, maintained and administered. The approval of the final plan and other materials shall be construed as a contract between the landowner(s) and the municipality, and shall be noted on all applicable deeds.

b.	Open space shall not include land occupied by nonrecreational buildings or structures, roads or road rights-of-way, parking areas for nonrecreational uses or land reserved for Mure parking areas for nonrecreational uses, stormwater detention or retention basins, or the yards or lots of dwelling units.

c.	A portion of the open space must be set aside as recreation land in accordance with Section 501.c of this Ordinance. Recreation land shall not include natural features with a one hundred (100) percent protection standard nor any portion of those natural features that may not be developed as specHied in Section 504 Environmental Performance Standards. Recreation land may contain impervious
surfaces.  Such impervious surfaces shall be included in the calculation  of the impervious surface ratio.

Section 531	Open Space Designation

All  land held for  open  space  shall  be so  designated  on  the  subdivision  and  land development plans.  Such plans shall contain the following information:

a.	A statement that the open space land shall not be separately sold or further subdivided, except for transfer to the municipality or a conservation organization approved by the municipality. And, a statement that the open space land shall not be further developed, except for recreational facilities.

b.	The use(s) of the open space shall be indicated on the plans. In designating the use(s), one or more of the following classes shall be used:

(1)	Lawn: A grass area with or without frees which may be used by the residents for a variety of purposes and which shall be mowed regularly to insure a neat and orderly appearance.

(2)	Natural Area: An area of natural vegetation undisturbed during construction, or replanted. Such areas may contain pathways. Meadows shall be maintained as such and not left to become weed-infested. Maintenance may be minimal, but shall prevent the proliferation of weeds and undesirable plants such as honeysuckle and poison ivy. Litter, dead trees and brush shall be removed, and streams shall be kept in free flowing condition.

(3)	Recreation Area: An area designated for a specHic recreational use in accordance with Section 501.c., including but not limited to tennis courts, basketball courts, swimming pools, playflelds and tot lots. Such areas shall be maintained so as to avoid creating a hazard or nuisance, and shall perpetuate the proposed use.

c.	The type of facilities to be provided and the extent of proposed improvements shall be noted on the plans, including a planting plan and schedule.



153
 

d.	The plan shall note the method by which the open space shall be owned and maintained in accordance with Section 534.

Section 532	Design Standards for Open Space

All open space areas shall meet the following design standards:

a.	Layout of Open Space: The open space shall be laid out In accordance with the best principles of site design, the Quakertown Area Linked Open Space Plan, and any other duly adopted open space plan. It is intended that the open space shall be as close to all residences as possible, with greenways leading to major recreation spaces. Major recreation areas shall be located to seive all residents. The open space is most needed in areas of highest density.

b.	A method of physically delineating private lots from common open space areas shall be provided. Such method may include shrubbery, trees, markers or other method acceptable to the municipality.

c.	Recreation Land: Section 501.c of this Ordinance requires that a portion of the open space be useable for active recreation. The following standards shall apply to the design of the recreation land:

(1)	Areas set aside for active recreation purposes shall be of adequate size and configuration to accommodate the intended use. The National Recreation and Park Association Standards, standards established by a sports Governing Body, or standards obtained from another credible source shall be utilized to determine the exact spacial and dimensional requirements needed for a specific type of recreation area or facility.

 
(2)


(3)




(4)




(5)


(6)
 
The recreation land shall not include narrow or irregular pieces of land which are remnants from lotting or the layout of streets and parking areas.

The developer shall be required to improve the recreation land so that it is useable for the intended activity, including necessary facilities and equipment.	The proposed improvements, including facilities and equipment, shall be acceptable to the municipality.

The slope of recreation land to be used for active play areas shall not exceed two (2) percent. Compliance with this slope requirement may be achieved through regrading, in keeping with applicable natural resource protection standards.

At least one side of the recreation land shall abut a street for a minimum distance of fifty (50) feet.

Recreation land shall not be traversed by utility easements unless said utilities are placed underground and no part of them or their supportive equipment protrudes above ground level.
 

d.	Open space shall be freely accessible to all residents of the development.

Section 533	Ooen Space Performance Bond

Designated planting and recreation  facilities within the open  space areas shall be provided by the developer. A performance bond or other securities may be required to cover costs of installation in accordance with the provisions of the subdivision and land development ordinance.




154
 
Section 534	Ownership of Open Space

Any of the following methods may be used to preserve, own, or maintain open space: condominium, homeowners association, dedication in fee simple, dedication of easements, or transfer to a private conservation organization. The following specific requirements are associated with each of the various methods.

a.	Condominium: The open space may  be controlled through the use of condominium agreements. Such agreements shall be In conformance with the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act of 1980, as amended. All open space land shall be held as "common element." Such land shall not be eligible for sale to another party except for transfer to another method of ·ownership permitted under this section, and then only where there Is no change In the open space ratio.

b.	Homeowners Association: The open space may be held in common ownership by a  homeowners  association.    This  method shall  be subject  to  all  of the
.provisions for homeowners associations set forth in Article VII of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.

c.	Fee-simple Dedication: The municipality may, but shall not be required to, accept any portion or portions of the open space provided the following conditions are met:

(1)	Such land shall be freely accessible to the public.

(2)	There shall be no cost to the municipality involved.

(3)	The municipality agrees to and has access to maintain such lands.

(4)	The open space shall be in an acceptable condition to the municipality at the time of transfer with regard to size, shape, location and improvement.

d.	Dedication of Easements: The municipality or county may accept, but shall not be required to accept, easements to any portion or portions of the open space. In such cases, the land remains in the ownership of the individual, condominium, or homeowners association while the easements are held in public ownership. The county shall accept the easements only in accordance with the provisions of Act 442 and county plans. The municipality may accept such easements as it sees flt. In either case, there shall be no cost to the county or municipality for acquisition or maintenance. The municipality may require this method where it seems this is the most appropriate way of preserving land in open space.

e.	Transfer to a Private Conservation Organization: With permission of the municipality, an owner may transfer either the fee simple title, with appropriate deed restrictions running in favor of the. municipality, or easements, to a private, nonprofit organization, among whose purposes is to conserve open space land and/or natural resources provided that the following conditions are met:

(1)	The organization is acceptable to the municipality and is a bona fide conservation organization with perpetual existence.

(2)	The conveyance contains appropriate provision for proper reverter or re­ transfer In the event that the organization becomes unwilling or unable to continue carrying out its functions.

(3)	A maintenance agreement acceptable to the municipality is entered into by the developer and the organization.



155
 

f.	Deed Restrictions

(1)	Buffer yards as required by this Ordinance may be held in the ownership of the individual property owners of residential developments. This form of ownership of open space will be subject to the following requirements:

(a)	This form of ownership will be limited to buffer yards.

(b)	It may be used only if approved by the municipality.

(c)	Restrictions meeting municipal specifications must be placed In the deed for each property that has buffer yards within its boundaries. The restrictions shall provide for the continuance of the buffer yard in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.

(d) It will be clearly stated in the individual deeds that the maintenance responsibility lies with the ·individual property owner.

(2)	For nonresidential uses, buffer yards and areas of natural resource features m\Oy be held with the ownership of the entire parcel provided the buffer yards and natural features are deed restricted to ensure their protection and continuance.

(3)	In the case of residential developments where all of the units are rental, the open space land may be in the same ownership as that of the development provided that the land Is deed restricted  to ensure Its protection and continuance and that a maintenance agreement suitable to the municipality is provided.

(4)	For any of the above options, the municipality may accept, but is not required to accept, an easement to the open space land in the development.

Section 535	Costs

Unless otherwise agreed to by the municipality or county, the cost and responsibility of maintaining open space shall be borne by the property owner, condominium association, or homeowners association. If the open space is not properiy maintained, the municipality may assume responsibility of maintenance and charge the property owner, condominium association, or homeowners association a fee which covers maintenance costs, administrative costs, and penalties as stipulated in this Ordinance.




















156
 

ARTICLE  VI.	OVERLAY  ZONING  DISTRICTS

A.	VILLAGE EXPANSION (OVERLAY) DISTRICT

Section 600	Applicability

The Village Expansion (Overlay) District shall be an overlay to regulate the use of land within the areas designated as such on the municipal zoning map. The  dimensional  requirements of the overlay district shall supersede the requirements of the underlying zoning  district. However, where no standards are mentioned herein, the provisions of  the  underlying  zoning district in Milford Township and Trumbauersville  Borough shall apply.

Section 601	Pumose and Intent

The purpose of the Village Expansion (Overlay) District is to provide suitable standards and guidelines for development areas adjacent to existing villages and towns. A major objective  is to integrate future development with existing development through  appropriate  urban  design. New developments should be expansions of the villages and towns rather than self-contained neighborhoods.

Section 602	Use Limitations

Any use permitted in the underlying zoning district shall be permitted in the Village Expansion (Overlay) District with one exception. Use 97 Mobile Home Park shall not  be  permitted in the Village Expansion (Overlay)  District where the underlying zoning district is SRM.

Section 603	Dimensional  Requirements

a.	Front yard requirement--Large front yard setbacks are discouraged in the Village Expansion (Overlay) District because they would be inconsistent with the existing character of villages and towns. Therefore, the minimum front yard requirement for uses in the Village Expansion (Overlay) District shall be thirty (30) percent less than the minimum front yard requirement specified in Section 503 for the underlying zoning district or thirty (30) percent less than the minimum front yard requirement specified in Section 404 for a particular use; however, the minimum front yard requirement shall not be reduced below fifteen  (15) feet.

b.	Lot width requirement--The minimum lot width requirement tor uses in the Village Expansion (Overlay) District shall be fifteen (15) percent less than the minimum lot width requirement specified in Section 503 for the underlying zoning district or fifteen (15) percent less than the minimum lot width requirement specified in Section 404 for a particular use. However, this reduction in the minimum lot width requirement shall not apply to Use BS Single-Family Detached Cluster and Use 86  Pertormance  Standard  Subdivision.

Section 604	Parking

Off-street parking areas with a capacity of five (5) or more parking spaces shall be located to the side or rear of buildings. Rows of parking shall not be permitted to extend along the front of buildings. In the event that a parking area with visible frontage along a public street exceeds 100 feet, a screen consisting of a fence of masonry, ornamental ironwork or wood, combined with landscaping shall be required.

Section 605	Street Layout and Roadway Connections

The street system within the Village Expansion (Overlay) District shall be designed to connect new developments with each other and with the existing village or town.   A grid pattern



157
 

provides the best means of maximizing connections between developments.	It is recommended that a grid pattern be utilized in new developments to the greatest extent possible.

Potential primary roads and secondary street connections are shown  on  Illustrations  A and B. New primary streets are Important to provide better circulation throughout the village or town as it expands.  Secondary  street connections  link neighborhoods  and strengthen the  sense of community.  These proposed roads and connections  are not exact locations but are intended to illustrate approximate locations of new streets. It is recommended that landowners/developers incorporate these proposed primary roads and secondary street  connections  or a similar  design into any future development of their site.

Section 606	Design Gujdelines

The following design guidelines are  recommendations  which  should  be  considered  for any development proposed in the Village Expansion (Overlay) District. Although only recommendations, every effort should be made to follow the suggested guidelines so that future development  enhances and extends the character  of adjacent villages and towns.
-

a.	Mix of Residential Uses--ln keeping with the character of villages and towns, future developments in the overlay district should be encouragel!i to provide a mix of residential types. Also, dwelling types should be integrated throughout the developments, so as to avoid any segregation of uses within defined areas of the development. The goal should be to have all permitted residential types interspersed throughout the area.

b.	Architectural Considerations--To the fullest extent possible, architectural elements such as, porches, balconies, roof types, walls and fences shall be characteristic of existing architectural elements in the village or town. This carryover effect of such architectural elements will help achieve the primary goal of the Village Expansion (Overlay) District, which is to allow development to occur adjacent to the village or town while still protecting the character and identity of the original village or town.

c.	Garages--Wherever possible, garages should be detached from the dwelling unit and located in the rear of the lots, with possible access from an alley or private drive.	Often a distinguishing element of older villages and towns, detached garages help foster a sense of diversity of structures throughout the area.

d.	Pedestrian Access--Pedestrian access should be an important design element in any development proposed adjacent to villages and towns. Villages and towns usually contain a variety of uses. Due to this unique character, linkages such as walkways and sidewalks should be provided to connect the development with the village or town to encourage pedestrian access.

e.	Alleys--Alleys, where feasible, are encouraged for future developments in this area.   Alleys can be an effective method of providing access  to the  rear of residential lots for service and on-lot parking. An additional advantage of utilizing alleys is that they would help to alleviate pressures for on-street parking.

Section 607	Procedures

The Village Expansion (Overlay) District provisions may be used only after the granting of conditional use approval by the Governing Body.

Section 608	Reserved

Section 609	Reserved




158
 
ILLUSTRATION	A TRUMBAU ERS VILLE






































/











I
-- PROPOSED  PRIMARY ROADS
 

PROPOSED  SECONDARY CONNECTIONS
AREA  NOT  INCLUDED  IN
 

STREEl
 
OVERLAY  DISTRICT
 
ILLUSTRATION    l3 SPINNERSTOWN







Q
a:  I----'
-







HOLLOW'







 
0
a:









:c
<.>
a:
::i
:c
<.>
 


I










BRINKMAN	RD
 
 	-	LI  _L_..l_\	..Ll.U\	J:t
PA	663










-	-	PROPOSED PRIMARY ROADS

•	PROPOSED  SECONDARY  STREET CONNECTIONS
 

B.	ARTERIAL CORRIDOR  (OVERLAY) DISTRICT

Section 61O	Applicability

The Arterial Corridor (Overlay) District shall be an overtay to regulate the use of land within the area designated as such on the municipal zoning map. The dimensional requirements of the Arterial Corridor (Overlay) District shall supersede the requirements of the underlying zoning districts. However, where no standards are mentioned herein, the provisions of the underlying zoning district shall apply.

Section 611	Puroose and Intent

The purpose of the Arterial Corridor (Overlay) District is to provide for convenient access to useswithin the district, while promoting consistent and appropriately restrictive management of access to arterial highways in order to maintain their critical local and regional arterial functions'.

Section 612	Limita\jons

Any nonresidential use permitted in the underlying zoning district(s) by riglJl, by special exception, or as a conditional use shall be permitted within the Arterial Corridor (Overlay) District only when approved as a conditional use in accordance with the provisions of this section and Section 1108 of this Ordinance.

Section 613	Access Management

No tract within the Arterial Corridor (Overlay) District shall be provided direct access to the arterial highway if adequate alternative access can be provided by way of a secondary, primary, collector or marginal access street or through joint access with a neighboring property already provided with an access to the arterial. Potentially negative impacts on the quality and character of surrounding properties or neighborhoods shall be satisfactorily mitigated by the landowner/developer. Where there is no adequate alternative access, direct access to the arterial highway shall be permitted in accordance with the following regulations:

a.	No tract within the Arterial Corridor (Overlay) District shall be provided with more than one point of direct access to the arterial. Unless and only if one accessway is impracticable in the judgment of the Governing Body, two accessways may be permitted, provided they are separated from each other and from any accessway on any abutting property and from any intersecting street by a minimum of 500 feet, as measured along the frontage of the arterial. Where such spacing. cannot be achieved, no more than one accessway shall be permitted.

b.	Within any tract to be subdivided or developed for two or more nonresidential buildings, no individual nonresidential building shall be provided with direct access to the arterial. All individual uses shall be accessed from an internal circulation system designed to serve the development of which they are a part.

Section 614	Setbacks

All buildings and structures within the Arterial Corridor (Overlay) District shall be set back a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from the ultimate right-of-way line of the arterial or shall meet the front yard requirement of the underlying zoning district, whichever is greater.

Section 615	Procedures

The Arterial Corridor (Overlay) District provisions may be used only after the granting of conditional use approval by the Governing Body.





161
 



































































162
 

ARTICLE VII.	PLANNED  RESIDENTIAL  DEVELOPMENT

Section 700	Purpose

II is the purpose of this Article to encourage and promote flexibility and ingenuity in the layout and design of large, new developments, enabling the developer to provide both residential and nonresidential uses in a community setting. Such a community would provide living, shopping, employment and recreational opportunities within walking distance of each other so as to promote pedestrian travel and street ltte and to reduce traffic congestion and dependence on the automobile. The intent of this Article is to utilize the planning and  design principles. of traditional towns in Bucks County. To meet these ends, procedures combining the administration of zoning and subdivision approval have been developed for use in Planned Residential Developments.

Section  701	Establishment of Districts

Any landowner may request the establishment of a Planned Residential  Development (PAD) on a tract·containing fttty (50) or more acres of contiguous  land under one ownership, and zoned either SAC, SAL, SAM or SRH.

Section 702	Use Regulations

A PRD is a development in which a mix of residential and nonres\dential uses is required. The PRO shall be divided into Residential Neighborhoods and a Town Center. The town center would be the focal point of the community where a diversity of  uses are encouraged including civic uses, retail and consumer service uses and offices with residential units on the second floor. Residential neighborhoods would be located adjacent to the town center  and would include a variety of housing types. The standards governing the design and layout of each area are listed below.

a.	The following requirements are applicable to the Residential Neighborhoods:

(1)	All housing types permitted under Use 96 Performance Standard Subdivision shall be permitted subject to all requirements of Section 404.96.

(2)	The maximum density, maximum impervious surface ratio and minimum · open space ratio requirements shall be those allowed for performance standard subdivisions in Sections 502 and 506 for the applicable district. These performance standards shall be calculated using only the area of land in the residential neighborhoods;  land devoted to the town center shall not be included.

b.	The following requirements are applicable to the Town Center:

(1)	Permitted Uses--The Town Center is the only area of a PAD in which nonresidential uses are permitted. In addition, dwellings in combination are permitted and encouraged. The following uses shall be permitted in the Town Center of the PAD:

(a)	Ci Place of Worship
(b)	C2 School
(c)	C3 Commercial School
(d)	C4 Library or Museum
(e)	CB Recreational Facility
{f)	C9 Community Center
(g)	C1O Child Care Center
(h)	C16 Municipal Services



163
 

(0	D1 Office
(D	D2 Medical  Office
(k)	E1 Retail Shop
(0	E3 Service  Business
(m)	E4 Financial Establishment
(n)	ES Eating Place
(o)	E7 Repair Shop
(p)	E10 Indoor Entertainment
(q)	E11 Athletic  Facility
(r)	E17CarWash
(s)	E27 Dwelling In Combination
(t)	F2 EmE!rgency Services

(2)	The use regulations in Section 404 for the particular use shall be met.

(3)	The town center shall be a contiguous area. The minimum amouni of land devoted to the town center shall be ten (1O) percent of the base site area and the maximum amount of land devoted to the town center shall be twenty (20) percent of the base site area.

(4)	At least twenty (20) percent of the land area of the town center shall be developed for civic  uses.   Civic uses shall include uses C1, C2, C3, C4,
CS, C9, C1o, C16, D1 (government offices only) and F2.

(5)	The maximum impervious surface ratio for the town center shall be sixty
(60)  percent.

(6)	Nonresidential uses are subject to the following setback requirements unless a greater standard is specified in Section 404:

O ft.  with a minimum  1o ft. sidewalk  between  building  and street  or parking
15 ft.   from parking with no sidewalk
20 ft.   from the curb line of a street with no sidewalk
45 ft.   from non-residential use to residential property line
75 ft.   between non-residential  building and residential  building
15 ft.   minimum spacing  between non-residential buildings
150 ft.  maximum length of building

 
(7)







(8)

(9)




(10)
 
Uses D1, D2, E1, E3, E4 and ES shall not include stores or businesses in excess of two thousand  (2,000) square feet of floor area.  A store or business may exceed the two thousand (2,000) square foot floor area · lirnit, up to a maximum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet, if the front facade of the building is designed to appear to be a series of connected buildings.

All uses shall take access from an interior street.

The town center may be, and is encouraged to be, oriented .towards an existing frontage road(s). This outward orientation Is intended to attract passing motorists and residents from outside the village development to the town center.

The nonresidential uses in the town center shall not be designed as what is commonly known as a "strip shopping center." All commercial and office uses shall be located in individual buildings, or a small number of uses may be located in one building.




164
 

(11)	Parking

(a)	Continuous parallel parking shall be permitted on the streets in the town center.

(b)	All off-street  parking  areas  shall  be  located  to  the  rear  of buildings.

(12)	Village Square

(a)	A village square or green of at least 25,000 square feet shall be provided in the Town Center of a Village Development as a focal point. The village square shall be useable land and shall be located adjacent to the area of highest intensity non-residential uses.

(b)	No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the village square or green shall contain impervious surfaces.        ·

(c)	The pedestrian path system shall provide access to the village square.

(d) The square shall be designed and landscaped as an activity spaca for concerts, exhibits and other public gatherings. Shade trees, park benches, trash receptacles and lighting shall be incorporated into the design.

c.	General Design Guidelines

(1)	Village streets should be arranged as a generally rectilinear and interconnecting network with variation for topography, environmental or other design factors and should terminate at other streets.

(2)	Sidewalks/Pedestrian Paths

(a)	Sidewalks shall be provided along all streets in the Town Center area. The sidewalk shall extend to the curb and shall be ten feet wide along all non-residential uses.

(b)	Sidewalks shall be provided in all residential areas in such a manner that all dwelling units have access to the pedestrian path system.	·

(c)	Sidewalks and pedestrian paths shall be provided in a comprehensive manner to provide pedestrian circulation throughout the development. All residential, non-residential and open space/recreation areas shall be accessible via a pedestrian path system.

(d)  In  designing  the  pedestrian  system  benches  and   trash receptacles shall be included in appropriate locations. · These facilities are particularly important in the Town Center and in open space areas. Bike racks shall be  provided  in the  Town  Center and in open space/recreation  areas.

(e)      Sidewalks and pedestrian paths shall be paved with materials that are compatible with the architecture, durable, easily maintained and  non-slip.



165
 


(f)		Sidewalks and pedestrian paths shall be a minimum of four (4) feet wide, except as noted in subsection (a) above.

Section 703	Application Procedure

The application procedure, as detailed below, is summarized as follows: Step 1.	Feasibility Review and Recommendation (60 days).
Step 2.	Tentative Review including a Public Hearing (60 days).

Step 3.		Issuance of  Findings, and a Tentative  Decision (30 days).	Zoning change granted upon approval of Tentative Plan.

Step 4.	Final Review (Time limit set by the Governing Body). Step s._	Fi al Decision in part or in whole (30 days).
Section 704	Feasibility Review

A feasibility review is recommended to provide a means of evaluating potential development sites to determine certain planning restraints, natural limitations, man-made capacities, or other factors which operate to limit the development potential of each particular site proposed for PAD. A fee shall be required at the time of submission in accordance with Section 712.

a.	Natural Site Determinants:

The developer shall map all relevant natural resources information and shall complete the site capacity calculations of Section 501.

b.	Capacity Determinants:

Traffic generation, including an analysis of the capacity of streets serving the site as well as predictions on traffic generated by the site. Sewer and water capabilities indicating the improvements needed to serve the site.

c.	General Site Analysis:

The applicant shall submit a location map showing the area within one-half (1/2) mile radius of the site and to the nearest arterial highway designated in this Ordinance. The following information shall be provided: identifiable areas of homogeneous land use; structures of historical or architectural interest; and facilities including schools, fire companies, sewer, water and recreation areas. Standards designated in the municipal plan and Section 105 of this Ordinance for density and use, and any alterations required through the municipal plan and Section 1OS of this Ordinance to permit the development, shall also be detailed.

d.	The Governing Body, after receiving the recommendations of the municipal planning commission, Quakertown Area Planning Committee, and Bucks County Planning Commission, shall respond in writing to the applicant within 60 days from the receipt of the feasibility review application, indicating general approval or disapproval of the proposal. The response shall detail areas of the site recommended for conservation, and any improvements or dedications on or off­ site that shall be required.
 

e.	General disapproval of a proposed PRD during a feasibility review shall not preempt a developer from applying for tentative approval as specified in the ordinance.	.

Section 705	Application for Tentative Approval

An application for tentative approval shall be flied as specified below.   A fee shall be required at the time of submission in accordance with Section 712.

a.	A plan indicating the location, size, topography, and vegetative cover of the site and the nature of the landowner's interest in the land proposed to be developed.

b.	A site plan and other drawings showing the overall density, impervious surface ratio, and open space ratio, and the density of the land use to be allocated to various portions of the site to be developed, the location and size of the common open space, the use, approximate height, bulk, and location of  buildings and other   information   including   building   elevations,   planting   plan  schedule,
·	provisions for parking of vehicles, and location and width of streets and public ways.

c.	Such drawings and documents as are required to establish the feasibility oi proposals for water supply and the disposal of sanitary wastes and storm water, the substance of covenants, grants, easements or other restrictions proposed to be imposed upon the use of·the land, buildings and structures including easements or grants for public utilities, the feasibility of the proposed maintenance and use levels of various areas of the open space in sufficient detail so that the Municipality may evaluate the use of the open space and the maintenance that it is expected to receive.  Elevations and perspective sketches
·	are encouraged. The written document shall include a written statement by the landowner setting forth the reasons why in his  opinion a planned residential development would be in the public interest and would be consistent with the zoning plan and the best interests of the municipality. The required modifications to municipal land use regulations otherwise applicable to the property, the form of organization proposed to own and maintain common open space, and in the case of development plans calling for development over a period of years, a schedule of proposed time  within which applications for final approval of the various sections of the proposed planned residential development are intended. This schedule must be updated annually on the anniversary of the grant of tentative approval.

d.	If water is to be provided by means other than by private wells owned and maintained by the individual owners of lots within the PRD, evidence shall be presented that the planned residential development is to be supplied by a certificated public utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot owners, or by a municipal corporation, authority or  utility. A copy of a Certificate of Public Convenience from the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or an application for such certificate, a cooperative agreement, cir a commitment or agreement to serve the area in question, whichever is appropriate, shall be acceptable evidence. If only an application for a Certificate of Public Convenience from the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission is provided, tentative approval shall be conditioned upon the applicant obtaining a Certificate of Public Convenience.

e.	Immediately upon receipt, the plans shall be referred to the municipal planning commission, the Quakertown Area Planning Committee, and the Bucks County Planning Commission for review.

f.	A fee, as stipulated in the fee schedule, adopted separately, shall be charged the developer by the municipality for reviewing tentative plans.
 

Section  706	The Public Hearing

a.	W hin sixty (60) days after filing an application for tentative approval of a planned residential development pursuant to this Article, a public hearing pursuant to public  notice on said application shall be held by the Governing Body in the manner  prescribed in Section 1109.

b.	The Governing Body may continue the hearing from time to time and may refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for a report; provided, however, that in any event, the public hearing or hearings shall be concluded within sixty {60) days after the date of the first public hearing.

Section 707	The Findings

a.	The Governing Body, within sixty {60) days following the conclusion of the public· hearing provided for in this Article, shall, by official written communication to the
_   lando ner,  either:

(1)	Grant tentative approval of the development plan as sub!Tiitted;

{2)    Grant tentative approval subject to specified conditions  not  included  in the development plan as submitted;

(3)	Deny tentative approval of the development plan.

b.	Failure to so act within said period shall be deemed to be a grant of tentative approval of the development plan as submitted. In the event, however, that tentative approval is granted subject to conditions, the landowner may, within thirty (30) days after receiving a copy of the official written communication of a Governing Body, notify the Board of his refusal to accept all said conditions, in which case the Governing Body shall be deemed to have denied tentative approval of the development plan. In the event the landowner does not, within said period, notify the Governing Body of his refusal to accept all said conditions, tentative approval of the development plan, with all said conditions, shall stand as granted.

c.	The grant or denial of tentative approval  by  official written  communication  shall include  not  only  conclusions   but  also  findings  of  fact  related  to  the  specific proposal and shall set forth the  reasons for the  grant,  with  or without  conditions, or  for  the  denial;  and said communication shall  set  forth  particularly  in  what respects  the  development  plan would  or  would  not  be  in the  public  interest, including but not limited to the findings  of fact  and conclusions  on the following:

(1)	Those respects in which the development plan is or is not consistent with the Municipal Plan and Section 1OS of this Ordinance;

{2) The extent to which the development plan departs from zoning and subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property, including but not limited to density, bulk and use, and the reasons why such departures are or are not deemed to be In the public interest;

{3) The purpose, location and amount  of  common  open  space  in the planned residential development, the reliability of the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the common open space, and the adequacy or inadequacy of the amount and purpose of the common open space as related to the proposed density and type of residential development;
 

(4)	The physical design of the development plan and the manner in which said design does or does not make adequate provision for public services, provide adequate  control over vehicular traffic, and further the amenities of light and air, recreation and visual enjoyment;

(5)	The relationship,  beneficial  or  adverse,  of  the  proposed  planned residential development to the neighborhood in which it is proposed to be established; and                                                                 ·

(6) In the case of a development plan which proposes development over a period of years, the sufficiency of the terms and conditions intended to protect the interests of the public and the residents of the planned residential development in the integrity of the development plan.

d.	In the event a development plan is granted. tentative approval, with or without conditions, the Governing Body may set forth in the official written communication the time within which  an  application for  final  approval  of  the development  plan
·shall be filed; or, in the case of a development plan which provides for development over a period of years, the periods of time within which applications
for final approval of each part thereof  shall be filed.   Except  upon the consent  of
the landowner, the time so established between grant of tentative approval and an application for final approval shall not be more than three (3) months; and in the case of development over a period of years, the time between applications for final approval of each part of a plan shall be not more than twelve (12) months.

Section 708	status of Plan After Tentative Aporoval

a.	The official written communication  provided for in this Article shall be certified by the Zoning Officer and shall be filed  in his office,  and a certttied copy  shall  be mailed to the landowner.   Where tentative  approval  has been granted,  it shall be deemed  an amendment  to the  zoning  map, effective  upon  final  approval,  and shall be noted on the zoning map.  The notation shall be as follows:    PRO - (SRC, SRL, SRM and SRH Districts as appropriate)  and the date of tentative approval.

b.	Tentative approval of a development plan shall not qualify a plat of the planned residential development for recording nor authorize development or the issuance of any building permits. A development plan which has been tentatively approved as submitted or which has been given tentative approval with conditions accepted by the landowner (and provided that the landowner has not defaulted nor violated any of the conditions of the tentative approvaQ, shall not be modified or revoked nor otherwise impaired by action of the municipality pending an application or applications for final approval, without the consent of the landowner; provided an application for final approval is filed or, in the case of development over a period of years, provided applications are filed, within the periods of time specified in the official written communication granting tentative approval.

c.	In the event that a development plan is given tentative approval and thereafter, but prior to final approval, the landowner shall elect to abandon said development plan and shall so notify the Governing Body in writing; or in the event the landowner shall fail to file application or applications for final approval within the required period of time or times, as the case may be; the tentative approval shall be deemed to be revoked and all that portion of the area Included in the development plan for which final approval has not been given shall be subject to those local ordinances otherwise applicable thereto as they may  be amended from time to time; and the same shall be noted on the zoning map and in the records of the Zoning Officer.




169
 


Section 709	Apolication for Final Approval

a.	An application for final approval may be for all the land included in a development plan or, to the extent set forth in the tentative approval, for a section thereof. Said application shall be made to the Zoning Officer of the municipality within the time or times specified by the official written communication granting tentative approval. The application shall include any drawings, specifications, covenants, easements, funds or securities in sufficient amount as determined by the Governing Body to insure performance and such other requirements as may be specified by ordinances, as well as any conditions set forth in the official written communication at the time of tentative approval. A fee shall be required at the time of submission in accordance with Section 712. A public hearing on an application for final approval of the development plan, or a part thereof, shall not be required provided the development plan, or part thereof, submitted for final approval is in compliance with the development plan theretofore given tentative approval and with any specified conditions attached thereto._

b.	In the event the application for final approval has been filed, together with all drawings, specifications and other documents in support thereof, and as required by the ordinance and the official written communication of tentative approval, the Governing Body shall, within forty-five (45) days of such filing, grant such development plan final approval.

c.	In the event the development plan as submitted contains variations from the development plan given tentative approval, the Governing Body may refuse  to grant final approval and shall, within forty-five {45) days from the filing of the application for final approval, so advise the landowner in writing of said refusal, setting forth in said notice the reasons why one or more of said variations are not in the public interest.  In the event of such refusal, the landowner may either:

(1)	Refile his application for final approval without the variations objected to; or

(2)	File a written request with the Governing Body that it hold a public hearing on his application for final approval. All plans will be referred to the municipal planning commission, Quakertown Area Planning Committee, and Bucks County Planning Commission for review. If the landowner wishes to take either such alternate action he may do so at any time within which he shall be entitled to apply for final approval, or within thirty (30} additional days if the time for applying for final approval shall have already passed at the time when the landowner was advised that the development plan was not in substantial compliance. In the event the landowner shall fail to take either of these alternate actions within said time, he shall be deemed to have abandoned 'the development plan. Any such public hearing shall be conducted in the manner prescribed in this Article for public hearings on applications for tentative approval. Within (30) days after the conclusion of the hearing, the Governing Body shall by official written communication either grant final approval to the development plan or deny final approval. The grant or denial of final approval of the development plan shall, in cases arising under this section, be in the form and contain the findings required for an application for tentative approval set forth in this Article.

d.	A development plan, or any part thereof, which has been given final approval, shall be so certified without delay by the Governing Sedy and shall be filed on record forthwith in the office of the Recorder of Deeds before any development shall take place in accordance therewith. Upon the filing of record of the development plan, the zoning and subdivision regulations otherwise applicable



170
 

to the land included in such plan shall cease to apply thereto. Pending completion, in accordance with the time provisions stated in Section 508 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247, as amended by Act 170), of said  planned  residential  development   or  part  thereof  as  finally  approved,  no
modification at the provisions at said development  plan, or part thereof, as finally
approved,  shall be made  except  with  the  consent  of  the  landowner.     Upon
approval of the final plat, the developer shall record the plat and post financial security in accordance .with the provisions of sections 513(a) arid 509 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247, as amended by Act 170).

Section 71O	Abandonment  of PRO

When the landowner fails to meet the schedules fixed in the tentative approval and does not appear to request an extension prior to the scheduled date, or when final approval has been granted and the developer tails to start work within one (1) year, or when work is stopped for a period of one (1) year, the PRD shall be considered to be abandoned. If the landowner fails to meet the above_ deadlines, and within such time does not request an extension, abandonment shall be considered.to have taken place.

Section 711	Required Number of Copies for Reviews

 
Feasibility Application Tentative Application Final Application
 
12 copies required
18 copies required
14 copies, including
2 linen copies, required
 

Section 712	Fees

All applicants for PRD approval (feasibility, tentative, and final) shall, at the time of making application, pay to the Zoning Officer for use of the municipality a fee in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Governing Body upon enactment of this Ordinance or as such schedule may be amended by resolution of the Governing Body.































171
 




































































172
 

ARTICLE  VIII.	NONCONFORMITIES

Section 800	Definitions

a.	Nonconforming lot means a lot, the area or dimensions of which was lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption or amendment. Such nonconformities may include buffers, environmental protection standards, parking and other requirements of this Ordinance.

b.	Nonconforming structure means a structure, or part of a structure, which does not comply with the applicable use or extent of use provisions of this Ordinance or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such  structure  lawfully existed prior to enactment of such ordinance or amendment or prior to the application   of   such   ordinance   or  amendment  to  its  location  by  reason  of
.annexation.	Such  nonconforming  structures  include  but  are  not  limited to, nonconforming signs.

c.	Nonconforming use means a use, whether of land or of structure, which does  not comply with the applicable use provisions of this Ordinance or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully in existence prior to the enactment of such ordinance or amendment, or  prior to the application  of such ordinance or amendment to Its location by reason of annexation.

Section  801	Registration  Of  Nonconforming  Uses. Structures  and Lots

The zoning officer shall have the discretion to identify and  register  all nonconforming uses, structures and lots. Upon identifying the nonconformity, the zoning officer shall mail registration forms to the owner of record.

Section 802	Continuation

The lawful use of a building or structure or the lawful use of any land as existing and lawful at the time of the enactment of this Ordinance, or in the case of an amendment to this Ordinance, then at the time of such amendment, may be continued except as hereinafter provided, although such use or structure does not conform to the provisions of this Ordinance or subsequent amendments.

Section  803	Nonconforming  Lots

a.	The provisions of Section 502 and Article IV shall not prevent the construction of a single-family dwelling in a residential district on any lot that was lawful when created and which, prior ta the effective date of this Ordinance, was in separate ownership duly  recorded by plan or deed; and provided that:

(1)	Such lot is not less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in RP, RA, RD, FC, SAC, SAL and VC-1 Districts; ten thousand (10,000) square feet in the VC-2 and SAM Districts; eight thousand {8,000) square feet in the SRH District; and f1Ve thousand (5,000) square feet in the URL District.

 
(2)
 
The width of such lot is not less than one hundred (100) feet in the RP, RA, RD, FC, SAC and SAL Districts; eighty (BO) feet in the SAM and SRH Districts; 60 feet In the VC-1 and VC-2 Districts; and (50) feet in the URL District.
 


(3)	Those  lots not served  by  public  water  and  public sewer shall  meet all requirements of the Bucks County  Department of Health.


173
 


(4)	The maximum building coverage shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) in the  RP, RA, RD, FC, SRC, SRL and VC-1 Districts; twenty percent (20%) in the VC-2, SAM and SRH Distrii:ts and thirty percent (30%) in the URL District.

(5)	The front and rear yards shall aggregate at least sixty percent (60%) of the total lot depth or meet the minimum requirements of the district in which the lot is located; but only in the VC-1, VC-2 and URL Districts shall either the front yard or the rear yard be less than thirty (30) feet.

(6)	The sideyards shall aggregate at least forty percent (40%) of the total lot width or meet the minimum requirements of the district in which the lot is located; the side yard shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet In any district except in the VC-1, VC-2 and URL Districts where it shall not be less than ten (1O) feet.

b.	This exception shall not apply to any two (2) or more contiguous lots in single
·	ownership as of or subsequent to the effective date of this Ordinance, in any case where a re-parceling or repiatting could create one or more lots which would conform to the Ordinance or which could be consolidated to minimize the nonconformity.

Section 804	Extension of Nonconforming Uses and Structures

a.	A nonconforming structure may be extended along the existing building lines or existing building plane of the existing nonconformity, provided that such expansion shall not extend within any street line. All other applicable requirements, including setbacks, yards and building height, shall be met. A zoning permit shall be obtained.

b.	A  nonconforming use may be extended  by special exception provided that:

(1)	The proposed extension shall take place only upon the lot or contiguous lots  held in the same ownership as that existing at the time the use became nonconforming. Permission to extend il nonconforming use as described in this Article shall not be construed to mean that a new use or uses may be established.

 
(2)




(3)
 
The proposed extension shall conform with the area and dimensional requirements in Section 503 for the district in which said extension is located and with the parking, sign, buffer and environmental standards and all other"applii:able requirements of this Ordinance.

Any increase in floor area or land area shall not exceed an aggregate of more than fifty (50) percent of the floor area or land area existing at the date the use became nonconforming.
 

Section 805	Restoration

A nonconforming structure or any structure containing a nonconforming use wholly or partially destroyed by fire, explosion, flood or other phenomenon, or legally condemned, may be reconstructed and used for the same nonconforming use, provided that reconstruction of the structure shall be commenced within one (1) year from the date the structure was destroyed or condemned and shall be carried on without interruption. The restoration shall not exceed the building footprint of the structure which was destroyed or condemned.






174
 

Section 806	Ownership

Whenever a lot is sold to a new owner, a previously lawful nonconforming use may be continued by the new owner. A change in nonconformity is governed by Section 808.

Section 807	Abandonment .

If a nonconforming use of a structure or land is abandoned for a continuous period of one
(1)	year, subsequent use of such structure or land shall be in conformity with the provisions of this
Ordinance.	For the purposes  of this Ordinance,  abandonment  shall commence  when the nonconforming use ceases.

Section 808	Changes

Once changed to a conforming use, no structure or land shall be permitted to revert to a nonconforming use. A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use only under all of the. following conditions:

a.	Such change shall be permitted  only  as a Special Exception by the Zoning Hearing Board.

b.	The  applicant  shall  show  that  a nonconforming  use cannot  reasonably  be changed to a conforming use.

c.	The applicant  shall show that the proposed change will be less objectionable  in external effects than the existing nonconforming use, with. respect to:

(1)	Traffic  generation  and  congestion  including  truck,  passenger  car,  and pedestrian traffic.

(2)	Noise, smoke, ash, dust, fumes, vapors,  gases, heat, odor, glare, or vibration.

(3)	Storage and waste disposal.

(4)	Appearance.



























175
 


































































176
 

ARTICLE  IX.	SIGNS

Section 900	Scope and Applicability

Any sign hereafter erected and maintained shall conform with the provisions of this Article and any other municipal ordinances and regulations.

Section 901	Definitjons

a.	Animated Sign: Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or create a special effect or scene. A sign on which the only copy that changes is ah electronic or mechanical indication of time or temperature shall be considered a changeable copy sign and not an animated sign.

b.		Banner: Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is mounted to  a pale, a building or any  other  structure.    Flags representing governmental,  educational
.or religious organizations shall not be considered  banners.   ·

c.		Beacon: Any light with one or mare beams directed into  the  at(TIOSphere  or directed at one or mare points not on the same  lot  as the  light  source;  also,  any light with one or more  beams that  rotate or  move.

d.		Building Marker: Any sign indicating the name of a building and date and incidental information about its construction, which sign is cut into a masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material.


e.		Building Sign:   Any sign attached  to any  part of  a building,  as contrasted to  a freestanding  sign.

f.	Canopy Sign: Any sign that is a part of an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy.

g.	Changeable Copy Sign: A sign on which the message copy can be changed through the use of attachable letters, numerals or graphics or through the use of electronic switching of lamps or other illuminated devices. A sign on which the message changes more than eight {8) times a day (except for time and/or temperature) shall be considered an animated sign and not a changeable copy sign far purposes of this ordinance.

h.	Commercial Message: Any sign wording, logo, or other representation  that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention ta a business, product, service, or other commercial activity.

i.		Freestanding Sign: Any sign supported by an upright(s) that is anchored in the ground and that is independent from any building or other structure.

j.		Incidental Sign: A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located, such as "no parking", "entrance", "telephone", "no trespassing" and other similar directives, and window  signs giving store hours or the names of credit institutions. No sign with a commercial message legible from a position off the lot on which the sign is located shall be considered   incidental.

k.	Marquee: Any permanent  roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed for  commercial  use ta provide  protection from the
weather or for advertising.



177
 


I.	Marquee Sign: Any sign attached to, in any manner, or made a part of a marquee.

m.	Pennant: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material which does not contain a message and is suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind.

n.	Portable Sign: Any sign which  is self  supporting  without  being firmly  embedded in the ground; or is fixed on a movable stand or mounted on wheels or movable vehicles or made easily movable in some other manner,  including, but not  limited to, signs converted to A- or T-frames; balloons used as signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way.

o.	Projecting Sign: Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that its leading edge extends more than fourteen (14} inches beyond the surface of such building or wall.  Projecting signs shall not project more than four (4) feet
.from the wall or surface to which they are attached, shall not .extend beyond the edge of any wall or other surface to which they are mounted, and the lowest edge shall be at least eight (8) feet above the ground level immediatelY. below.

p.	Residential Sign: Any sign located in a district zoned for residential uses that contains no commercial message except advertising for goods or services legally offered on the premises where the sign is located.

q.	Roof Sign: Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof.

r.	Roof Sign, Integral: Any sign erected or constructed as an integral or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, such that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof and such that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than fourteen
(14) inches.

s.	Sign: Any device, fixture, placard, or structure that uses any color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol, or writing to advertise,  announce,  or  identify  the  purpose of a person or entity, or to communicate information of any kind to the public.


t.	Wall Sign: Any sign attached parallel to, but within fourteen (14) inches of, a wail, painted on a:wall surface of, or erected and confined within the limits of an outside
wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one sign surface.

u.	Window Sign: ·Any sign, pictures, symbol, or combinati.on thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale, or service, that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window.

Section  902	Area of Signs

a.	The area of a sign  shall be construed to include all lettering, wording, and accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background, whether open or enclosed, on which they are displayed but not including any supporting framework and bracing incidental to the display itself.

b.	The area of a sign painted upon or applied to a building shall be considered to include all lettering, wording, and accompanying designs or symbols together with any backing associated with the sign.



178
 

c.	Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to or painted on a surtece, building, wall, canopy, or window, the area shall be considered to be that of  the  smallest  rectangle  or  other  regular  geometric  shape  which encompasses all of the letters and symbols.

d.	In computing square foot area of a double-faced sign, only one side shall be considered, provided both faces are identical. If the interior angle formed by the two faces of the double-faced sign is greater than forty-five (45) degrees, then both sides of such sign shall be considered in calculating the sign area.

e.	Lots fronting on two or more streets may compute the sign area for each street frontage separately, however, signage cannot be accumulated and used on one street in excess of that allowed for lots with only one street frontage.

Section 903	Illumination of Signs

a.	.Directly Illuminated Sign--A sign designed to give forth artificial light directly (or through transparent or translucent material) from a source of light within such sign, including but not limited to neon and exposed lamp signs.

b.	Indirectly Illuminated Sign--A sign illuminated with a light so shielded that no direct rays therefrom are visible elsewhere on the lot where said illumination occurs. If such shielding device is defective, such sign shall be deemed to be a directly illuminated sign.

c.	Non-Illuminated Sign--A sign which is not illuminated either directly or indirectly.

Section 904	Height of Signs

a.	The height of a freestanding sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be the existing grade prior to construction or the newly established grade after construction (exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign), whichever is lower.

b.	For a projecting, roof or wall sign, the height shall be determined by its placement on the  building.

Section 905	Placement of Signs

a.	In no case shall any sign be erected so that it:

(1)	Interferes with traffic through glare or through confusion with a traffic control device (by reason of color, location, shape, wording or other characteristic)  or through any other means.

(2)	Lies within the clear sight triangle as specified in Section 523.

(3)	Lies within a parking space or parking aisle.

(4)	Blocks the movement of  pedestrians traveling on public thoroughfares.

(5)	Blocks the entrance, exit, fire escape, or fire lane to a building.

b.	Signs shall not be located within, nor project into the ultimate right-of-way of a street. In addition, the following minimum setback requirements shall be met:




179
 


(1)	Signs of two (2) square feet or less shall be set back at least two (2) feet from a sidewalk or the cartway of a street.

(2)	Signs of six (6) square feet or less shall be set back at least five (5) feet from a sidewalk or the cartway of a street.

(3)	Signs which are greater than six (6) square feet shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from a sidewalk or the cartway of a street.

c.	Signs shall be no closer than fifteen (15) feet to a side or rear lot line. Section !106	Exempted Signs
Official signs which are authorized or erected by a duly constituted Governing Body including, but not limited to, signs necessary for the direction, regulation and control of traffic; street name signs;  legal notices; and warnings at railroad crossings, shall be exempt from regulation under this Article.

Section  907	Prohibited Signs

The following signs are unlawful and prohibited:

a.	Animated signs

b.	Beacons

c.	Pennants

d.	Signs containing information that a property may be used for any purpose not permitted- in the zoning district in which the property to which the sign relates is located.

e.	Signs illuminated by a group of incandescent light bulbs hung or strung overhead or used to outline a sign or structure, with the exception of festive lighting.

f.	Any sign erected on a tree or utility pole, or painted or drawn on a rock or other natural feature.

Section 908	Signs Permitted in All Zoning Districts

The following signs shall be permitted in all zoning districts and do not require a permit, provided the applicable requirements have been met. In addition, such signs shall not be counted when calculating the maximum total area of all signs on a Jot.

a.	Incidental signs, provided the area of any such sign shall not exceed two (2)
square feet.

b.	Flags representing governmental, educationaf or religious organizations, provided that the total area of all such flags shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet in area.

c.	Jdentttication signs displaying only the name and/or address of the occupant of a premises, provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed two hundred (200} square inches, and provided that only one (1} such sign shall be permitted per premises.

d.	Building markers or historical signs or tablets provided that the total area of such signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet per building.



180
 

Section 909	Signs in Residential Districts

a.	In the RP. RA, RD, FC, SRC, SRL, SRM, SRH and URL Districts, the following sign regulations shall apply to residential uses:

(1)	Each lot shall be permitted one (1) residential sign in accordance with the following requirements:

(a)	The maximum area of any such sign shall be two (2) square feet.

(b)	A freestanding sign or a wall sign shall be permitted.

(c)	Such sign shall be non-illuminated or indirectly illuminated.

(2)	Each lot shall  be permitted temporary  signs In accordance  with the following requirements:

 
(a)

(b}

(c)

(d)



(e)
 
The maximum area of any such sign shall be six (6) square feet. Freestanding signs or window signs shall be permitte'd.
Such signs shall be non-illuminated.

No more than four (4) temporary signs shall be permitted in any one calendar year and no more than two (2) temporary signs shall be permitted on a lot at any one time.

Such signs shall be removed after thirty {30) days. However, signs advertising the sale or rental of the premises upon which said sign has been erected shall be permitted until there is an agreement of sale, lease or rental for the property.
 

(3)	Each residential development or complex shall be permitted an identification sign at each principal access drive subject to the following requirements:

(a)	The maximum area of any such sign shall be twelve (12) square feet.

(b)	A freestanding sign shall be permitted.

(c)	Such sign shall be non-illuminated or indirectly illuminated.

(4)	The maximum height of a freestanding sign shall be six (6) feet.

b.	In the RR RA, RD, FC, SRC, SRL, SRM, SRH and URL Districts, the following sign regulations shall apply to permitted nonresidential uses and lawful nonconforming uses:

(1)	Each lot shall  be permitted  permanent  signs in accordance  with the following requirements:

(a)	One (1) freestanding sign with a maximum area of twelve (12) square feet.

(b)	One (1) wall sign with a maximum area of ten (10) square feet.





181
 

(c)    The signs  permitted by (a)  and (b)  above may be  changeable copy signs provided that they are not directly illuminated.

(d)	Such signs shall be non-illuminated or  indirectly illuminated.

(2)	Each lot shall be permitted temporary signs in accordance with the following requirements:

(a)	The maximum area of any such sign shall be ten (10) square feet.

(b)	Freestanding signs, banners and window signs shall be permitted.

(c)	Such signs shall be non-illuminated.

(d)    No more than four (4) temporary signs shall be permitted in any one calendar year and no more than two (2) temporary signs shall be permitted on a lot at any one time.

(e}  Such signs shall be removed after fifteen  (15) days.  However, signs advertising the sale or rental of the premises upon which said sign has been erected shall be permitted until settlement or rental of the property has occurred.

(3)	The maximum height of a freestanding sign shall be six (6) feet.

Section 91o	Signs in Planned Residential Developments and Village Center Districts

a.	Residential uses in PRDs and VC-1 and VC-2 Districts shall be permitted signs in accordance with Section 909.a.

b.	Nonresidential  uses in PRDs and VC-1 and VC-2  Districts shall be permitted permanent signs in accordance with the following requirements:

(1)	Each lot shall be permitted one (1} freestanding sign. The area of any such sign shall not exceed one (1) square foot for each five (5) feet of street frontage or twenty (20) square feet, whichever is smaller.

(2)	Each lot shall be permitted building signs in accordance with the following requirements:

(a)	The total area of all building signs shall not exceed five (5) percent of the exterior area of the front building wall (including window and door area and cornices) of the principal building.

 
(b)


(c}



(d)
 
Canopy signs, projecting signs, marquee signs, wall signs and window signs shall be permitted.

Not more than one (1} projecting sign or marquee sign shall be permitted per principal building and such sign shall not exceed ten (10) square feet.

Window signs shall not exceed twenty-five (25} percent of the total window area.
 


(3)	The signs permitted by sections  (1)  and  (2)  above  may  be changeable copy signs provided that they are not directly illuminated.




182
 

(4)	Such signs shall be non-illuminated, indirectly illuminated or directly Illuminated, except as indicated in subsection (3) above.

c.	Nonresidential  uses  in  PRDs and VC-1  and  VC-2  Districts  shall  be  permitted temporary signs in accordance with the following requirements:

(1)	The maximum area of any such sign shall be ten (1O) square feet.

(2)	Freestanding  signs,  banners  and window  signs  shall  be permitted; provided that no more than one (1) temporary, freestanding sign shall be permitted on a lot at any one time.

(3)	Such signs shall be non-illuminated.

(4)	No more than four (4) temporary signs shall be permitted per establishment for any one calendar year and no. more than two (2) temporary signs shall be permitted per establishment at any one time.

(5)	Such signs shall be removed after fifteen (15} days. However, . signs advertising the sale or rental of the premises upon which said sign has been erected shall be permitted until there is an agreement of sale, lease or rental for the property.

d.	The maximum height of a freestanding sign shall be six (6) feet.

Section 911	Signs in the CC and SC Districts

a.	The following types of permanent signs shall be permitted in the CC and SC Districts:

(1)	Each lot shall be permitted one (1) freestanding sign in accordance with the following  requirements:

(a)	The area of any suc-ti sign shall not exceed one (1) square foot for each five (5) feet of street frontage or thirty (30) square feet, whichever is smaller.

(b)	The maximum height of any such sign shall be ten (10) feet.

(2)	Each lot shall be permitted building signs in accordance with the following requirements:

(a)	The total area of all building signs shall not exceed ten (1O} percent of the exterior area of the front building wall (including window and door area and cornices)  of the principal building.

(b) Canopy signs, projecting signs, marquee signs,  wall signs and window  signs shall be permitted.

 
(c)



(d)
 
Not more than one (1) projecting sign or marquee sign shall be permitted per principal building and such sign shall not exceed twenty  (20) square feet.

Window signs shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total window area.
 

(3)	The signs permitted by sections  (1) and  (2)  above  may  be changeable copy  signs.



183
 


(4)	Such signs shall be non-illuminated,  indirectly  illuminated or  directly illuminated.	·

b.	Temporary  signs  shall  be  permitted  in accordance  with  the following requirements:

(1)	The maximum area of any such sign shall be twelve (12) square feet.

(2) Freestanding signs, banners and window  signs  shall  be  permitted; provided that no more than one (1) temporary, freestanding sign shall be permitted on a lot at any one time.

(3)	The maximum height of a freestanding sign shall be six (6) feet.

(4)	Such signs shall be non-illuminated.

(5)	No more than four  (4) temporary  signs  shall be permitted per
·	establishment  for  any  one calendar  year  and  no niore than  two  (2)
temporary signs shall be permitted per establishment at a y one time.

(6)	Such signs shall be removed after fifteen (15) days. However, signs advertising the sale or rental of the premises upon which said sign has been erected shall be permitted until there is an agreement of sale, lease or rental for the property.

Section 912	Signs in the PC Districts

a.	The following types of permanent signs shall be permitted in the PC Districts:

(1)	Each lot shall be permitted one (1) freestanding sign in accordance wtth the following requirements:

(a)	The area of any such sign shall not exceed one (1) square foot for each four (4) feet of street frontage or sixty (60) square feet, whichever is smaller.

(b)	The maximum height of any such sign shall be twelve (12) feet.

(2)	Each lot shall be permitted building signs in accordance with the following requirements:

(a)	The .total area of all building signs shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the exterior area of the front building wall (including window and door area and cornices) of the principal building.

 
(b}


(c)



(d)


(e)
 
Canopy signs, projecting signs, integral roof signs, marquee signs, wall signs and window signs shall be permitted.

Not more than one (1) projecting sign or marquee sign shall be permitted per principal building and such sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32} square feet.

Not more than two (2) integral roof signs shall be permitted per principal building.

Window signs shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total window area.
 



184
 

(3)	The signs permitted by sections (1) and (2) above may be changeable copy  signs.

(4)	Such signs shall be non-illuminated, indirectly illuminated or directly illuminated.

b.	Temporary  signs  shall  be permitted in accordance  with the following requirements:

(1)	The maximum area of any such sign shall be twenty (20) square feet.

(2)	Freestanding signs, banners and window signs shall be permitted, provided that no more than one (1) temporary, freestanding sign shall be permitted on a lot at any one time.

(3)	The maximum height of a freestanding sign shall be ten (1O) feet.

(4)	Such signs shall be non-illuminated.

(5)	No more than four (4) temporary signs shall be permitted per establishment for any one calendar year and no more than two (2) temporary signs shall be permitted per establishment at any one time.

(6)	Such signs shall be removed after flfl:een (15) days. However, signs advertising the sale or rental of the premises upon which said sign has been erected shall be permitted until there is an agreement of sale, lease or rental for the property.

Section 913	Signs in the Pl and EXT Districts

a.	The following types of permanent signs shall be permitted in the Pl and EXT Districts:

(1)	Each lot shall be permitted one (1) freestanding sign in accordance with the following requirements:

(a)	The area of any such sign shall not exceed one (1) square foot for each four (4) feet of lot frontage or sixty (60) square feet, whichever is less.

(b)	The maximum height of any such sign shall be twelve (12) feet.

(2)	Each lot shall be permitted business signs in accordance with the following requirements:

(a)	The total area of all building signs shall not exceed five (5) percent of the exterior area of the front building wall (including window and door area and cornices) of the principal building.

 
(b)


(c)
 
Canopy signs, projecting signs, roof signs, wall signs and window signs shall be permitted.

Not more than one (1) projecting sign shall be permitted per principal building and such sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.
 






185
 


(d) Not more than one (1) roof sign shall be permitted per principal building. Such sign shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet and extend more than four (4) feet above the roof line.

(3)	The signs permitted by sections (1) and (2) above may be changeable copy  signs.

(4) Such signs shall be non-illuminated, indirectly illuminated or directly illuminated.

b.	Temporary signs shall be permitted in accordance with the following requirements:

(1)	The maximum area of any such sign shall be twenty (20) square feet.

(2)	Freestanding signs, banners and window signs shall be permitted; provided that no more than one (1) temporary, freestanding sign shall be permitted on a lot at any one time.

(3)	The maximum height of a freestanding sign shall be ten (1O) feet.

(4)	Such signs shall be non-illuminated.

(5)	No.more than four (4) temporary signs shall be permitted per establishment for any one  calendar year and no more than two (2) temporary signs shall be permitted per establishment at any one time.

(6)	Such signs shall be removed after fifteen (15) days. However, signs advertising the sale or rental of the premises upon which said sign has been erected shall be permitted until there is an agreement of sale, lease or rental for the property.

Section 914	Nonconforming  Signs

a.	Signs  existing  at  the  time  of  passage  of  this  Ordinance,  which  were  legally erected, and which do not conform with the requirements of this Ordinance shall be  considered   nonconforming   signs.

b.	Nonconforming signs may be repainted or repaired (including lighting) provided such repainted or repaired sign does not exceed the dimensions of the existing sign. Wording may also be changed. However, nonconforming signs shall either be eliminated or made to conform with the requirements of this Article when any proposed change, repair or maintenance would constitute an expense of more than fifty (50} percent of the original value or replacement value of the sign, whichever is less.

c.	Nonconforming signs which are removed shall be replaced only with conforming signs.

Section 915	Permits, Construction, Maintenance and Violations

a.	General Permit Procedures

(1)	A zoning permit  must  be obtained from the  municipality  before  the erection  of any sign greater than two (2) square feet in area, unless specifically exempted herein. Exemptions from the necessity of securing a zoning permit, however, shall not be construed to relieve the owner of




186
 

the sign involved from responsibility for its erection in a safe manner and in a manner in accord with all the other provisions of this Ordinance.

(2)	Permanent Signs--Before any permit Is granted for the erection of a permanent sign or permanent sign structure,  plans  and  specifications shall be filed with the municipality showing:

(a)	the dimensions of the sign  and,  where  applicable,  the dimensions of the wall surface of the building to which it is to be attached;

(b)	the dimensions of the sign's supporting members;

(c)	the maximum height of the sign;

(d) the proposed location of the sign in relation to the face of the building, in front of which or above which it is to be erected;

(e)    the proposed location of the sign in relation to the boundaries of the lot upon which it is to be situated;                       '

(f)	the method and hours of illumination;

(g)	the materials, finish,  and details of construction  including  loads, stresses,  anchorage,  and any  other  pertinent  engineering  data; and

(h)	existing signs on the property.

(3)	Temporary Slgns--No permit is required for a temporary  sign.  However, the requirements of this Ordinance shall be met.

(4)	Fees and Deposits--Permit fees and refundable escrow deposit amounts shall be set from time to time by resolution of the Governing Body.

b,		Construction Requirements--All signs shall meet the design  and construction requirements of the BOCA Basic Building Code. All electrical signs shall be manufactured in accordance with the Underwriters' Laboratories specifications and shall bear the laboratory label.

c.	Maintenance Requirements--Every sign permitted by this Ordinance must be constructed of durable materials and kept in good condition and repair. Any sign which is allowed to become dilapidated may be removed by the municipality at the expense of the owner or leasee of the property or premises on which it is located. Prior to such action, the zoning officer shall follow the notification procedures specified in Section 915.e below.

d.	Unsafe and Unlawful Signs--lf the Zoning Officer finds that any sign regulated herein is unsafe or insecure or is a menace to the public or has been constructed, erected, or maintained in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance, he shall give notice to remove or alter the sign to comply with this Ordinance, in the same manner as in Section 915.e below. However, any sign which is in immediate peril to persons or property may be removed summarily and without notice.

e.	Removal of Signs--The owner or leasee of any property or premises upon which any sign is erected shall be responsible for its complete removal as required by any provision of this Ordinance. If the owner or_ leases of any property upon which a sign has been erected shall fail or  neglect to remove  it  as  hereinabove



187
 



required, the Zoning Officer shall give notice to the owner by certffied mail to remove the sign. If this letter is returned undelivered, far any reason, he may post such notice upon the premises. if, upon the expiration  of  thirty  (:30)  days following notice, the owner fails to remove the sign, the municipality shall arrange for its removal and shall bill the owner or leasee for the cost of such work plus ten (1O) percent for administrative cost.

Section 916	Overlay Districts

Signs in the Village Expansion (Overlay) District and the Arterial Corridor (Overlay) District shall meet the sign regulations of the underlying zoning district.























































188
 

ARTICLE  X.	ADMINISTRATION

Section  1000	Zoning Officer - Duties and Powers

The provisions of this Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the zoning officer who shall be appointed by the Governing Body. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer and he/she shall have the power to:

a.	Receive and examine all applications for zoning permits.

b·.		Issue permits and certificates only where there  is compliance with the  provisions of this Ordinance, with other municipal ordinances, and  with the Jaws of the Commonwealth and the federal government.  Permits for construction of uses requiring a special  exception or variance shall  be issued only upon order of the Zoning Hearing Board.  Permits requiring approval  by the Governing Body  shall be issued only after receipt of approval from the Governing Body.

c.	Record and file alJ applications for zoning permits with  accompanying plans ·and documents.  All applications, plans and documents shall be a public record.

d.	Receive applications for special exceptions and variances and forward these applications and all pertinent information to the Zoning Hearing Board for action thereon.

e.	Receive applications for PRDs, conditional uses, curative amendments and zoning changes, forwarding requests and all pertinent information to the Governing Body, the Planning Commission, and other appropriate agencies.

f.		Following refusal of a permit, to receive applications for interpretation appeals and variances.· These applications and all pertinent information will then be forwarded to the Zoning Hearing Board for action thereon.

g.	Conduct inspections to determine compliance or noncompliance with the terms of this Ordinance.

h.	Institute civil enforcement proceedings in accordance with Sections  1302 and 1303 of this Ordinance.

i.	With the approval of the Governing Body, or when directed by them, institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenence or use; to restrain, correct or abate such violation, so as to prevent the occupancy of or use of any building,  structure, landscaping or land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about such premises.

j.	Revoke any order or zoning permit issued under a mistake of fact or contrary to the law or the provisions of this Ordinance.

k.	Maintain a map or maps showing the current zoning classification of all land in the municipality.

I.	Register nonconforming structures, uses and lots in accordance with the provisions of Section 801.

Section  1001	Duties of the Planning Commission

The Planning Commission shall review applications  referred to  it under Section  1000.e. Jn  reviewing  such  applications,   the  Planning  Commission  shall  follow  the  same   procedure



189
 


employed in reviewing subdivision and land development plans. The Planning Commission shall submit its recommendations and findings to the Governing Body within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the application from the Zoning Officer.  Should the Planning Commission fail to submit a report and recommendations to the Governing Body within forty-five {45) days from receipt of the application from the  Zoning  Officer, the application shall be deemed acceptable to  the Planning Commission.

Section  1002	Zonjnq Permits Required

Hereafter, no use listed in Section 403 or 404 may be established or  changed,  no structure shall be erected,  constructed,  reconstructed,  altered,  razed  or  removed,  and  no building used or occupied, or changed in use, until a zoning permit has been secured from the Zoning Officer. Upon completion of changes in use or construction, reconstruction, alteration or moving of structures, the applicant shall notify the Zoning Officer of such completion. No permit shall be considered as complete or as permanently effective until the Zoning Officer has noted on the permit that the work or occupancy and use have been inspected and approved as being in conformity with_ the provisions of this Ordinance.

Section  1003	Application Requirements for Zoning Permits

a.	.    All applications for zoning  permits shall be made in writing by the owner, tenant, vendee under contract of sale, or authorized agent on a form supplied by the municipality, and shall be filed with the  Zoning  Officer.  The  application  shall include the following  information:

 
(1)

(2)







(3)


(4)
 
A statement as to the proposed use of the building or land.

A site layout drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and height of proposed buildings, structures, or uses and any existing buildings in relation ta property lines and street lines. If the application relates to property scheduled to be developed in successive stages, such plans shall show the relationship of the portion scheduled for initial development to the proposed layout of the entire property.

The location, dimensions, and arrangements of all open spaces, yards and buffer yards, including methods to be employed for screening.

The site layout shall indicate all existing trees which are to be saved, the tree protection zone boundary, and the method by which tree protection will occur.
 

(5)	The location, size, arrangement and capacity of all areas to be used for motor vehicle access, off-street parking, off-street loading and unloading, and provisions to be made for lighting such areas.

 
(6)


(7)


(8)


(9)
 
For signs, the information specified in Section 915.a(2) of this Ordinance shall be provided.

The location and dimensions of sidewalks and all other areas to be devoted to pedestrian use.

Provisions to be made for treatment and disposal of sewage and industrial wastes, water supply, and stormwater management.

The capacity and arrangement of all buildings used or intended ta be used for dwelling purposes, including the proposed density in terms of number of dwelling units per acre of land.
 



190
 

(10)	A description of any proposed industrial or commercial  operations  in sufficient detail to indicate effects of those  operations  in producing noise, glare, air pollution, water pollution, fire hazards, traffic congestion, or other safety hazards.

(11)	Description of methods to be employed in controlling any excess noise, glare, pollution, smoke fumes, water pollution, fire hazards, traffic congestion, or other safety hazards.

(12)	Any other data deemed necessary by the Zoning Officer, Planning Commission or Governing Body to enable them to determine the compliance of  the proposed development with  the  terms  of this Ordinance.

b.	No permit for any new use or construction which will involve the on-site disposal of sewage or waste, and no permit for a change in use or an alteration which will result in an increased volume of sewage or waste to be disposed of on the site,
·shall tie issued until approval has been granted by the Bucks County Department
of Health.

c.	No permit for any new use or construction which will use public sewage facilities, and no permit Jar a change in use or an alteration which will result in an increased volume of sewage, shall be used until approval of the connection has been granted by the servicing authority.

Section 1004	Fees

All applicants for zoning permits shall, at the time of making application, pay to the Zoning Officer for the use of the municipality  a fee in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Governing Body upon the enactment of this Ordinance or as such schedule may be amended by resolution of the Governing Body.

Section 1005	Life of a Zoning Permit

Any erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or moving of a building or other structure, including a sign, authorized by a zoning permit shall be commenced, and any change in use of a building or land authorized by a zoning permit shall be undertaken, within one (1} year after the date of issuance of the permit. If not, the permit shall be considered null and void. However, in case of erection or construction  of  a building, the  right to  proceed with  construction
may be extended annually without additional fees tor an aggregate period of not more than three
(3)	years, provided that the construction  pursuant to said permit  has commenced within the first
one (1) year period.

Section 1006	Certificate of Occupancy

Hereafter, no structure erected, constructed, reconstructed, extended or moved, and no land or building changed in use under a zoning permit, shall be occupied or used in whole or in part for any use whatsoever, until the owner or authorized agent has been issued a certificate of occupancy by the Zoning Officer, indicating that the building or use complies with the terms of zoning as provided in this Ordinance.

For businesses that are open to the public, a certificate of occupancy shall be obtained from the Pennsylvania  Department of Labor and Industry in  accordance with the Pennsylvania Code-Tille 34, Chapters 49 to 59 before the zoning officer issues a certificate of occupancy.

No certificate shall be issued until the premises in question  has  been  inspected  and found  by the Zoning  Officer to be in compliance with the zoning  ordinance.   The  Issuance  of a




191
 


certificate of occupancy in no way absolves the owner or authorized agent from compliance with the intent of this Ordinance.

































































192
 


ARTICLE  XI.	ZONING  HEARING BOARD  AND  OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEEDINGS

Section  1100	Establishment of Zoning Hearing Board

A Zoning Hearing Board is established in order that the objectives of this Ordinance may be more fully and equitably achieved and a means for competent interpretation of this Ordinance provided.

Section  1101	Membershio. Terms of Office of Zoning Hearing Board.

a.	The Zoning Hearing Board shall consist of three (3) residents of the municipality appointed by resolution by the Governing Body.  The terms  of  office  shall  be three (3) years and shall be so fixed that the term of office of one member shall expire each year. The Zoning Hearing Board shall promptly notify the Governing Body of any vacancies which occur.   Appointments  to fill vacancies  shall be only
-for the-unexpired portion of the term.   Members of the Zoning Hearing Board shall
.hold no other office in the municipality.

b.	Alternate Members.  The Governing Body may  appoint  by resolution at least one
(1)	but not more than three (3) residents of the  municipality to serve as alternate members of the Zoning Hearing Board, subject to the following provisions:

{1)	The term of office of an alternate member shall be three (3) years.

{2)	Alternate members shall hold no other office in the municipality.

(3)	Any alternate member may participate in any proceeding or discussion of the Zoning Hearing Board but shall not be entitled to vote as a member of th-e Zoning Hearing Board nor receive any compensation (if such compensation exists) unless designated as a voting alternate member.

(4)	If, by reason of absence or disqualification of a Zoning Hearing Board member, a quorum is not reached, the Chairman of the Zoning Hearing Board shall designate as many alternate members of the Zoning Hearing
Board to sit on the Zoning Hearing Board as may be needed to provide a quorum. Any alternate member of the Zoning Hearing Board shall continue  to serve  on  the  Zoning  Hearing  Board  in all  proceedings
·	involving the matter or case for which the alternate member was initially appointed until the Zoning Hearing Board has made a final determination of the matter or case. Designation of an alternate member shall be made on a case-by-case  basis in rotation according to declining seniority among
all alternates.

Section  1102	Removal of Member of Zoning Hearing Board

Any Zoning Hearing Board member may be removed - for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of the Governing Body, taken after 15 days advance notice of the intent to take such a vote. A hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the member shall request it in writing.

Section  1103	Organization of Zoning Hearing Board

a.	Officers: The Zoning Hearing Board shall elect a chairman from its membership, and shall appoint a secretary. The chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.





193
 


b.	Procedures: The Zoning Hearing Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its procedures, consistent with ordinances  of the municipality  and laws of the Commonwealth.

c.	Meetings:   Meetings shall be open to the public and shall be at the call of  the
·Chalrman and at such other times as the Zoning Hearing Board shall specify in its rules of procedure. For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be not less than a majority of all members of the Zoning Hearing Board.

d.	Records and Decisions: The Zoning Hearing Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question; or if absent or failing to vote,  indicating such fact; and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be the property of the municipality and shall be a public record. The Zoning Hearing Board shall submit a report of its activities to the Governing Body as requested by the Governing Body.

Section  1104	Expenditures for Services of Zoning Hearing Board

a.	The Governing Body shall fix per-meeting compensation for the members of the Zoning Hearing Board according to a schedule adopted by resolution of the Governing Body upon enactment of this Ordinance or as such schedule may be amended from time to time. Such compensation shall not exceed the rate of compensation authorized to be paid to the members of the Governing Body.

b.	Alternate members may receive compensation for the performance of their duties when designated as voting alternate members pursuant to Section 1101.b of this Ordinance.	Such compensation shall be in accordance with subsection a. hereof.

Section 1105	Jurisdiction of Zoning Hearing Board and Governing Body

a.	The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and render final adjudications in the following matters:

(1)	Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance, except those brought before the Governing Body pursuant to Section 1111.a(2) of this Ordinance.

(2) Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising procedural questions or alleged defects in the process of enactment or adoption, which challenges shall be raised by an appeal taken within thirty (30) days after the effective date of said Ordinance.

(3) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including, but not limited to, the granting or denial of any permit or failure to act on the application therefor, the issuance of any cease and desist order, or the registration or refusal to register any nonconforming use, structure or lot.

 
(4)


(5)

(6)
 
Appeals from a determination by a municipal engineer  or the zoning officer with reference to the administration of any flood plain provision.
Applications for variances pursuant to Section 1106 of this Ordinance. Applications for special  exceptions  pursuant  to Section  1107 of  this
Ordinance.
 





194
 

(7) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning  Officer  or  municipal engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or provision thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion control and storm water management insofar as the same relate to development not involving an application for a subdivision, land development or planned residential development.

b.	The Governing Body shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and render final adjudications In the following matters:

(1)	All applications for approval of Planned Residential Developments under Article VII of this Ordinance.

(2)	All applications for subdivisions and land developments pursuant to the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. Any provision in the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance requiring that final action concerning subdivision and land development applica\ions be taken by
·the  Planning  Commission   rather  than  the  Governing  Body  shall  vest
exclusive jurisdiction in the Planning Commission in lieu of the Governing Body for purposes of the provisions of this paragraph.	'

(3)	Applications for conditional uses pursuant to Section 1108 of this Ordinance,

(4)	Applications for curative amendments pursuant to Section 1111 of this Ordinance.

(5)	All petitions for amendments to land use ordinances pursuant to Article XII of this Ordinance.

(6)	Appeals from the determination of the zoning officer or the municipal engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or provisions thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion control and storm water management insofar as the same relate to an application for a subdivision, land development or planned residential development. ·

Section  1106	Zoning Hearing Board:  Powers and Duties - Variances

a.	Appllcability. UP,on appeal from a determination by the Zoning Officer, the Zoning Hearing Board shall have the power to vary or adapt the strict application of any of the requirements of this Ordinance, where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of property at the time of the enactment of this Ordinance or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition on such piece of property, the strict application of any regulation enacted under this Ordinance would result in peculiar and exceptional and undue hardship upon the owner of such property, but in no other case.

b.	Condition. In general, the power to authorize a variance from the terms of this Ordinance shall be sparingly exercised and only under peculiar and exceptional circumstances.

c.	Requirements and Standards. No variance in the strict application of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be granted by the Zoning Hearing Board unless the Zoning Hearing Board finds that the requirements and standards are satisfied.

The applicant must  prove that the variance  will  not  be  contrary  to  the  public interest and that practical difficulty and unnecessary  hardship will result if it is not



195
 


granted. In particular. the  applicant shall establish and substantiate that the appeal for the variance is in conformance with the following requirements and standards listed below:

(1)	That the granting of the variance shall be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Ordinance, and shall not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.

(2)	That the granting of the variance will not permit the establishment within a District of any use which is not permitted in that District.

(3)	There must be proOf of unique circumstances. That there are special circumstances or conditions, fully described in the findings, applying to the land or building for which the variance is sought, which circumstances or conditions are peculiar to such land or building and  do ·not apply generally  to  land  or  buildings  in  the  neighborhood,  and  that  said
. circumstances or conditions are such that the strict application of the provisions of this Ordinance would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of such land or building.

(4)	There must be proof of unnecessary hardship. It is not sufficient proof of hardship to show that greater profit would result if the variance were granted. Furthermore, hardship complained of cannot be self-created; it cannot be claimed by one who purchases with or without knowledge of restrictions; it must resulr from the application Of this Ordinance; it must be suffered directly by the property in question; and evidence of a variance granted under similar circumstances shall not be considered.

(5)	That the granting of the variance is necessary for the reasonable use of the land or building and that the variance as granted by the Zoning Hearing Board is the minimum variance that will accomplish this purpose.

The Zoning Hearing Board may impose whatever conditions and safeguards it deems necessary to insure that any proposed development or use will secure substantially the objectives Of this Ordinance.

d.	Administration. The Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct  hearings and make decisions in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in Section 1109.

Section   1107    Zoning Hearing Board:  Powers and Duties - Special Exceptions

a.	Applicability. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have the power to approve special exceptions  when  this  Ordinance  specifically  requires  the  obtaining  of  such approval and for no other use or purpose.

b.	Conditions and Standards. In granting a special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board shall make findings of fact consistent with the provisions of this Ordinance. The Zoning Hearing Board shall not approve a special exception except in conformance with the conditions and standards outlined in this Ordinance.

c.	General Requirements and Standards Applicable to All Special Exceptions. The Zoning Hearing Board shall grant a special exception only if it finds adequate evidence that any proposed development submitted will meet all of the following general requirements listed herein as well as any specific requirements and standards for the proposed use. The Zoning Hearing Board shall among other things require that any proposed use and location be:




196
 


(1)	In accordance with the Quakertown Area Comprehensive Plan and Section 105 of this Ordinance and consistent with the spirit, purposes, and the intent of this Ordinance;

(2)	In the best interests of the Municipality, the convenience of the community, the public welfare, and be a substantial improvement to the property in the immediate vicinity; ·

(3)	Suitable for the property in question, and designed, constructed, operated, and maintained so as to be in harmony with and appropriate in appearance to the existing or intended character of the general vicinity,

(4)	In conformance with all applicable requirements of this Ordinance and all municipal  ordinances;

(5)	Suitable in terms of effects on highway traffic and safety with adequate
. access  arrangements  to  protect  streets  from  undue  congestion  and hazard; and

(6)	In accordance with sound standards of subdivision and land development practice where applicable.

The Zoning Hearing Board may impose whatever conditions and safeguards it deems necessary to insure that any proposed development or use will secure substantially the objectives of this Ordinance.

d.	Express Standards and Criteria Applicable to Specific Special Exceptions. In addition to the requirements specified in subsection c. above and the other requirements of this Ordinance, the applicant shall provide the additional information· required below and any other information necessary for the Zoning Hearing Board to make its evaluation:

(1)	Use A7 Agricultural Retail

(a)	the applicant will provide certification that all products sold are grown, produced or raised on the property and that all plants, produce and nursery stock were raised from seed or starter plants an the property;

(b)	the hours of operation to determine if they are appropriate for the neighborhood;

(c)	access shall have appropriate sight distance;

(d)	evaluate the need for additional buffering improvements.

(2)	Use B3 Rooming or Boarding House

(a)	ensure the number of sleeping rooms  does  not  exceed  the requirements  of  Section  404.B3.a.;

(b)	evaluate the requited off-street parking spaces under Section 404.B3.e.;

(c)	evaluate the need for additional buffering improvements;

(d)	evaluate the adequacy of sewer service or on-site septic and consistency with the municipal sewerage facilities plan.


197
 



(3)	Use C6 Recreational Facility and Ca Private Club

(a)	specify the types of  uses, activities, structures  and accessory uses that will be located or take place on the property;

(b)	evaluate the adequacy of sewer service or  on-site  septic  and consistency with the municipal sewerage facilities plan;

(c)	evaluate the need for additional buffering improvements;

(d)	evaluate  measures  to  abate  noise  which  would  constitute  a public nuisance;

(e)	evaluate  measures  to  ensure  the  safety  of  participants, neighbors and the public;

(f)	for quasi-military  operations, games, activities and,training,

(Q        ensure  the  requirements   of  Section  404.C6.f.   shall   be met;

(ii) evaluate the compliance with this Ordinance  prior to approval of tournaments;

(iiij	evaluate the rules of conduct;

(iv)	evaluate the need for liability insurance;

(v)     ensure the nuisance requirements of this Ordinance will be met;

(vij     prepare  an  agreement  to  hold  harmless  the  Township and its agents and employees from any and all liability related to this use and activity.

(g)	for a rifle range, ensure the requirements of  Section  404.C6.e. shall be met.

(4)	Use C7 Golf Course

(a)	specify the types of uses, activities and accessory uses that will be located or take place on the property;

(b)	evaluate the adequacy of parking and access;

(c)	provide transportation Impact, water, sewer and environmental impact statements, as specified in Section 1205;

(d)	indicate how parking areas will be screened from view of adjacent residential properties;

(e)	evaluate the  need for  additional  buffering improvements;

(f)		evaluate  the  hours  of  operation  and  lighting  improvements   to determine if they are appropriate for the general area.



198
 



(5)	Use C1O Day Care Center

(a)	specify the types of uses, activities, structures  and accessory uses that will be located or take place an the property;

(b)	access shall be evaluated far proper sight distance;

(c)	evaluate  the  hours  of  operation  ta  determine  if  they  are appropriate far the neighborhood;

(d)	sufficient drop-off/pick-up area shall be provided;

(e)	evaluate the need far additional buffering.

_(6)	Use C17 Recreational Cabin/Cottage  Development

(a)	a transportation impact statement shall be provided, f!S specified in Section  1205;

(b)	specify the types and location of accessory outdoor recreation uses and/or activities;

(c)	evaluate the need for additional buffering improvements:

(d)	ensure all requirements of Section 404.C17 will be met.

(7)	Use E22 Multiple Commercial Use (Shopping Center)  - Other  Permitted us·es

Under Section 404.E22.e., determine if proposed uses, other than those specified in Section 404.E22.d., are of the same general character and specify reasonable restrictions for such uses.

(B}	Use E28 Auction  House

 
(a)
 
specify the types of goods ta be said at auction;
 

{b)	ensure that proper disposal of animal waste will be  provided  far animal auctions;

(c)	a transportation impact statement  shall be provided, as specified in Section  1205;	·

 
(d)

(e)

(f)
 
evaluate the adequacy of parking improvements: evaluate starmwater management improvements;
evaluate the hours of operating and lighting improvements to determine if they are appropriate for the general area;
 

(g)	evaluate the  need for additional  buffering improvements.







199
 




(9)	Use F1 Utilities

(a)	specify the types of uses, activities, operations, structures and accessory uses that will be located or take place on the property;

(b)	evaluate the  need tor  additional  buffering improvements. (1O)	Use F3 Terminal
Evaluate the compatibility of the proposed use with existing and potential conditions and uses in the Extraction District.

(11)	Use F4 Airport or Heliport

(a)	evaluate  proposed  accessory  uses tor  compatibility  with  the principal airport/heliport and the surrounding area;

(b)	it accessory office, commercial or industrial uses are proposed, a transportation impact statement shall be provided;

(c)	evaluate the impact on surrounding land uses;

(d)	evaluate the  need for  additional  buffering improvements.

(12)	Use G11 Fuel Storage and Distribution

(a)_		specify the types of uses,  activities,  operations,  structures  and accessory  uses that will be located or take place on the property;

(b)		designate the location of all buildings and their uses and all areas for the storage of fuels, materials and equipment;

 
(c)

(d)

(e)
 
access shall be evaluated for proper sight distance;

provide a plan for containing fuel spills and other emergencies; evaluate the  need for additional  buffering improvements.
 
(13)	Use G14 Extractive Operations,. Mining

(a)	water,  transportation   impact   and   environmental   impact statements shall be submitted, as specified in Section i205;

(b)	ensure all requirements, studies, plans and improvements, as specified in Section 404.Gi 4, will be satisfied;

(c)	evaluate the need for a bond to be posted for rehabilitation as noted in Section 404.G14.d.

(14)	Use G15 Resource Recovery Facility and Use G16 Solid Waste Landfill

(a)	specify the types of uses, activities, operations, structures and accessory uses that will be located or take place on the property;





200
 



{b)     designate the  proposed locations  of all buildings and their uses and all areas for the storage of materials, refuse and equipment;

(c) provide transportation, water, sewage and environmental impact studies, as specified in Sectioni205;

(d) ensure all requirements, studies, plans and improvements, as specified in Section 404.Gi5 or Section 404.Gi6 for the respective uses, will be satisfied.

(i5) Use Hia Accessory Professional Office, Use Hib Accessory Personal Service, Use Hig Accessory Repair Service and Other Home Occupations

(a)		specify the type  of service, office, repair service or other activity to be conducted  on the premises;	·
 

{b)
 

if employees are permitted, specify the number of' employees, the number of nonresident employees and the number of nonfamily employees;
 

(c)		indicate the areas of the property and structure to be used for the activity and for parking;

 
(d)
 
evaluate the  need for  additional  buffering improvements.
 

(16)	H7 Outside Storage and Display - Larger Area

Evaluate  the  impacts  of  an  area  greater  than  specified  in  Section 404.H7.b. and ensure the provisions of Section 404.H7.e. shall be met.

(17)	HB Temporary Structure or Use - Time Extensions

If a longer time is requested than is specified in Section 404.HB.a.,  the following conditions will be addressed by the applicant:

 
(a)

(b)

(c)


(d)


(e)
 
provide information an the permanent structure, building or use; ensure that, financially, the project can be completed;
specify the time for completion of the permanent structure, building or use;

specify the time for removal of the temporary  structure,  building or use;

provide a written agreement that the temporary structure, building or use will be removed within thirty days of the expiration of the permit or the issuance of an occupancy permit for the permanent structure, building or use, whichever occurs first.
 

(i8)	Use H10 Air Landing Field

(a)	ensure all requirements  of Section 404.Hi a will be met;




20i
 





(b)	evaluate the proposed times of operation and specify any limitations;

(c)	evaluate the need for additional buffering improvements in  all areas including warm-up ramps and areas, parking areas,  tie­ down areas  and hangers.

(19)	Flood Plain Regulations

(a)	evaluate the expansion of an existing structure or use In flood plain areas and ensure the flood plain regulations, Section 507.h., will be met;

(b)	evaluate any development in flood plain areas to ensure the provisions of Section 507.I. will be met.

(20)	Parking Performance Standards

(a)	evaluate a proposed reduction of off-street parking facilities under the provisions of Section 516.d;

(b)	evaluate proposed joint use of parking facilities or the establishment of common parking facilities under the provisions of Section 516.e.

(21)	Off-Street  Loading - Reduction of Facilities

Evaluate a proposed reduction of off-street loading facilities under the provisions of Section 519.h.

(22)	Nonconforming Uses

(a)	evaluate a proposed extension of a nonconforming  use  under the  provisions of Section 804;

(b)	evaluate a proposed change of a nonconforming use under the provisions  of Section  808;

(c)	in the evaluation of an extension of a nonconforming use or a change of nonconforming use, the need for additional parking, buffering or access improvements shall be determined.

e.	Review by the Planning Commission. The Zoning Hearing Board shall request an advisory opinion from the Planning Commission on any application for a Special Exception; the Planning Commission is to submit a report of such advisory opinion prior to the date of the public hearing held by the Zoning Hearing Board on an application.

f.	Review by the QAPC. The Zoning Hearing Board shall request an advisory opinion from the Quakertown Area Planning Committee on any application for a Special Exception involving a development of more than five (5) acres as required in Section  1402.c.

g.	Administration.    The  Zoning  Hearing  Board shall  conduct  hearings  and  make decisions  in accordance with the procedures and standards  set forth  in Section 1109.



202
 

Section 11OB	Governing Body: Powers and Duties - Conditional Uses

a.	Applicability. The Governing Body shall have the power to approve conditicnal uses when this Ordinance specifically requires the obtaining of such approval and for no other use or purpose.

b.	Conditions and Standards. In granting a conditional use, the Governing Body shall make findings of fact consistent with the provisions of this Ordinance. The Governing Body shall not approve a conditional use except in conformance with the conditions and standards outlined in this Ordinance.

c.	General Requirement and Standards Applicable to All Conditional Uses. The Governing Body shall grant a conditional use only ifit finds adequate evidence that any proposed development submitted will meet all of the following  general requirements as well as any specific requirements and standards listed in subsection d for the proposed use and those contained in Articles IV and V.  The
-Governing Body shall among other things require that any proposed use and
location be:

(1)	In accordance with the Quakertown Area Comprehensive Plan and Section 105 of this Ordinance and consistent with the spirit, purposes, and the intent of this Ordinance;

(2)	In the best interests of the Municipality, the convenience of the community, the public welfare, and be a substantial improvement to the property in the immediate vicinity;

(3)	Suitable for the property in question, and designed,  constructed, ORerated, and maintained so as to be in harmony with and appropriate in appearance to the existing or intended character of the general vicinity;

(4)	In conformance with all applicable requirements of this Ordinance and all municipal  ordinances;

(5)	Suitable in terms of effects on highway traffic and safety with adequate access  arrangements  to  protect streets from  undue  congestion  and hazard; and

(6)	In accordance with sound standards of subdivision and land development practice where applicable.

d.	Specific Requirements and Standards. The Governing Body shall:

(1)	Determine that the proposal provides for adequate access to public roads without creating hazardous conditions. In making this determination, the Governing Body may impose conditions requiring:

(a)	access  to  be  limited,  or  combined  with  that  of  adjoining properties;

 
(b)



(c)
 
improvement of vertical or horizontal alignment  adjoining the site or off-site if access to the site would be restricted or hazardous  as
a result ot the alignment problem.

widen or replace a bridge if said bridge restricts access to the site, or where the nature of the traffic generated by the proposed use would create a hazardous or restrictive situation.
 




203
 


{2)    Examine the use and its relationship to existing land uses to insure that the proposed use does not adversely alter the character of stable neighborhoods and to protect adjoining residents from uses which are objectionable. To this end, the Governing Bady may impose conditions requiring:

(a)	special buffer planting, buffer yards, or planted berms;

(b) planting or wails ta screen intrusive uses such as parking lots, loading docks, mechanical plants, etc;

(c)  control of location of intrusive uses so that they are sited in the least disruptive manner;

{d) special design of lighting and signs to avoid disrupting existing developments or conflicting with the vision of motorists, particularly near intersections;

(e)    ensure that the requirements of Section 404 for,the  respective use shall be met.

(3)	The natural  resources  listed  in Section  501  shall  be  mapped  and presented to provide evidence that the  performance  standards  in Section 504 can be met. Drawings and calculations shall be provided to illustrate and  indicate the percentage of intrusion for each natural resource so that each standard in Section 504 may be evaluated.

(4)	Many conditional uses are so classified because of their potential tor nuisance and negative impact on the community or neighboring properties. The following additional conditions shall apply to these uses:

(a)	Use A 1 General Farming - CC District

(1)	for general farming in the CC District, ensure that the requirements of Section 404.A 1 will be met;

(2)	prepare an agreement that, if activities change, there will be additional submissions for conditional use review and approval.

(b)	Use A3 Intensive Agriculture; AS Riding Academy; A6 Commercial Kennel

(1)	specify  the types  of  activities  or  operations ta  be conducted on the property;

 
(2}



{3)



(4)
 
designate the location of all buiidings and their proposed uses, feed lots, pens, confinement areas, storage and processing   areas;

designate measures to be taken to prevent surface water and groundwater contamination from fertilizers, herbicides, pesticides and animal waste;

for the raising or training of guard dogs or attack dogs, specify measures for animal control and the safety of the neighborhood.
 



204
 



(c)	Use A4 Forestry

(1)	evaluate the Forest Management Plan under the provisions of Section 404.A.4.;

(2)	determine the need for and the amount of a bond to be posted for reforestation and  potential  damages  caused by the forestry  operation.

(d)	Use A9 Farm Support Facility

(1)	evaluate the hours of operation to determine if they are appropriate for the area;

(2)	evaluate access for appropriate sight. distance;

(3)	evaluate the location of loading and unloading areas to determine  if they are appropriate for the neighborhood,

(e)	.	Use B1o Life Care Facility

Ensure the provisions of Section 404.81O will be met.

(f)	Use C3 Commercial School

(1)	the type of school and instruction will be specified;

(2)	the number of teachers, instructors, staff and students will be specified;

(3)	evaluate the hours of operation;

(4)	determine the adequacy of parking and access.

(g)	Use C11 Hospital; Use C12 Nursing Home

(1)	describe and locate the principal use, all accessory uses, structures and activities to be conducted or located on the property;

(2)	provide transportation, water and sewage facilities impact studies as specified in Section 1205;

(3)	evaluate emergency access and parking.

(h)	Use C13 Halfway House

(1)	describe the types of security measures and supervision that will be provided to protect nearby residents from disruptive  behavior;

(2)	describe the types of residents and their related problems who will reside in the facility.





205
 




(Q	Use  C15  Recreational  Camping  Park

(1)	provide a means to ensure that the lengths of occupants' stay do not exceed the requirements of Section 404.C15.b.;

(2)	provide a plan for emergency vehicles to have adequate access  throughout  the  development;

(3)	provide transportation, water and sewage facilities impact statements as specified in Section 1205;

(4)	specify the types of uses, activities, structures and accessory uses that will be located or take place on the property.

(j)	Use D1 Office; Use D2 Medical Office; Use D3 Office Park; Use E1 Retail Shop; Use E3 Service Business; Use E4 Financial Establishment; Use ES Eating Place; Use E7 Repair Shop; Use EB Funeral Home or Mortuary; Use E15 Veterinary Office or Clinic

(1)	specify the types of practice, goods for sale, service to be provided or items to be repaired and all structures and accessory uses to be located or to take place on the property;

(2)	if located in a village district or a residential district, evaluate access and its impact on adjacent properties and the road system;

(3)	if the  proposed use would generate two hundred fifty
{250) or more trips per day, a transportation impact study shall be submitted as specified in Section 1205;

(4)	evaluate the hours of operation to determine if they  are
appropriate for the area;

(5)	if a veterinary office is proposed, specify if animals will be boarded on the premises, what impacts could affect the area and what measures will be taken to abate animal noise.

(k)	Use ES Drive-Ins and Other Eating Places; Use E13 Tavern

(1)	evaluate the adequacy of  parking/access  and  internal circulation;

(2)	evaluate the hours of operation and methods to abate impacts on surrounding  properties;

(3)	if the proposed use would generate two hundred fifty
(250) or more trips per day, a transportation impact study shall be submitted as specified in Section 1205.






206
 


(Q	Use   E12  Outdoor    Entertainment

(1)	specify the types of uses, activities, structures and accessory uses that will be located or take place on the property;

(2)	evaluate the adequacy of sewer services or on-site septic and consistency with the municipal sewage facilities plan;

(3)	for quasi-military operations, games, activities and training,

a)	ensure the requirements of Section 404.E12.c. will be met,

b}		evaluate the compliance with the ordinance prior to approval of tournaments,

c}	evaluate the rules of conduct,

d)	evaluate the need for liability insurance,

e}		prepare an agreement to hold harmless the Township and its agents and employees from any and all liability related to this use and activity,

f}	ensure the nuisance requirements of this Ordinance will be met.

(m}	Use E14 Lumber Yard

(1)	evaluate potential impacts on adjacent land uses;

(2)	evaluate access;

(3)	provide information on methods to abate nuisances as required by this Ordinance.

(n)	Use E16 Service Station; Use E18 Automotive Sales; Use E19 Automotive Repair

(1}   provide assurances that v_ehicles will not be parked on the street;

(2)	evaluate access;

(3)	evaluate  outdoor  lighting improvements;

(4)	provide information on methods to abate nuisances as
required by this Ordinance.

(o).	Use E22 Multiple Use Commercial

(1)	evaluate access;



207
 




(2)	evaluate outdoor  lighting improvements;

(3)	provide transportation, water and sewage facilities impact statements as specified in Section  1205.

(p)	Use E23 Adult Commercial

(1)	specify  the types  of  uses  and  activities  that  will  be located or take place on the property;

(2)	evaluate the hours of operation to determine if they are appropriate for the area.

(q}	Use E24 Outdoor  Motion Picture Establishment

(1)	evaluate access;

(2)	evaluate outdoor  lighting improvements.

(r)	Use E25 Vehicular Track or Course

(1)	demonstrate compliance with the noise standards of this Ordinance;

(2)	evaluate access;

(3)	evaluate outdoor  lighting improvements.

(s)	Use E26 Flea Market

(1)	evaluate the days and hours of  operation to  determine  if they are appropriate for the area;

(2)	evaluate parking Improvements;

(3)	evaluate access;

(4)	evaluate the physical delineation of the outdoor sales area as required by Section 404.E26.h.;

(5)	evaluate provisions for emergency vehicle access.

(t)	Use F2 Emergency Services

(1)	specify  the types  of  uses and activities  that  will  be located or take place on the property;

(2)	evaluate access;

(3)	evaluate outdoor  lighting improvements.

(u)	Use G2 Research

For research uses in the  CC  district,  identify  activities  involving hazardous chemicals, gases or explosive  products  and  provide



208
 


methods  to  ensure  the safety  of  adjacent  properties  and  the general area.

(v)	Use G3 Wholesale  Business, Wholesale  Storage,  Warehousing;
Use G4 Mini-Warehouse

(1)	specify the types· of  uses  and activities  that  will  be located or take place on the property;

(2)	identify activities involving hazardous chemicals, gases or explosive products and provide methods to ensure the safety of adjacent properties and the general area;

(3)	evaluate access;

(4)	evaluate  outdoor  lighting improvements;

(5)	the conversion of any such use to another use must comply  with the  use,  area,  dimensional  and  other requirements and standards of this Ordinance.

(w)	Use Ga Crafts

(t) specify the types of  uses  and activities  that  will  be located or take place on the property;

(2)	specify area for the  storage  of  materials,  waste  and parking to determine  impacts on adjacent properties;

(3)	evaluate  outdoor  lighting improvements.

(x)	Use G13 Junk Yard

(1)	specify the types of uses, activities and materials that will be located or take place on the property;

(2)	specify methods to contain petroleum, distilates and other liquids that may leak from vehicles and describe methods to protect surface water and groundwater resources;

(3)	evaluate  outdoor  lighting improvements;

(4)	provide an environmental impact statement as specified in Section 1205.

M	Use HS Dormitory

(1)	determine the adequacy of off-street parking improvements under Section 404.HS.d.;

(2)	specify types of uses, activities, recreation facilities and other accessory uses that will be located or take place on the   property;






209
 




(3)	specify the types of supervision that will take place, if the Governing Body determines that supervision of the residents is warranted;

(4)	evaluate access;

(5)	evaluate outdoor  lighting  improvements;

(6)	specify the types of security service that will be provided, if the Governing Body determines that security service for the residents is warranted.

(z)	Use H9 Temporary  Community Event

(1)	specify the type of event, uses, activities, facilities and accessory. uses that will be located or take place on the property;

(2)        specify the duration of the event;

(3)          evaluate signs to advertise the event;

(4)	evaluate the aspects specified in Section 404.H9.c. (aa)	Reduction of  Non-Residential  Parking Requirements
Evaluate  a  proposed  reduction  of  non-residential  parking requirements under the provisions of Section 517.

(bb)	Village Expansion (Overlay) District

Evaluate a proposal to employ the village expansion overlay district provisions in compliance with the standards of this Ordinance, compatibility with the existing village character and street pattern and compliance with the design guidelines specified in Section 606.

(cc)	Arterial Corridor (Overlay) District

Evaluate a proposal to employ the arterial corridor overlay district provisions in compliance with the standards of this  Ordinance
and the provisions of Sections 61o through 615.

(dd)	Wetlands  Delineation

Evaluate a wetlands delineation study under the provisions of Section 504.i.

(5)	VC-1 and VC-2 Districts - Those uses listed in the Table at Use Regulations as permitted  by conditional use in the  VC-1 and VC-2 Districts shall meet the following regulations:

(a)	No building shall exceed a gross floor  area of five thousand (5,000) square feet, except Uses B10 and C12.





210
 


(b)	The length of any building wall that fronts on a street shall not exceed 2.5 times the height of the building.

(c)	The distance at the closest point between any two buildings or groups of attached buildings shall not be less than twenty {20) feet.

(d)	If there is an existing building on the lot, every effort must be made to preserve the building. If any alterations of the building's facade or any expansion of the building is proposed, every attempt should be made to match the scale and building materials of the  existing  building.

(e)	If new buildings are proposed, whether on vacant lots or sharing a lot with an existing building, every attempt should be made to provide a design that is compatible with the size, scale, general appearance, and building materials of surrounding buildings. In addition, new buildings should be oriented towards the village to provide continuity and to strengthen the village character.

e.	The Governing Body may impose whatever conditions and safeguards it deems necessary to insure that any proposed  development  or  use  will  secure substantially the objectives of this Ordinance.

f.	Review by Planning Commission. The Governing Body shall request an advisory opinion from the Planning Commission on any application for a Conditional Use; the Planning Commission is to submit a report of such advisory opinion prior to the date of the public hearing held by the Governing Body on an application.

g.	The Governing Body shall request.an advisory opinion from the Quakertown Area Planning Committee on any application for a  Conditional  Use  involving  a development of more than five (5) acres as required in Section 1402.c.

h.	Conditional use applications shall be governed by the following:

(1)	The applicant shall make a written request to the Governing Body that it hold a hearing on his application. The request shall contain a statement reasonably informing the Governing Body of the matters that are in issue.

(2)	The application shall be accompanied by plans and other material describing the use or development proposed. Such plans and other materials shall provide a sufficient basis for evaluating the applicant's request.	lnfonmation required by this Ordinance shall accompany the application.

(3)	The Governing Body shall hold a hearing pursuant to public notice upon the request, commencing not later than 60 days after the request is filed, unless the applicant requests or consents in writing to an extension of time. In addition, the Governing Body shall render a written  decision within forty-five (45) days after the last hearing.

i.	Administration. The Governing Body shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in Section 1109.

j.	Fees. The applicant for any hearing on a conditional use request before the Governing Body shall at the time of making application, pay a fee in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Governing Body or as such




211
 



schedule may be amended from time to time.  In addition, an escrow deposit may be required, as established by resolution of the Governing Body.

Section  1109	Hearings

Hearings pursuant to this Ordinance shall be held by the Zoning Hearing Board or the Governing Body, in matters relating to curative amendments or conditional uses, in accordance with the following requirements. The Zoning Hearing Board or the Governing Body are herein denominated as the Board.

a.	Public notice shall be given and written notice shall be given to the applicant, the zoning officer, such other persons as the Governing Body shall designate by ordinance and to any person who has made timely request for the same. Written notices shall be given at such time and in such manner as shall be prescribed by Ordinance or, in the absence of Ordinance provision, by rules of the Governing Body or the Zoning Hearing Board. In addition to the written notice provided herein, - written notice of said hearing shall be conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land at least one (1) week prior to the hearing.

b.	The Governing Body may prescribe reasonable fees by. resolution with respect to hearings. Fees for said hearings may include compensation for the secretary and members of the Zoning Hearing Board, notice and advertising costs and necessary administrative overhead connected with the hearing. The costs, however, shall not include legal expenses of the Board, expenses for engineering, architectural or other technical consultants or expert witness costs.

c.	The hearing shall be held within sixty (60) days from the date of the applicant's request, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time.

d.	The hearings shall be conducted  by the Board.   The decision,  or,  where  no decision is called for, the findings shall be made by the Board.

e.	The parties to the hearing shall be the municipality, any person affected by the application who has made timely appearance of record before the Board, and any other person including civic or community organizations permitted to appear by the Board. The Board shall have power to require that all persons who wish to be considered parties enter appearances in writing on forms provided by the Board for that purpose.

f.	The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Board shall have power to administer oaths  and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of  relevant  documents  and  papers,   including  witnesses   and documents  requested by the parties.

g.	The parties shall have the  right to  be represented  by  counsel  and shall  be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.

h.	Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial or unduly· repetitious evidence may be excluded.

i.	The Board shall keep a stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for a stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the Board. The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board if the transcript is ordered by the Board or shall be paid by the person appealing from the decision of the Board if such appeal is made, and in either event the cost of additional copies shall be paid by the person requesting such copy or copies. In other cases, the party requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.



212
 


j.	The Board shall not communicate, directly or indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection with any issue involved except upon notice and where all parties have opportunity to participate. The Board shall not take notice of any communication, report, staff memoranda, or other materials, except advice from their solicitor, unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the material so noticed, and shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the commencement of hearings with any party or his representative unless all parties are given an opportunity to be present.

k.	The Board shall render a written decision or, where no decision is called for, make written findings on the application within forty-five (45) days after the last hearing before the Board. Where the application is contested  or  denied, each  decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact  and  conclusions  based  thereon, together with the reasons therefor. Conclusions based on the provisions  of  any Act of the Commonwealth, or any Ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to  the  provision  relied  upon  and  the   reasons  why  the  conclusion  is
-deemed appropriate in light of the facts found.

Where the Board fails to render its decision within forty-five (45) days or fails to hold the required hearing within sixty (60) days from the date of the applicant's request for a hearing, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time. When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of the failure of the Board to meet or render a decision as herein above provided, the Board shall give public notice of said decision within ten (1O) days from the last day it could have met to render a decision in the same manner as provided in subsection a of this section. If the Board shall fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the right of any party opposing the application to appeal the decision ta a court of competent jurisdiction.

I.	A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him not later than the day following its date. To all other persons who have filed their name and address with the Board not later than the last day of the hearing, the Board shall provide by mail or otherwise, brief notice of the decision or findings and a statement of the place at which the full decision or findings may be examined.

Section 111O	Parties Appellant Before the Zoning Hearing Board

Appeals under Section 1105.a(1), (2), (3), (4) and (7) of this Ordinance may be filed with the Zoning Hearing Board in writing by the landowner affected, any officer or agency of the municipality, or any person aggrieved. Request$ for a variance under Section 1106 and for a special exception under Section 1i07 of this Ordinance may be filed with the  Zoning  Hearing Board by any landowner or any tenant with the permission of such landowner.

Section  111.i	Validitv of Ordinance:   Substantive Questions

a.	A landowner who, on substantive grounds, desires to challenge the validity of an Ordinance or map or any provision thereof which prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in which he has an interest shall submit the chailenge either:

(1)	To the Zoning  Hearing Board under Section 11as.a of this Ordinance;  or

(2)	To  the Governing  Body  under  Section  1105.b(4)  of  this  Ordinance, together with a request for a curative amendment.





213
 



b.	Persons aggrieved by a use or development permitted on the land of another by an Ordinance or map, or any provision thereof, who desires to challenge its validity on substantive grounds shall first submit their challenge to the Zoning Hearing Board for a decision thereon under Section 1105.a(1} of this Ordinance.

c.	The submissions referred to in subsections a and b above shall be governed by the following:

(1)	In challenges before the Zoning Hearing Board, the challenging party shall make a written request to the Zoning Hearing Board that it hold a hearing on its challenge. The request shall contain the reasons for the challenge. Where the landowner desires to challenge the validity of such Ordinance and elects to proceed by curative amendment, his application to the Governing Body shall contain, in addition to the requirements of the written request hereof, the plans and explanatory materials describing the use or development proposed by the landowner in lieu of
_ the use or development permitted by the challenged Ordinance or map. Such plans or other materials shall not be required to meet the standards prescribed for preliminary, tentative or final approval or for the issuance of a permit, so long as they provide reasonable notice of the proposed use or development and a sufficient basis for evaluating the challenged Ordinance or map in light thereof. Nothing herein shall preclude the landowner from first seeking a final approval before submitting his challenge.

(2)	If the submission is made by the landowner to the Governing Body under subsection a(2) hereof, the request also shall be accompanied by an amendment or amendments to the Ordinance proposed by the landowner to cure the alleged defects therein.

(3)	If the submission is made to the Governing Body, the municipal solicitor shall represent and advise it at the hearing or hearings.

(4)	The Governing Body may retain an independent attorney to present the defense of the challenged Ordinance or map on its behalf and to present their witnesses on its behalf.

(5)	Based upon the testimony presented at the hearing or hearings, the Governing Body or the Zoning Hearing Board, as the case may be, shall determine whether the challenged Ordinance or map is defective,  as alleged by the landowner. If a challenge heard by the Governing Body is found to have merit, the Governing Body may accept  a landowner's curative amendment, with or without revision, or may adopt an alternative amendment which will cure the challenged defects. If a challenge heard by the Zoning Hearing Board is found to have merit, the decision of the
Zoning Hearing Board shall include recommended amendments to the challenged Ordinance which will cure the defects found. In reaching its decision, the Zoning Hearing Board or the Governing Body, as the case
may be, shall consider the amendments, plans and explanatory material submitted by the landowner and shall also consider:

(a)	the impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water supplies, schools and other public service facilities;

 
(b)
 
if the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the proposal upon regional housing needs and effectiveness of the  proposal in  providing  housing  units  of  a type  actually  available  to  and
 




214
 

affordable  by classes of persons otherwise  unlawfully  excluded by the challenged provisions of the Ordinance or map;

(c) the suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by the site's sails, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, flood plains, aquifers, natural resources and other natural features;

(d) the impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture and other land uses which are essential to public health and welfare.

(6)	The Governing Bady or the Zoning Hearing Board, as the case may be, shall render its decision within forty-five (45) days after the conclusion of the last hearing.

(7)     If the Governing body or the Zoning Hearing Board, as the case may be, fails to act on the landowner's request within the time limits referred ta in subsection  (6), a denial of the request is deemed  to  bave  occurred  an
·the forty-sixth (46) day after the close of the last hearing.
 

d.	The Zoning  Hearing  Board or  Governing  Bady, as the  case
 

'
may
 

be,  shall
 
commence its hearings within sixty  (60) days after the request is filed unless the landowner requests or consents ta an extension of time.

e.	Public notice of the hearing shall include notice that the validity of the Ordinance or map is in question and shall give the place where and the times when a copy of the request, including any plans, explanatory material or proposed amendments may be examined by the public.

f.	The challenge shall be deemed denied when:

(1)	The Zoning Hearing Board or Governing Body, as the case may be, fails to commence the hearing within the time limits set forth in subsection d;

(2)	The Governing Body notifies the lanaowner that it will not adopt the curative  amendment;

(3)	The Governing Body adopts another curative amendment which is unacceptable to the landowner; or

(4)	The Zoning Hearing Board or Governing Body, as the case may be, fails to act on the request forty-five (45) days afterthe close of the last hearing on the request, unless the time is extended by mutual consent by the landowner  and municipality.

g.	Where, after the effective date of this Ordinance, a curative amendment proposal is approved by the grant of a curative amendment application by the Governing Body pursuant ta Section 1105.b(4) of this Ordinance or a validity challenge is sustained by the  Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to Section 1105.a(1) of this Ordinance or the Court acts finally on appeal from denial of a curative amendment proposal or a .validity  challenge, and the proposal or challenge so approved requires a further application for subdivision or land development, the developer shall have two years from the date of such approval to file an application for preliminary or tentative approval pursuant to the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance or Article VII of this Ordinance. Within the  two-year period, no subsequent change or amendment in  the  zoning,  subdivision  and land development or other governing ordinance  or plan shall be applied in any manner which adversely affects the rights of the applicant as granted in the curative amendment or the sustained validity challenge.



215
 


Where the proposal appended to the curative  amendment  application  or the validity challenge is approved but does not require further application under any subdivision or land development ordinance, the developer shall have one-year within  which to  file  for  a  building  permit.	Within  the  one  year  period,  no subsequent   change  or  amendment   in  the  zoning,   subdivision   and   land development or other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied in any manner which adversely  affects the rights of the applicant  as granted  In the curative amendment or the sustained validity challenge.  During these protected periods, the Court shall retain or assume jurisdiction for the purpose of awarding such
supplemental relief as may be necessary.

h.	If a municipality does not accept a landowner's curative amendment and a court subsequently rules that the challenge has merit, the court's decision shall not result in a declaration of invalidity for the entire zoning ordinance and map, but
only tor those provisions which specifically  relate to the landowner's curative
amendment  and  challenge.

Section  1112	Court Appeals

All appeals from all land use decisions rendered pursuant to this Article shall be taken to the Court of Common Pleas of the judicial district wherein the land Is located and shall be filed within thirty (30) days after entry of the decision, or in the case of a deemed decision, within thirty
(30)	days after the notice of said deemed decision is given as set forth in Section 1109.k of this
Ordinance.









































216
 

ARTICLE  XII.	AMENDMENTS

Section  1200	Power of Amendment

The Governing Body may from time to time amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal this Ordinance, including the zoning map. When doing so, the Governing Body shall proceed in the manner prescribed in Section 1202 of this Article.

Section  1201   Who May Initiate

Proposals for amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal may be initiated by the Governing Body on its own motion, by the Planning Commission, or by petition of one or more owners of property to be affected by the proposed amendment. Each petition by one or more property owners shall be signed and acknowledged, and submitted in writing to the secretary of the Governing Body. Along with the petition, the applicant(s) shall submit the information required in Section 1205 Impact Statement.

Section  1202	Enactment  of Zoning Ordinance Amendments

a.	Before voting on the enactment of an amendment,  the  Governing  Body shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public notice. In addition, if the proposed amendment involves a zoning map change, notice  of  said  public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by the municipality at points deemed sufficient by the municipality along the perimeter of the tract to notify potentially interested citizens. The affected tract or area shall be posted at least one (1) week prior to the date of the hearings.

b.	For an amendment other than that initiated by the Planning Commission, the Governing _Body shall submit each such amendment to the Planning Commission at least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing on such proposed amendment to provide the Planning Commission  an opportunity to submit recommendations.

c.	ff, after any public hearing  held upon an amendment,  the  proposed amendment is changed substantially, or is revised to include land previously not affected by it, the Governing Body shall hold another public hearing, pursuant to the  public notice, before proceeding  to vote  on the  amendment.

d.	The municipality shall submit each amendment to the Quakertown Area Planning Committee and the Bucks County Planning Commission at least thirty (30) days prior to the public hearing for recommendations.

e.	Within thirty  (30) days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to the  zoning ordinance shall be forwarded to the Bucks County  Planning Commission.

Section  1203	Change of Zoning in the FC Future Commercial District

The Future Commercial District is a classification intended to safeguard landowners'  rights to nonresidential development while  protecting the municipality's  and citizens' rights  in ensuring that  necessary services .and infrastructure will be present in the area prior to development.   It is
.i	ntended that once the site is provided with suitable facilities, it will be changed at the request of the owner to Planned Commercial (PC), Select Commercial (SC), or Planned Industrial (Pl). The
following special conditions apply:

a.	The Planning Commission and Governing Body shall maintain and provide a record showing the previous zoning classification of all such lands.

b.	The applicant for a change of z-0ning shall provide the following:




217
 



(1)	Proof that marginal  access  roads are  provided  or programmed to  be provided.

(2)	Proof that public or private water supply is available at the site.

(3)	Proof that  public sewer  connections to  a treatment  plant approved by
D.E.R. are  available  and that  there  is  plant  capacity  to  handle  the projected  load.

(4)	Provision  of pertormance  bonds  or  other  surety  to  insure that  these services are made available.

(5)	The  applicant  shall submit  the  information  required  in Section  1205 Impact Statement.

Section  1204	Extension of Development Area

A landowner who wishes his property to be included in a zoning \:iistrict of the Development Area may make a request to the Governing Body. The following procedures shall be observed.

a.	The applicant must submit the information required in Section 1205 Impact Statement.	·

b.	The applicant must establish that public sewerage is obtainable and that plant capacity is adequate to handle the effluent anticipated to be generated by the proposed development as well as the development which is permitted in the Development Areas which are serviced by that treatment plant.

c.	The applicant shall be required to provide or to finance a study of the service area of the proposed sewer extension. This study shall be conducted by the Municipal Engineer or other qualified engineer agreed upon by both the Municipality and the applicant. The study shall determine the feasibility and cost of extending the line and expanding the plant, and the amount of development which may be served.                                                            ·

d.	Implementation - Prior to hearing and acting on a zoning change request which would extend the Development Area, the petition and impact statement shall be reviewed by the municipal planning commission, the Bucks County Planning Commission and the ·Quakertown Area Planning Committee. The municipality may also retain, at the petitioner's expense, experts to review and comment on any or all of the issues addressed in the impact statement.

Before voting on the request, the Governing Body shall review the petition, the impact statement, the review comments of the municipal planning commission, the Bucks County Planning Commission and the Quakertown Area Planning Committee, any consultants hired by the municipality and the notes of testimony of the hearing. If the Governing Body determines the change creates major problems or adverse impacts, then· the ·Governing Body shall reject the proposed zoning  change.

e.	The petitioner filing the request for an extension of the development area shall at the time of filing, pay to the Zoning Officer, for the use of the municipality, a fee in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by resolution of the  Governing  Body upon enactment of this Ordinance or as such schedule may be amended  form time to time.





?18
 


Section  1205	Impact Statement

For any petition filed pursuant to Section 1201, 1203 or 1204 of this  Ordinance,  an impact statement shall be submitted with the petition. A change of zoning generally means a deviation from the previously planned growth pattern. Such changes invariably have an impact on the community, on the environment, on taxes and on the Quakertown Area.  A detailed  statement of these impacts shall be submitted by the applicant for any  change in zoning classification or where required for a proposed use pursuant to this Ordinance. Such statement shall contain the following:

a.	Quakertown Area Comprehensive Plan - An analysis of the consistency of the proposed zoning change with the Comprehensive Plan shall be presented. The analysis shall include, but not be limlted to, the compatibility with the Statement of Community Goals and Objectives, and the impact on the Land Use Plan, Community Services and Facilities, Regional  Population  and  Housing Projections.

b.	Environmental Impact - An analysis of the impact on stormwater runoff, aquifer recharge, erosion, sedimentation, wildlife habitats, scenic areas, and the general amenity of the community. The environmental or naturalfeatures listed in Section 504 Environmental Performance Standards shall be identified and mapped. The abllfty of the proposed use to comply with the requirements of Section 504 shall be shown. The site capacity calculations of Section 501 shall be completed for the subject tract.

c.	Transportation Impact - An analysis of the impact of the proposed zoning change on the transportation system, both highways and public transportation, shall be provided.

Where a proposed zoning change, conditional use or special exception could result in traffic generation of 250 or more trips per day (see Section 1205.c(3)(d) for calculation), a transportation impact study shall be prepared in accordance with the following  requirements.

The appropriate review body, at its discretion, may require any other zoning change, special exception or conditional use application to be accompanied by a traffic impact study; provided, however, that the appropriate review body nottties the applicant within 15 days following the reviewing body's first meeting to consider the proposal. . Such a notification shall specify the reason for the requirement, citing the proposal's particular location or existing problems or type of use, e.g., generation of heavy truck traffic.

(1)	Definitions

(a)	Public Transportation - Transportation services for the general public provided by a common carrier of passengers generally but not necessarily on a regular route basis, by the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority or a private operator offering service to the public.

(b)	Study Area - The study area shall be defined by two concentric circles at each access point. The first circle shall have a radius of one-half mile from each access point and shall include all intersections along all roadways on which the tract has frontage and all major intersections on all other roadways. The second circle shall have a radius of one mile from each access point and include all major intersections on all roadways on which the tract has  frontage.    In the  case that  no  major  intersections  are



219
 



encountered on frontage roadways within either one-half mile or one mile radius areas, the study area shall be extended along frontage roadways to at least the first major intersection in each direction. All intersections identified in the study area should be examined.                                          ·

Proposals that will generate more than 2,500 new average daily trips shall expand the first concentric circle to a one mile radius and the second circle to a two mile radius. The  study shall consider. all intersections meeting this criteria, even if the intersections are located outside of the municipality. The transportation engineer shall seek guidance from the Zoning Officer prior to the initiation of the traffic impact study to insure agreement on the study area boundaries.

 
(c)
 
Major Intersection - The intersection of any arterial or collector street with any other arterial or collector street as defined by the Highway Classification Map of the Quakertown Area Zoning Ordinance or the equivalent document of adjacent municipalities where appropriate. The transportation engineer shall seek guidance from the Zoning Officer prior to the initiation of the traffic impact study to insure agreement on the location of major intersections.
 

(d)   Level-of-Service  -  Level  of service  (LOS), as described  in  the 1985 Highway Capacity manual, (Special Report 209, Transportation Research Board)  or as amended, is a qualitative measure of the operational conditions within a traffic stream and their perceptions by motorists. Levels of service are defined In terms of delay for signalized intersections and reserve  capacity for unsignalized intersections. Six levels of service (A through F) are defined for each type of facility with LOS "A" representing least congested operating conditions  and  LOS  "F"  representing a breakdown in operating  conditions.

(e) Capacity Analysis - Intersection approach capacity is  the maximum rate of vehicular flow that can pass through an intersection under prevailing roadway, traffic and signalization conditions. The analysis compares the actual or projected traffic volume to the Intersection capacity and results in a volume/capacity 01/C) ratio.

 
(f)





(g)







(h}
 
Trip Generation Rates - The total count of trips to and from a study site per unit of land use, as measured by parameters like dwelllng units or acres. The Trip Generation Report, Third Edition or as amended by the Institute of Transportation Engineers shall be referenced to determine specific rates.

Warrants for Traffic Signal Installation - A series of tests which detail the minimum traffic or pedestrian volumes or other criteria necessary for the installation of a traffic signal. These warrants are contained in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration,  1978, as amended.

On-Site Transportation Improvements - All improvements on or adjacent to the development site in the public  right-of-way required to  be  constructed  by  the  developer  pursuant  to  any
 



220
 

ordinance, resolution or requirement of the municipality and/or directly related to the transportation needs of the proposed use.

W		Off-Site Transportation Improvements -  Other  transportation related improvements which are  generally  not  contiguous  with the property being developed and not required as an on-site improvement but found  to be necessary, partly or wholly  as a result of the proposed  use.

(2)	The traffic impact study shall be prepared by a qualified traffic engineer and/or transportation planner.

(3)	General Requirements and Standards

(a)	General Site Description - The site description shall include the size, location, proposed land uses, construction staging and completion date of the proposed development. If the development is residential, types of dwelling units shall also be included.	The general site description shall also include probable socio-economic characteristics of potential site users to the extent that they may affect the transportation needs of the site, e.g., number of senior citizens. A brief description of other major existing and proposed land developments within the study area shall be provided.

(b)	Transportation Facilities Description - The description shall contain a full documentation of the proposed internal and existing external transportation system. This description shall include proposed internal vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian circulation, all proposed ingress and egress locations, all internal roadway widths and rights-of-way, parking conditions, traffic channelizations, and any traffic signals or other intersection control devices at all intersections within the site. The site design shall be shown to maximize potential public transportation usage to and from the development, by providing adequate turning radii
at all access points to allow a bus to enter the development and
designating bus shelter and sign locations where appropriate.

The report shall describe the entire external roadway system within the study area. Intersections in the study area shall be identified and illustrated. All existing and proposed public transportation services and facilities within a one-mile radius of the site shall also be documented. Regional rail stations within three miles shall be noted . All future highway improvements, including proposed construction and traffic signalization, shall be noted. This information shall be obtained from the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation's Twelve-Year Highway and Bridge Program and the municipality. Any proposed roadway imprqvements due to proposed surrounding developments shall be recorded.

(c)	Existing Traffic Conditions - To the extent that it analyzes the study  area, the Quakertown Area Traffic Analysis,  Orth-Rodgers
& Associates of April, 1987 shall be considered the baseline for determining existing  conditions.    Existing traffic  conditions   shall
be measured and documented for all roadways and intersections
in the study area and shall Include current average daily traffic volumes,  peek  highway  hour(s)  traffic,  and  peak  development-



221
 


generated hour(s) traffic to update the Quakertown Area Traffic Analysis. Manual traffic  counts at all intersections in the study area shall be conducted, encompassing the peak highway and development-generated hour(s), and documentation shall be included in a technical appendix to the report. A delay analysis based upon existing volumes shall be performed during the peak highway hour(s) and the peak development-generated hour(s) for all roadways and intersections in the study area. An additional volume/capacity 01/C) analysis shall be conducted for all intersections having a level of service D, E, or F or which should be reasonably expected to have such a level of service after the proposed development. Volume/capacity ratios and delay levels of service shall be determined for each location according to the 1985 Highway Capacity Manual or as amended. The date or dates when any and all traffic counts were made shall be set forth. All changes from the baseline conditions of Quakertown Area Traffic Analysis shall be noted.

This analysis will determine the adequacy of the existing roadway system to serve the current traffic demand. Roadways and/or signalized intersections experiencing  levels of service E or F, and V/C ratios greater than or equal to 1.0 shall be noted as deficient.	Unsignalized or undersignalized intersections with levels of service E or F shall be noted as deficient.

(d)  Transportation Impact of Development - Estimation of vehicular trips to result from the proposal shall be completed tor the average daily peak highway hour(s) and peak development­ generated hour(s). (Trip shall mean a one-way trip into or out of the premises and shall not be construed to mean what is commonly referred to as a "round trip.") Vehicular trip generation rates to be used for this calculation shall be obtained from the lnstttute of Transportation Engineer's Trip Generation Report, Third Edition or as amended. For land uses not listed in the lnstitute's report, the transportation engineer shall seek guidance from the Zoning Officer or his/her designee.

All turning  movements shall be  calculated. These generated volumes shall be distributed to the study area and assigned to the existing roadways and intersections throughout the study area. Documentation of all assumptions used in the distribution and assignment phases shall be provided. Traffic volumes shall be assigned to .individual access points. Pedestrian volumes shall also be calculated, if applicable. If school crossings are to be used, pedestrian volumes shall be assigned to each crossing. Any characteristics of the site that will cause particular trip generation or distribution problems shall be noted.

(e) Analysis of Transportation Impact·- The total future traffic shall be calculated and shall consist of the existing traffic volume expanded to  the project  completion year using an annual background growth factor plus the development-generated traffic and traffic generated by other proposed developments in the study area. The annual background growth factor shall be determined using the projected rates of population and employment growth as determined by the Bucks County Planning Commission and the average annual traffic growth of the area's roadways as determined from the Delaware Valley



222
 

Regional Planning Commission's "Highway Network Coverage Traffic Counts" and current 24 hour traffic counts.

The delay analysis shall be conducted using the total future demand and the future roadway capacity. If staging of the proposed development Is anticipated, calculations far each stage ot completion shall be made.

The analysis shall be performed for the peak highway hour(s) and peak development-generated hour(s) far all roadways and intersections in the study area. Delay calculations shall be completed far all intersections and proposed access points to the development. A volume/capacity 01/C)  analysis shall be conducted for all intersections having a future level of service D, E or F.

All access paints and pedestrian crossing shall.be examined as ta the feasibility of installing traffic signals. This evaluation shall compare the projected traffic and pedestrian volumes to the warrants for traffic signal installation.

(f)		Conclusions and Recommended   Improvements - Levels of service (LOS) and volume/capacity  01/C) ratios shall be listed tor all roadways and intersection lane  groups.	All roadways and intersections showing  a level of service E or F, and V/C ratios equal to or greater  than i.a shall be considered deficient. Also, the proportion of site-generated traffic ta total future traffic shall be identified at  each lane group that is considered deficient. Specific  recommendations for the elimination of all deficiencies shall be  listed and shall include, but not be limited to, the fallowing  elements:	internal circulation design, site access location and design, external roadway intersection design and improvements, traffic signal installation and operation including signal timing, and transit design improvements.	All physical roadway improvements shall be illustrated. Signal timing should be evaluated for any intersection with a level of service D, E or F, but a volume/capacity CJ/C) ratio less than 1.0. Warrants for signalization    shall   be    examined   for    unsignalized   or
undersignalized intersections with levels of service E or F.

Existing and/or future public transportation service shall also be addressed and any transportation management techniques which would be available to the proposed development shall be identified. A listing of all actions to be taken to encourage public transportation usage for development generated trips and/or improve existing service, if applicable, shall be included.

d.	Water Resources Impact - An analysis of the impact of the proposed zoning change on underlying aquifers, streams and existing nearby wells or on the public water supply system shall be provided. The following information shall be Included.

(i)	Any reports, studies or plans previously prepared for the municipality shall be utilized in the analysis.

(2)	The proposed water supply  system  including source(s),  storage  and distribution shall be discussed.




223
 


(3)	Existing  and  proposed  water  resources  near  the  site  should  be identified.

e.	Sewage Facilities Impact - An analysis which evaluates the consistency of the proposed zoning change with the municipal sewage facilities plan.

f.		Community Services Impact - The impact Of the proposed zoning change on the demand for community  services such as police and schools shall be defined. Where standards of use are set by other agencies such as the Department of Environmental Resources, these shall be used. All capacities of existing facilities shall be identified and compared with demands that would be generated by the proposed zoning change.

For schools, the following school children yields shall be used.

SCHOOL  CHILDREN  PER  DWELLING  UNIT






































1These ratios shall be used where the number of bedrooms Is not known.

SOURCE: The New Practitioner's Guide to Fiscal Impact Analysis, Burchell, Ustokin and Dolphin, Center for Urban Policy Research/Rutgers University, 1986.

g.		Implementation - Prior to hearing or acting on the zoning change request, the petition and impact statement shall be reviewed by the municipal planning commission, the Bucks County  Planning Commission,  and the Quakertown  Area



224
 


Planning Committee. The municipality may also retain, at the petitioner's expense, experts to review and comment on any or all issues addressed in the impact statement.

Before voting on the zoning change request, the Governing Body shall review the petition, the impact statement, the review comments of the municipal planning commission, the Bucks County Planning Commission and the Quakertown Area Planning Committee, any consultants hired by the municipality and the notes of testimony of the hearing. If the Governing Body determines the change creates major problems or adverse impacts, then the Governing Body shall reject the proposed zoning change.

h.		The petitioner or applicant filing an impact statement shall, at the time of filing, pay to the Zoning Officer for the use of the municipality, a fee in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Governing Body upon enactment of this Ordinance or as such schedule  may be amended from time to time.

Section  1206	Periodic Amendment  of QAZO

This Ordinance shall be reviewed and may be amended if necessary in accordance with the guidelines incorporated in the Quakertown Area Comprehensive Plan.

Section 1207	Fees

The applicant tor any hearing on an appeal or amendment before the Governing Body shall at the time of making application, pay to the Zoning Officer, for the use a! the municipality, a fee in accordance with a tee schedule adopted by resolution of the Governing Body upon enactment of this Ordinance or as such schedule may be amended from time to time.




































225
 





































































226
 

ARTICLE  XIII.	ENFORCEMENT

Section 1300	Jurisdiction

Unless otherwise provided by law or in this Ordinance, no building or structure shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, razed or removed, and no building, structure or land shall be used or occupied, except for the purposes permitted herein.

Section 1301	Remedies

In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure, or land is used in violation of this Ordinance, the Governing Body or the Zoning Officer with the approval of the Governing Body may institute in the name of the municipality any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use;  to restrain, correct or abate such violation; to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure, or land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about such premises.

Section 1302	Enforcement Notice

a.	The Zoning Officer is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this section and to institute civil enforcement proceedings as provided for in Section 1303, when acting within the scope of his employment.

b.	If it appears that a violation of this ordinance has occurred, the Zoning Officer shall initiate enforcement proceedings ·by sending an enforcement notice to the owner of record of the parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel, and_to any other person requested in writing by the owner of record.

c.	The enforcement  notice shall state the following:

(1)	The name of the owner of record and any other person against whom the municipality intends to take action.

(2)	The location of the property in violation.

(3)	The specific violation with a description of the requirements which have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions of this Ordinance.

(4)	That the owner of record or other person against whom the municipality Intends to take action has five (5) days to commence steps to comply with this Ordinance and thirty (30) days within which to complete such steps to be in compliance with this Ordinance, unless such times are extended in writing by the Zoning Officer.

(5)	That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the Zoning Hearing  Board within thirty  (30) days of  the  date  of  the  enforcement notice or not later than the expiration of any extension granted,  in writing, by the Zoning Officer.

(6)	That the failure to comply with the enforcement notice within the time specified, unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board, constitutes a violation with sanctions clearly described.






227
 


Section  1303	Enforcement  Remedies

a.	Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated any of the provisions of this Ordinance, upon being found liable therefore in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the municipality shall pay a judgement of not more than $500.00 plus all court costs plus reasonable attorney fees incurred by the municipality as a result thereof. No judgement shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the district justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the municipality may enforce the judgement pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the district justice determining that there has been a violation further determines that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating this Ordinance to have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there - shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth (5) day following the date of the determination of a violation
·by the- district justice and thereafter each day that the violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.

b.	The court of common pleas, upon petition of the defendant, may grant an order of stay,  upon cause shown, tolling the  per  deim judgement  pending  a final adjudication of the violation and judgment.

c.	Nothing contained herein shall be construed or interpreted to grant to any person or entity other than the municipality the right to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.






































228
 

ARTICLE  XIV.	QUAKERTOWN  AREA  PLANNING  COMMITTEE

Section  1400	Puroose

The Quakertown Area Planning Committee has been formed in accordance with Article XI of  the  Pennsylvania  Municipallties   Planning  Code   in  recognition   of  the  common   planning problems which the member municipallties  and the school district share.

Section  1401	Membership

Membership on the Quakertown Area Planning Committee is llmlted to designated representatives of the Boroughs of Quakertown, Richlandtown and Trumbauersville; the Townships of Haycock, Milford and Richland; and the Quakertown Community School District.

Section  1402	Duties

The duties of the Quakertown Area Planning Committee shall include b"ut not be limited to the  following:
 

a.	Review and recommendation concerning  any amendment to the
 
' subdivision
 
and land development ordinance or to the area zoning ordinance.

b.	Review and recommendation concerning all planned residential developments, performance standard subdivisions, and cluster developments.

c.	Review and recommendation concerning all requests for conditional uses or special exceptions involving developments of more than five (5) acres.

d.	Review of all sketch and preliminary subdivision or land development plans of nonresidential developments involving more than five (5) acres or residential developments of twenty-five  (25) or more dwelling units.

All reviews and recommendations are advisory and shall be returned to the municipality within forty-five (45) days of receipt. The responsibility for submitting all required items to the Quakertown Area Planning Committee shall rest with the appropriate municipality.




























229
 






































































230
 

ARTICLE  XV.	REPEALER  AND  EFFECTIVE  DATE

Section  1500	Repealer

The existing zoning ordinance, adopted June 23, 1975 and entitled the Haycock Township Portion of the Quakertown Area Zoning 0rdinance of 1975, as Amended and all supplements and amendments thereto, are hereby repealed. Provided, however, if the present ordinance is held to be ineffective or invalid by reason of some irregularity in or impediment to Its passage, this repealer shall also be ineffective as aforesaid. Then and in that event, the Zoning Ordinance of 1975 together with its supplements and amendments, would necessarily remain in full force and effect.

Section  1501	Effective Date

The effective date of this Ordinance shall be September 26, 1994. Section  1502    ·Enactment
Enacted and ordained into an Ordinance this 26th day of September, 1994. '









Attest:




































231
 


APPENDIX  A

Bucks County Wetland  Plant List

The following plant list represents common wetland species found in  Bucks County. These species are reliable indicators of wetlands when found dominating a site (e.g., comprising more than 50% of the vegetation).

This list was derived from a larger regional list of wetland plants located in the northeastern United States compiled by the u:s. Fish and Wildlife Service.  The selections for this  Bucks
County list were made with the assistance of several regional experts: Dr. Ann Rhoads, Director of Botany, Morris Arboretum; Dr. Ernest Schuyler, Associate Curator, Academy of  Natural Sciences; Dr. David Benner, Professor of Botany, Delaware Valley College; and Edward Perry, Assistant Supervisor, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service at State College.



1.	SCIENTIFIC   NAME
Acer  -negundo L.	COMMON  NAME
Box Elder
2.	Acer saccharinum L.	Silver Maple
3.	Acorus ca/amus L.	Sweetflag
4.	Agrostis  alba L.	Redtop
5.	A/isma subcordatum Raf.	Subcordate  Waterplantain
6.	A/nus  serrulata (Alt.)  Willd.  _	Hazel Alder
7.	Amaranthus  cannabinus (L.) Sauer	Tidemarsh Waterhemp
8.	Amorpha fruticosa L	Dull-Leaf Indigo
9.	Andropogon  gerardii Vitman	Big Bluestem
1O.
11.	Andropogon  glomeratus (Walt.) B.S.P.
Andropogon   virginicus L.	Bushybeard Bluestem Broomsedge Bluestem
12.	Arisaema triphy/lum (L.) Schott	Indian Jack-in-the-Pulpit
13.	Aronia arbutifo/ia (L.) Ell.	Red Chokecherry
14.	Aronia me/anocarpa (Michx.) Ell.	Black Chokecherry
15.	Asc/epias incamata L.	Swamp Milkweed
16.	Aster  umbellatus Mill.	Flattop Aster
17.	Betula nigra L.	River Birch
18.	Bidens (all species)	Beggarticks
19.	Boehmeria cylindrica (L.) SW.	Smallspike False-Nettle
20.	Ca/amagrostis canadensis (Michx.) Beauv.	Bluejoint  Reedgrass
21.	Ca/amagrostis cinnoides (Muhl.) Barton	Hairyseed  Reedgrass
22.	Ca/Iha palustris L.	Marsh Marigold
23.	Cardamine bulbosa (Schreb.) B.S.P.	Bulb Bittercress
24.	Cardamine pensy/vanica Muhl. ex Willd.	Pennsylvania  Bittercress
25.	Carex {all  species)	Sedge
26.	Cephalanthus  occidentalis L.	Common   Buttonbush
27.	Che/one glabra  L. _	White Turtlehead
28.	Chrysosplenium americanum  Schweinitz	Golden Saxifrage
29.	Cicuta bu/bifera L.	Poison Waterhemlock
30.	Cicuta macu/ata L.	Common Waterhemlock
31.	Cinna arundinacea L.	Stout  Woodreed
32.	C/ethra a/nifo/ia  L.	Summersweet Clethra
33.	Conium maculatum L.	Poison Hemlock
34.	Cornus amomum Mill.	Silky Dogwood
35.	Cyperus {all species)	Flatsedge
36.	Decodon  verticillatus (L.) Ell.	Water Willow
37.	Du/ichium arundinaceum (L.) Britt.	Three-Way-Sedge
38.	Echlnoch/oa walteri (Pursh) A. Heller	Walter Millet
39.	Eleocharis {all species)	Spikerush
40.	Epi/obium co/oratum Biehler	Purpleleaf Willowweed
41.	Equisetum  fluviati/e L.	Water Horsetail


A-1
 

42.	Equisetum hyemale L.	Scouringrush Horsetail
43.	Eragrostis  hypnoides (Lam.)  B.S.P.	Teal  Lovegrass
44.	Eragrostis pectinacea  (Michx.)  Nees	Carolina Lovegrass
45.	Eupatoriadelphus   dubius (all species)	Joe-Pye Weed
46.	Eupatorium  perloliatum  L.	Boneset
47.	Eupatorium  pilosum Walter	Hairy Thoroughwort
48.	Eutham/a graminifolia (L.) Nutt.	Grass-Leaved Goldenrod
49.	Fraxinus nigra Marshall	Black Ash
50.	Fraxinus pennsylvanica  Marshall	Green Ash
51.	Gal/um obtusum  Sigel.	Bluntleaf Bedstraw
52.	Ga/ium parisiense L.	Wall Bedstraw
53.	Ga/ium tinctorium L.	Dye Bedstraw
54.	G/yceria (all species)	Mannagrass
55.	He/enium autumna/e L.	Common Sneezeweed
56.	Heteranthera reniformis R. & P.	Roundleaf Mudplantain
57.	Hibiscus mosocheutos L.	Rose Mallow
58.	Hydrophyl/uro virginianum L.	Virginia Waterleaf
59.	Hypericum muti/um L.	Dwarf St. Johnswort
60.	/lex verticillata (L) A. Gray	Winterberry	,
61.	Impatiens capensis Meerb.	Spotted Touch-Me-Not
62.	Impatiens pa/Iida Nutt.	Pale  Touch-Me-Not
63.	Iris pseudacorus L.	Yellow Iris
64.	Iris versicolor L.	Blueflag Iris
65.	Juncus (all species)	Rush
66.	Laportea canadensis (L.) Wedd.	Canada Woodnettle
67.	Leersia oryzoides (L.) Swartz	Rice Cutgrass
68.	Leers/a virgin/ca Willd.	Whttegrass
69.	Leucothoe  racemosa (L.) Gray	Swamp Leucothoe
70.	Lindera benzoin (L.) Blume	Spicebush
71.	Liquidambar styraciflua L.	Sweetgum
72.	Ludwigia (all species)	Seed-Box
73.	Lycopus (all species)	Bugleweed
74.	Lyonia ligustrina (L) DC.	Male-Berry
75.	Lysimachia (all species)	Loosestrife
76.	Lythrum sa/icaria L.	Purple Loosestrife
77.	Magnolia virginiana L.	Sweetbay
78.	MenthaX piperita L.	Peppermint
79.	Mertens/a virgin/ca (L.) Pers.	Virginia Bluebells
80.	Mimu/us ringens L.	Monkey-Flower
81.	Myosotis scorpioides L	True  Forget-Me-Not
82.	Nasturtium officina/e R. Br.	Watercress
83.	Nuphar luteum (L.) Sibth. & J.E. Smith	European  Cowlily
84.	Onoc/ea sensibilis L.	Sensitive Fem
85.	Osmunda (all species)	Fern
86.	Panicum longifolium  Torr.	Long-Leaved Panic-Grass
87.	Panicum rigidu/um Bose. ex Nees.	Redtop  Panicum
88.	Peltandra virginica (L.)  Kunth.	Arrow-Arum
89.	Pha/aris arundinacea L.	Reed Canarygrass
90.	Phragmites australls (Cav.) Trin. ex Steud.	Giant Cane
91.	Polygonum  amphibium L.	Water Knotweed
92.	Polygonum arifolium L.	Halberdleaf  Tearthumb
93.	Polygonum  hydropiperL.	Marshpepper Knotweed
94.	Polygonum hydropiperoides Michx.	Swamp Knotweed
95.	Polygonum pensy/vanicum L.	Pennsylvania  Smartweed
96.	Polygonum  punctatum  Ell.	Dotted Smartweed
97.	Polygonum sagittatum L.	Arrow-Leaved  Tearthumb
98.	Polygonum scandens L.	Hedge Cornbind
99.	Pontederia cordata L.	Pickerelweed


A-2
 

100.	Quercus bico/orWilld.	Swamp White Oak
101.	Quercus pa/ustris Muench.	Pin Oak
102.	Quercus  phel/os L.	Willow Oak
103.	Ranuncu/us sce/eratus L.	Celeryleaf Buttercup
104.	Ranunculus   septentrionalis  Poir.	Swamp Buttercup
105.	Rhododendron   viscosum (L.) Torr.	Swamp Azalea
106.	Rhynchospora  capitel/ata (Michx.) Vahl	False Bog Rush
107.	Rorippa pa/ustris (L.) Besser	Marsh Yellowgrass
108.	Rorippa sy/vestris (L.) Besser	Creeping Yellowgrass
109.	Rosa palustris Marshall	Swamp Rose
110.	Sagittaria (all species)	Arrowhead
111.	Salix (all species}	Willow
112.	Saururus cernuus L.	Lizard's Tail
113.	Scirpus (all species)	Bulrush
114.	Scutellar/a integrifolia L.	Rough Skullcap
115.	Scute/Jaria /ateriflara L.	Blue Skullcap
116.	Sium suave Walt.	Common Waterparsnip
117.	Smilax hlspida Muhl.	Bristly Greenbriar
118.	Sparganium (all species)	Burreed
119.	Spiraea /atifo/ia (Ait.} Borkh.	Broadleaf Meadowsweet Spiraea
120.	Spiraea tomentosa L.	Hardhack
121.	Symp/acarpus taetidus (L.) Nutt.	Common Skunkcabbage
122.	Thelypteris thelypteroides (Michx.) J. Holub	Marsh Fern
123.	1iiadenum virginicum (L.) Raf.	Marsh St. Johnswort
124.	1}'pha angustifo/ia L.	Narrow-Leaved  Cattail
125.	1}'pha /atifalia L.	Common Cattail
126.	U/mus americana L.	American Elm
127.	U/mus rubra Muhl.	Slippery Elm
128.	Vaccinium corymbosum L.	Highbush Blueberry
129.	Vaccinium macrocarpon Ait.	Large Cranberry
130.	Verbena hastata L.	Blue  Verbena
131.	Viburnum dentatum L.	Arrow-Wood
132.	Viburnum recognitum Fernald	Arrow-Wood
133.	Woadwan:iia areo/ata (L.) T. Moore	Netted Chainfern
134.	Zizania aquatica L.	Annual Wildrice



























A-3
 


HDGHWAV	CLASSIFICATION

 

...,. 'i-",-·. 'j ·t ·l• 'lj•; ..::, ';:;_·
 
ARTERIAL COLLECT ER PRIMARY SECONDARY
 





 
....-.-:;·
 




,,.
 
'' I·-71 l "'1-··.
 
.r::::J
-	(,\ \	'\,/	:
. ,,._.,
,r
'·-···\	•,	...
I'	;.	........ -
 
/,I    [1
 
"'.....	r-
 
I	•.,,  i\
l_	•..	-
0	-..
I'
,1	- ..,1
(,J	/:::-.,-..."7	I  \
- I/	r.,\. ·····,	P _;J_;..
t,,' ""i;J ,....\:!· ·...·
\I ...  t	._	 	
1

....... '











0	1	2	3	4	5

"lllLES
 
HAVCOCI<
TOWNSHIP


















 




/<'
 
c·--c:


I•	r1  --L•"..l"!rn.•.
L
 








 



Zoning Districts
RP	Resource Protaction
RA	Rural Agricultural
SRll	Suburban Residential High VC-1	Village Center-1
SC	elect Commercial
PC	lannecl Commercial
1nnf	Tndu·' ·-.:al
 
(,  ,---- -- .	/I.
\J-)\	.f·
<J
 
 
 
HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP
BUCKS COUNTY	PENNSYLVANIA

ZONING MAP
FEBRUARY 2005

ZONING  DISTRICTS RP- RESOURCE PROTECTION RA- RURAL AGRICULTURAL
SRH-SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL HIGH VC-1-VILL.AGE  CENTER·l
SC·SELECT COMMERCIAL

PC· PLANNED  COMMERCIAL

Pl·PLANNED  INDUSTRIAL















-TAX MAP PARCEL BLOCKS
 
-: -1
-
 


BLOCK1 BLOOO. BLOCK4 BLOCl<S
BLOCK6


BLOCK9
 
BLOCK7
Bl.OCKa

BLOCK10	n

BLOCK11
BLOCK12
l'
BLOa< 13
 
 
 

HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BUCKS COUNTY	PENNSYLVANIA OFFICIAL   MAP
 
,
,,_-.. >  -1"	;
 



 
-	STATEROAD
-	TOWNSHIPHOAD
-PRIVATE ROAD
,.,,
-  .






,I LI""'	l't(STtlWOllRRIW>
 











LA.KETOWH8:
COUNTY PARK
 










.I/
 








,1'	*
\	i
 
RI
1l

ff
"
 	......... 	

Ci"'''-'
 









'°-':";;;";;"; '
 
\



HAYCOCK MOUNTAIN
STATEGAMELANDS
 

APPLEBACHSVILl.EROAD- 1398
BOULDER LANE T423 CAMPTRAILROAD---T459 CEDAR LANE                    T425
CHURCH ROAD                           T475
CHURCHVIEW DRIVE-- T473 CIDERPRESSLANE--- T465 COBBLER ROAD T463 CREAMERY ROAD---1390 DOGWOOD LANE---T420 EOGEHILLCCLE--- T477 FOX RUN ROAD T473 HARRISBURG SCHOOL ROAD-T406 HAYCOCK RUN ROAD--T424
!NOIAN PATH COURT --T481
 

;;;
i
'"
 



-d"-


-
-

'	p
 




(




_,,.,.,
 





...	-	-
 
KINZLER LANE - T421 LAKEWOOD DRIVE--- T476 MAGNOLIA DRIVE--- T460 MISSION ROAD                        T404
OAK LANE                                    T418
OLDBETHLEHEMROAD- T430
OLD SCHOOL ROAD-- T426 PHEASANTRUN ROAD-- T473 ROUDENBUSH ROAD-- T467 ROUNDHOUSE ROAD--T427 TOP ROCKTRAIL--- T422 WESTSAWM!LLROAD--T473 WESfTHATCHER ROAD-- T429 WOOOBINELANE---T419- WOODCOCKLANE---    T416
 
,,,.,,,-&'\O
•'°'

OFFICIAL HAYCOCKTOWNSHIP MAP WAS REFERRED TO THE HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP PLANNING COMMISSION ANDTHEBUCKS COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION.

OFFICIAL HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP MAP WAS ADOPTED BY THE HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP BOARD OF SUPERVISORS ON MAY 2,2005 AFTER THE OFFICIAL MAP WAS DULY ADVERTISED AND A PUBLIC HEARING WAS HaD REGARDft>IG THE SAME.
 
a";'
l
12
iJ
!"
 	 f
 
 
 

		
	


























































SOLICITOR
Terry Clemons, Esq.	













HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP SUBDIVISION
AND
LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE






BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
Earl D. Winters, Chairman Michael Lennard, Vice Chairman Kathleen M. Babb







PLANNING COMMISSION
William R. Taft, Chairman Eric Sontheimer, Vice Chairman
George Brodhead Henry DePue Mary Hanisch Edwin Leffingwell
Robert Gelwicks






ENGINEER
C. Robert Wynn, P.E.



Advertised Draft
Prepared June 19, 2000	
		
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS

ARTICLE I	- GENERAL PROVISIONS	Page

Section 101	Short Title 	1
Section 102	Purpose 	1
Section 103	Application of Regulations 	2
Section 104	Interpretation and Conflict 	3
Section 105	Repealer 	4
Section 106	Severability 	4
Section 107	Effective Date 	4
ARTICLE II	- DEFINITIONS
Section 201	Construction 	5
Section 202	Terminology 	5
ARTICLE III	-  SUBMISSION PROCEDURES
Section 301	General Procedures 	18
Section 302	Fee Schedule 	19
Section 303	Lot Line Adjustment Procedure 	19
Section 304	Minor Subdivision Procedure 	19
Section 305	Major Subdivision and Land Development Procedure 	20
Section 306	Review by Park and Recreation Board 	25
Section 307	Time Limitation of Plan Approval 	25
Section 308	Modifications 	25
ARTICLE IV	-  PLAN REQUIREMENTS
Section 401	Sketch Plan 	26
Section 402	Lot Line Adjustment and Minor Subdivision 	26
Section 403	Preliminary Plan 	29
Section 404	Final Plan (Record Plan) 	36
Section 405	As-Built Plans 	39
Section 406	Traffic Impact Study 	39
Section 407	Sewage Facilities 	43
Section 408	Water Resources Impact Study 	45
Section 409	Wetland Delineation 	47
ARTICLE V	-  GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS
Section 501	Application 	49
Section 502	General Standards 	49
Section 503	Community Facilities 	50
Section 504	Blocks and Lots 	50
Section 505	Street – General 	51
Section 506	Street Standards 	53
Section 507	Cul-De-Sac Streets 	56
Section 508	Street Alignment 	56
 
ARTICLE V	-  GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS (continued)	Page
Section 509	Street Grades 	57
Section 510	Street Intersections 	57
Section 511	Driveways 	58
Section 512	Curbs 	60
Section 513	Sidewalks 	60
Section 514	Reserved 	61
Section 515	Landscaping and Street Trees 	61
Section 516	Stormwater Management 	68
Section 517	Excavating and Grading 	75
Section 518	Erosion and Sedimentation Control 	76
Section 519	Water Supply, Distribution Systems and Fire Protection 	78
Section 520	Sanitary Sewer Disposal 	80
Section 521	Utilities 	81
Section 522	Monuments and Markers 	81
Section 523	Parking Facilities 	83
Section 524	Alleys 	87
Section 525	Recreation Facilities 	88
Section 526	Lighting 	93
Section 527	Easements 	94
ARTICLE VI	-  REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND GENERAL STANDARDS
Section 601	Intent 	95
Section 602	Required Improvements 	95
Section 603	Construction of Facilities 	96
Section 604	General Standards 	96
Section 605	Completion of Improvements 	97
Section 606	Guaranties to Complete Improvements and Financial Security 	97
Section 607	Completion of Improvements 	99
Section 608	Maintenance of Guaranties and Financial Security 	101
Section 609	Remedies to Effect Completion of Improvements 	101
ARTICLE VII	-  DEDICATION OF RECREATION LAND
Section 701	Recreation Land/Fee Requirements 	102
Section 702	Recreation Land Dedication 	102
Section 703	Criteria for Determining Location and Suitability of Recreation Areas 	102
Section 704	Ownership/Dedication to Township of Recreation Land 	103
Section 705	Fee in Lieu of Dedication 	104
ARTICLE VIII	-  ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS; PENALTIES
Section 801	Enactment of Amendments 	105
Section 802	Amendment Hearings 	105
Section 803	Penalties 	105
 
APPENDIX “A”	-  CONSTRUCTION DETAILS	Page

Typical Roadway Half Section ........................................................................... A-1

Typical Roadway Half Section ............................................................................A-2
Typical Roadway Half Section ............................................................................A-3
Typical Roadway Half Section ............................................................................A-4
Storm Sewer Bedding Detail...............................................................................A-5
Storm Sewer Bedding Detail...............................................................................A-6
Belgian Block Curb Detail ...................................................................................A-7

APPENDIX “B”	-	SAMPLES OF PLAN NOTIFICATIONS........................................................... B-1

APPENDIX “C”	-	NON-RESIDENTIAL PARKING LOTS............................................................. C-1

APPENDIX “D”	-	REQUIREMENTS FOR AS -BUILT DRAWINGS.............................................. D-1

APPENDIX “E”	-	BASIN BERM CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS........................................E-1

APPENDIX “F”	-	BUCKS COUNTY WETLAND PLANT LIST......................................................F-1 APPENDIX “G”	-	RUNOFF COEFFICIENTS FOR THE RATIONAL METHOD .......................... G-1
APPENDIX “H”	-	MANNING “N” VALUES BY TYPICAL REACH DESCRIPTION.................... H-1

APPENDIX “I”	-	TOHICKON CREEK/NORTH DELAWARE STORMWATER  MANAGEMENT AREA  MAP ........................................................................................................I-1
 
ORDINANCE NO. 86

AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF HAYCOCK DEFINING AND REGULATING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND AND THE DEVELOPMENT THEREOF; ESTABLISHING PROCEDURES FOR THE CONSIDERATION OF MINOR AND MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS AND LAND DEVELOPMENTS; REQUIRING THE PREPARATION OF SKETCH, PRELIMINARY, FINAL AND AS-BUILT PLANS; REQUIRING CERTAIN IMPROVEMENTS TO BE MADE OR GUARANTEED TO BE MADE BY THE SUBDIVIDER OR DEVELOPER AND ESTABLISHING DESIGN STANDARDS FOR IMPROVEMENTS; REGULATING SALE OF LOTS, ERECTION OF BUILDING(S), LAYING OUT, CONSTRUCTION, OPENINGS AND DEDICATION OF STREETS, SANITARY SEWERS AND STORM SEWERS, OTHER FACILITIE S AND PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS; PROVIDING FOR THE ADMINISTRATION OF THIS ORDINANCE; AND PRESCRIBING PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.

ARTICLE I - GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section 101. - Short Title.

This  Ordinance  shall  be  known  as  the  Haycock  Township  Subdivision  and  Land Development Ordinance.

Section 102. - Purpose.

1.	These regulations are adopted for the following purposes:

A.	To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of Haycock Township.

B.	To guide the future growth and development of  Haycock  Township,  in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and Act 537 Sewage Facilities Plan of Haycock Township.

C.	To provide for adequate light, air, privacy; to secure safety from fire, flood, and other danger; and to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of population.

D.	To protect the character and social and economic stability of Haycock Township and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of Haycock Township.

E.	To protect and conserve the value of land throughout Haycock Township and the value of building(s) and improvements upon the land and to minimize the conflicts among the uses of land and buildings.

F.	To guide public and private policy and action in order to provide adequate and efficient transportation, water supply, sewerage, stormwater management, schools, parks, playgrounds, recreation, and other public requirements and facilities.
 
ARTICLE I - GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE I - GENERAL PROVISIONS


G.	To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land and buildings and the circulation of traffic within Haycock Township having particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in the streets and highways, and the pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the various uses of land and buildings, and to pr ovide for the proper location and width of streets and building lines.

H.	To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivision and re-subdivisions, in order to further the orderly layout  and  use  of  land;  and  to insure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided land.

I.	To insure that public facilities are available and will have a sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision.

J.	To prevent the pollution of air, streams, lakes, and ponds; to assure the adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table; and to encourage the wise use and management of natural resources in order to preserve the community and value of the land.

K.	To control stormwater in a manner consistent with the Bucks County stormwater management plan.

L.	To regulate the subdivision and/or development of land within any designated floodplain district in order to promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.

M.	To require that each subdivision lot in flood-prone areas include a safe building site with adequate access; and that public facilities which serve such uses be designed and installed to minimize flood damage.

N.	To protect individuals from buying lands which are unsuitable for use because of flooding by prohibiting the improper subdivision and/or development  of  lands within the designated floodplain districts; and which are unsuitable for use because of topography, wetlands, steep slopes,  and  other  environmental features.

O.	To preserve the natural beauty and topography of Haycock Township  and  to ensure appropriate development with regard to these natural features.

P.	To provide for open spaces through efficient design and layout of the land.

Section 103. - Application of Regulations. This Ordinance shall apply to all subdivision and land development plans submitted after the effective date of this Ordinance and to all subdivision and land development plans submitted before the effective date of this Ordinance which no longer have prot ection from the effect of changes in governing ordinances granted by Section 508(4) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.

1.	Subdivision Control.

A.	No subdivision, as herein defined, of any lot, tract or parcel  of  land  shall  be effected and no street, alley, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main or other facilities in connection therewith, shall be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated  for  public  use  or  travel,  or  for  the  common  use  of  occupants  of
 
ARTICLE I - GENERAL PROVISIONS

ARTICLE I - GENERAL PROVISIONS

buildings abutting or to abut thereon, except in strict accordance with the provisions of  this  Ordinance. No lot  in  any subdivision  may  be sold,  and  no permit to erect, alter or repair any building upon land in a subdivision may be issued and no building may be erected in a subdivision, unless and until a subdivision plan has been approved by the Board of Supervisors and recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds for Bucks County.

B.	There shall be no subdivision of any lot which has been restricted from further subdivision by a note or restriction on a plan or deed recorded at the office of the Bucks County Recorder of Deeds.

2.	Land Development Control.

A.	Land development, as herein defined, must  comply  with  the  regulations contained herein.   Such compliance shall include, but not be limited to the filing of preliminary and final plats, the dedication and improvements of rights-of-way, streets and roads, and the payment of fees and charges as established by Resolution of the Board of Supervisors.

B.	Land development plans shall indicate the location of each structure and clearly define each unit and shall indicate public easements, common areas, and improvements, all easements appurtenant to each unit,  and  improvements  to public rights-of-way. Developments are subject to the zoning regulations as they apply to use and density requirements, setbacks, parking and other features, and the same shall be indicated on the land development plan.

Section 104. - Interpretation and Conflict.

1.	Interpretation. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Ordinance, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare.

2.	Conflict with Public and Private Provisions.

A.	Public Provisions. Where any provision  of this Ordinance  imposes restrictions different from  those  imposed  by  any  other  provision  of  this Ordinance  or  any other ordinance, rule, or regulation, or other  provisions  of  law,  whether  local, state or Federal, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher standards shall control.

B.	Private Provisions. This Ordinance is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant of any other private agreement or restriction, provided that where the provisions of this Ordinance are more restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant, or other  private  agreement  or restriction, the requirements  of  this  Ordinance  shall  govern.  Where  the provisions of the easement, covenant or private agreement or restriction impose duties and obligations more restrictive, or higher standards than the requirements of these regulations, or the determinations of the Board of Supervisors in approving a subdivision or in enforcing this Ordinance, and such private provision are not inconsistent with this Ordinance or determinations thereunder, then such private provisions shall be operative and supplemental to these regulations and determinations made thereunder.
 
ARTICLE I - GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE I - GENERAL PROVISIONS

3.	Municipal Liability. The grant of a permit or approval of a plan for any  proposed subdivision and/or land development to be located within any identified floodplain area or district shall not constitute a representation, guarantee, or warranty of any kind  by Haycock Township or by any official or employee thereof of the practicability or safety of the proposed use, and shall create no liability upon Haycock Township, its officials or employees.

Section 105. - Repealer.

All Ordinances and Resolutions of the Township inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistencies specifically, Ordinance No. 36 adopted June 20, 1979.

Section 106. - Severability.

If any sentence, clause, section, or part of this Ordinance is for any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality, or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this Ordinance. It is hereby declared as the intent of the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township that this Ordinance would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.

Section 107. - Effective Date.

This Ordinance shall become effective on the 12th day of August, A.D., 2000. ORDAINED AND ENACTED this 7th day of August, A.D., 2000.
Haycock  Township Board of Supervisors




________________________________




 	________________________




________________________________

Attest:




______________________________
Secretary
 



ARTICLE II - DEFINITIONS

Section 201. - Construction.

Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall, for the purpose of this Ordinance, have the meaning herein indicated. The present tense shall include the future; the singular number shall include the plural; words used in the masculine gender shall include the feminine and the neuter; the word "shall" is always mandatory; the word "may" is always permissive.

Section 202. - Terminology.

Agricultural Soils - Agricultural Soils shall be recognized and classified as follows:

1.	Prime Agricultural Soils - the following soil types shall be recognized and classified as Prime Agricultural Soils:

Manuscript
Symbol	Mapping Unit Name

AdB	Allenwood gravelly silt loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes AgA	Alton gravelly loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes
AgB	Alton gravelly loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes
BeA	Bedington silt loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes
BeB	Bedington silt loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes
CeA	Chester silt loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes
CeB	Chester silt loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes
ClB	Clarksburg silt loam, 2 to 6 percent slopes
DsB	Duffield silt loam, 2 to 8 percent slopes
DuA	Duncannon silt loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes
DuB	Duncannon silt loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes
HoA	Howell silt loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes
HoB	Howell silt loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes
LaA	Lansdale loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes
LaB	Lansdale loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes
LgA	Lawrenceville silt loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes
MaB	Manor loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes
MlA	Mount Lucas silt loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes
NeB	Neshaminy channery silt loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes PeA	Penn silt loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes
PeB	Penn silt loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes
PnB	Penn-Lansdale complex, 3 to 8 percent slopes PoA	Pope loam, terrace, 0 to 3 percent slopes
PpA	Pope loam, terrace, 0 to 3 percent slopes
RdA	Readington silt loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes
Ro	Rowland silt loam
WaB	Washington gravelly silt loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes Woa	Woodstown silt loam, 0 to 5 percent slopes
 
ARTICLE II - DEFINITIONS

2.	Agricultural  Soils  of  Statewide  Importance   -  The   following   soil   types   shall  be recognized and classified as Agricultural Soils of Statewide Importance:

Manuscript
Symbol	Mapping Unit Name

AbA	Abbottstown silt loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes
AbB	Abbottstown silt loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes AbC	Abbottstown silt loam, 8 to 15 percent slopes
AdC	Allenwood gravelly silt loam, 8 to 15 percent slopes AlA	Alton gravelly loam, flooded, 0 to 5 percent slopes BeC	Bedington silt loam, 8 to 15 percent slopes
CaA	Chalfont silt loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes
CaB	Chalfont silt loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes
CeC	Chester silt loam, 8 to 15 percent slopes
CwB	Culleoka-Weikert shaly silt loams, 3 to 8 percent slopes DtC	Duffield and Washington soils, 8 to 20 percent slopes Fa	Fallsington silt loam, gravelly subsoil variant
KlB	Klinesville very shaly silt loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes LaC	Lansdale loam, 8 to 15 percent slopes
LgB	Lawrenceville silt loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes  LhB	Lehigh channery silt loam, 2 to 8 percent slopes LhC	Lehigh channery silt loam, 8 to 18 percent slopes MaC	Manot loam, 8 to 15 percent slopes
MlB	Mount Lucas silt loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes
MlC	Mount Lucas silt loam, 8 to 15 percent slopes
NeC	Neshaminy channery silt loam, 8 to 15 percent slopes PeC	Penn silt loam, 8 to 15 percent slopes
PhB3	Penn-Klinesville shaly silt loams, 3 to 8 percent slopes, eroded PnC	Penn-Lansdale complex, 8 to 15 percent slopes
RdB	Readington silt loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes
RdC	Readington shaly silt loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes ReA	Reaville shaly silt loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes ReB	Reaville shaly silt loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes StB	Steinsburg gravelly loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes StC	Steinsburg gravelly loam, 8 to 15 percent slopes UrA	Urbana silt loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes
UrB	Urbana silt loam, 3 to 8 percent slopes

Alley - A strip of land over which there is a public or private right-of-way which serves as the secondary means of vehicular access to the side or rear of two (2) or more properties. Frontage on such a right-of-way shall not be construed as satisfying the requirements of Township Ordinances relating to frontage on a street.

Alluvial Soils (Floodplain Soils) - Areas subject to periodic flooding and listed in the Soil Survey of Bucks and Philadelphia Counties, Pennsylvania, U.S. Department of Agricultural  Soil Conservation Service, July 1975 as being "on, or in, the flood plain" or subject to flooding. The following soil types are alluvial and/or floodplain soils:

Alluvial land
Alton gravelly loam, flooded	Marsh
Bowmansville silt loam	Pope loam
Hatboro silt loam	Rowland silt loam
 
ARTICLE II - DEFINITIONS

Applicant - A landowner, or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has filed an application for development including his/her heirs, successors and assigns.

Application for Development - Every  application, whether tentative,  preliminary,  or  final required to be filed and approved prior to start of construction or development including but not limited to an application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or plan or for the approval of a development plan.
Architect - A Professional Architect licensed as such by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Berm - An earth mound which physically blocks views without using architectural elements.   Block - A tract of land bounded by streets. Block length shall be measured along the centerline of
a street between centerlines of intersecting streets.

Building - Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels, and including covered porches or  bay windows and chimneys. Included shall be all manufactured homes and trailers to be used for human habitation.

Cartway or Roadway - The portion of a street right -of-way normally paved or stoned  and designed or intended for vehicular use.

Clear Sight Triangle - An area of unobstructed vision at street intersection defined by lines of sight between points at a given distance from the intersection of the street right-of-way lines.

Common Open Space – (Refer Open Space, Common)

Condominium and Cooperative - (An ownership arrangement and not a land use) a method of ownership which, when applied to a  multifamily  dwelling,  provides  for  separate  ownership  for each unit, title of which shall consist of ownership of the unit together with an undivided interest in the common element.

Conservation District - Bucks Conservation District.

County - The County of Bucks, Pennsylvania.

County Planning Commission - The Planning  Commission of the County of Bucks.

Crosswalk - A right -of-way or easement for pedestrian travel which crosses a cartway.

Cul-de -sac - A street intersecting another street at one end and terminating at the other in a vehicular  turnaround.

Culvert - A pipe, conduit, or similar structure including appurtenant works which convey surface water.

Density - The measure of the number of dwelling units per  acre  as  determined  by  Township Zoning Ordinance regulations.

Design Standards - Regulations adopted pursuant to this Ordinance establishing minimum or maximum standards and a layout by which a subdivision and land development is developed.
 
ARTICLE II - DEFINITIONS

Design Storm - The magnitude of precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence (i.e. 50-Year Storm) and duration (i.e. 24-Hour), and used in computing storm water management control system.

Detention Basin - A basin designed to retard stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a predetermined rate.

Developer - Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a subdivision of land or a land development.

Development - Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, the construction or placement of buildings or other structures, mobile homes, streets and other paving, utilities, mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or drilling operations, and the subdivision of land.

Development Plan - The provisions for development including a planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of development, streets, ways and  parking facilities, common open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of development plan" when used in this Ordinance shall mean the written and graphic materials referred  to  in  this definition.

Drainage Facility - Any ditch, gutter, swale, culvert, basin, storm sewer or other structure designed, intended or constructed for the purpose of conveying, diverting or controlling surface water or groundwater.

Drainage Right-of -Way - The lands required for the installation of stormwater sewers  or drainage ditches, or required along a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage and unnatural erosion.

Driveway - A private vehicular passageway providing access between a street and  a  private parking area or private garage.

Driveway, Shared - A private vehicular passage way providing access between a  street  and private parking area or garage serving four (4) or less dwellings. Shared driveways may cross through lots provided access easements are established. Lot frontage on such easements shall not be utilized to meet minimum lot width requirements of the Township Zoning Ordinance.

Dwelling - A building designed and occupied exclusively for residential purposes containing one or more dwelling units on a single parcel of land, excluding hotel, rooming house, tourist home, institutional home, guest house, residential club, motel, motor court, and the like.

Dwelling Unit - Any room or group of rooms located within a residential building and forming a single, habitable unit with facilities used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating, by one family.

Easement - A grant for the use of a parcel of land by the public, a corporation, or a person, for a specified  purpose.

Encroachment - Any placement or obstruction in a delineated floodway, wetland, right -of-way, easement, required yard, setback, or adjacent land.

Engineer - A Professional Engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
 
ARTICLE II - DEFINITIONS

Erosion - The removal of soil particles by the action of water,  wind,  ice,  or  other  geological agents.

Excavation - Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated, or bulldozed; and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.

Fill -

1.	Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other material is  placed,  pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a new location above the natural surface of the ground, or on top of a stripped surface; and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom;

2.	The difference in elevation between a point on the original ground and a designated point of higher elevation on the final ground elevation.

3.	The material used to fill.

Financial Security - Any approved security which may be in lieu of a requirement that certain improvements be made before the Board of Supervisors approves a final subdivision or land development plan, including performance bonds, escrow agreements, and other similar collateral or surety agreements.

Flood - A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.

Floodplain (General Floodplain) - A relatively flat or low l and area which is subject to partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of surface waters from any source.

Floodplain Soils - Areas subject to periodic flooding and listed in the Soil Survey of Bucks and Philadelphia Counties, Pennsylvania, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, July 1975, as being "on the floodplain" or "subject to flooding". The  following  soil  types  are floodplain soils: Alluvial land; Alton gravelly loam, flooded; Bowmansville silt loam; Hatboro silt loam; Marsh; Pope loam; and Rowland silt loam.

Flood-proofing - Any combination of structural and non -structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents.

Floodway - The channel of the watercourse and portions of the adjoining floodplains which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the 100 -year frequency flood. Unless  otherwise specified, the boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps  and  flood  insurance  studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the boundary  of the 100-year frequency floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that  the floodway extends  from both  sides of  the  stream to  50 feet  from  the top  of each  bank  of the stream.

Floodway Fringe - Area between the floodway and boundary of the 100 year flood.  For purpose of definition, it is the area of the floodplain that could be completely obstructed without increasing the water surface elevation of the 100 year flood more than one (1) foot at any point. Floodway and floodway fringe are typically calculated by equal conveyance reduction from each side of the floodplain.
 
ARTICLE II - DEFINITIONS

Forest (Woodlands) - Areas comprised of one (1) or more acres of mature or largely mature trees in which the largest trees measure at least six (6) inches dbh (diameter at breast height, or four and one-half feet above the ground). Forest shall be measured from the drip line of the outer trees.

Frontage - Refer lot width.

Governing Body - The Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township,  Bucks  Co unty, Pennsylvania.

Grade - The slope of a street, other public way, land area, drainage facility or pipe specified in percent.

Grading and Drainage Plan - A plan showing all existing ground features and proposed grading, including existing and proposed surface and subsurface drainage facilities, described by grades, contours, and topography.

Groundwater - Natural underground water supplies.

Hydric Soils - Soils that are categorized as poorly drained that can support hydrophytic plants, but may not do so in many cases. For the purpose of this Ordinance, hydric soils are general wetland indicator soils. (Refer Wetlands) The following soils, classified in the Soil Survey of Bucks and Philadelphia Counties, Pennsylvania, U.S. Department  of  Agriculture,  Soil Conservation Service, July 1975, are hydric soils:

Bowmansville silt loam Doylestown silt loam Fallsington silt loam Hatboro silt loam Towhee silt loam
Towhee extremely stony silt loam

Identified Floodplain Area - The floodplain area specifically identified in this Ordinance as being inundated by the one hundred (100) year flood. Included would be areas identified as Floodway (FW), Flood-Fringe (FF) and General Floodplain (FA).

Impervious Surface - Impervious surfaces are those surfaces which do not absorb precipitation and surface water. All buildings, parking areas, driveways, roads, sidewalks, swimming pools, and any areas in concrete, asphalt, packed stone, or other equivalent surfaces shall be considered impervious surfaces within this definition. In addition, other areas determined by the Township Engineer to be impervious within the meaning of this definition will be classified as impervious  surfaces.

Improvements - Those physical additions, installations, and chang es required to render land suitable for the use intended, including but not limited to, grading, paving, curbing, street lights and signs, fire hydrants, water mains, electric service, gas service, sanitary sewers, storm drains, sidewalks, crosswalks, driveways, culverts, and street shade trees.

Improvement Construction Documents - Include but are not  limited  to  Traffic  Study, Stormwater Management Study, Floodplain Study, Wetland Studies, Erosion and Sedimentation Pollution Control Narrative, Geological Studies for Water Supply, Sewage Facilities Alternatives Study, etc. Studies requiring engineering calculations shall be prepared, signed, and sealed by a licensed Professional Engineer.

Land Development - Any of the following activities:
 
ARTICLE II - DEFINITIONS

1.	The improvement of one (1) or two (2) or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for any purpose involving:

A.	A group of two (2) or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether purposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or

B.	The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between or among two (2) or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds,  condominiums, building groups or other features.

2.	A subdivision of land.

3.	"Land development" does not include development which involves:

A.	The conversion of an existing single family detached dwelling or single family semi-detached dwelling into not more than three (3) residential units, unless such units are intended to be a condominium;

B.	The addition of a residential accessory building, including farm building,  not greater than 1000 square feet in area on a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building; or

C.	The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines of an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park. For the purposes of this subsection, an amusement park is defined as a tract or area used principally as a location for permanent amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall not apply to newly acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial plans for the expanded area have been approved by the proper authorities.

Landowner - The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee, if he/she is authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having a proprietary interest in land.

Lot - A parcel of land, used or set aside and available for use as the site of one or more buildings and any buildings accessory thereto, or for any other purpose, in one ownership and not divided by a street, nor including any land within the ultimate right-of-way of a public or private street upon which said lot abuts, even if the ownership to such right-of-way is the owner of the lot. In the case where an existing deeded parcel of land is divided into two or more tracts by public street; for the purposes of this Ordinance, each tract shall be considered a separate lot.

1.	Lot, Corner - A lot which has an interior angl e of less than one hundred and thirty-five
(135) degrees at the intersection of two (2) street lines. A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if the tangent to the curve at the points beginning within the lot or at the points of intersection of the side lot lines with the street lines intersects at an angle of less than one hundred and thirty-five (135) degrees.

2.	Lot, Depth - The mean distance from the ultimate right -of-way line of  the  lot  to  its opposite rear line measured in a direction parallel to the side lines of the lot. Lot depth for triangular lots shall be the mean distance from the street line to the point of intersection of the side yards.
 
ARTICLE II - DEFINITIONS

3.	Lot, Double Frontage - A lot (ex cept for a corner lot) which fronts two interior proposed streets within a subdivision.

4.	Lot, Flag (Lane) - A lot which meets the criteria for an exception to the minimum lot width requirements under Section 522 c. of the Zoning Ordinance.

5.	Lot, Interior - A lot, the side lot lines of which do not abut on a street.

6.	Lot, Minimum Width - The minimum required lot width measured at the required building setback line.

7.	Lot, Nonconforming - A lot, the area or dimension of, which was lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of the relevant Zoning Ordinance, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district under the current Zoning Ordinance.

8.	Lot of Record - A lot which has been recorded in the Office of the Recorder of  Deeds.

9.	Lot, Reverse Frontage - A lot (excluding corner lots) which abuts both a proposed street and an existing street of higher classification, with vehicular access solely from the street of lower classification.

10.	Lot, Through - An interior lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets.

11.	Lot, Triangular - A lot having three (3) lot lines, but which does not qualify as a corner lot.

12.	Lot, Width (frontage) - The distance measured between the side lot lines,  at  the required minimum building setback line. In a case where there is only one side lot line, lot width shall be measured between such side lot line and the opposite rear lot line or street line.

Lot Line Adjustment - A minor subdivision of land resulting in revised property  boundaries between two (2) or more existing lots, and not resulting in the creation of any additional lots.

Maintenance Guarantee - Any security which may be accepted by the Township for the maintenance of any improvements required by this Ordinance.

Major Subdivision - Any subdivision not classified as a minor subdivision or lot line adjustment.

Manufactured/Modular Home - A  dwelling  unit  erected  on  a  foundation  and made  of  one  or more sections built in a factory. The completed unit shall meet all applicable building codes in effect.

Minor Subdivision - Any division or re-division of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means into two (2) lots or less.

Mobile Home - A transportable, single family dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two (2) or more units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental  unpacking  and  assembly  operations,  and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent foundation. For the purposes of this Ordinance, travel trailers are not considered as mobile homes.
 
ARTICLE II - DEFINITIONS

Mobile Home Lot - A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary for the erections  thereon  of  a  single  mobile home.

Mobile Home Park - A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has been so designated and improved that it contains two (2) or more mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.

Municipal Authority - A body politic and corporate created pursuant to the Act of May 2, 1945
(P.L. 382, No. 164), known as the "Municipalities Authority Act of 1945".

Municipal Engineer - A Professional Engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and appointed by the Township pursuant to Article V of the Second Class Township Code.

Municipalities Planning Code - Act of Assembly of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, as amended.

One Hundred Year Flood - A flood that, on the average, is likely to occur once every one hundred (100) years (i.e. that has one percent (1%) chance of occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year).

Open Space - Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved  and  set  aside, dedicated or reserved for resource protection, public or private use and enjoyment, or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of  land  adjoining  or  neighboring such open space. Open space shall not include land occupied by non-recreational structures, roads, street rights-of- way, parking lots, land reserved for future parking, or any portion of required minimum lot areas as required by this Ordinance.

Open Space, Common - Land within or related to a development, not individually owned or dedicated for public use, which is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of the development and may include such complementary structures and improvements as may be required and/or appropriate.

Person - An individual, partnership, public or private association or corporation, firm, trust, estate,
municipality,  governmental  unit,  public  utility  or  any  other  legal  entity  whatsoever  which  si recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.

Plan, Final - A complete and exact plan prepared by a licensed engineer or surveyor, prepared for official recording, showing right-of-way lines, easements, lot dimensions with bearings, lot numbers, and any other relevant information pertaining to the street and lot subdivision or land development. The final plan shall include improvement construction documents prepared by a licensed engineer where applicable). Final plan must show typical cross-section of streets and the horizontal and vertical details (plan-profiles of all streets, drainage facilities, sanitary sewers, water mains, fire hydrants, street lights, and all underground and above ground utility conduits and poles). An exact copy of the approved final plan on opaque linen of standard size shall be submitted for necessary signatures and recording with the Bucks County Recorder of Deeds.

Plan, Preliminary - A plan prepared by a licensed engineer and/or surveyor showing the existing features of a tract and its surroundings and proposed street and lot layout within and adjacent to the subdivision or land development, as a basis for consideration prior to preparation of a final plan. Preliminary plan shall include improvement construction documents prepared by a licensed engineer (where applicable). Preliminary Plan must show typical cross section of the streets and the horizontal and vertical details (plan-profiles of all streets, drainage facilities, sanitary sewers, water mains, fire hydrants, street lights, and all underground and above ground utility conduits and poles).
 
ARTICLE II - DEFINITIONS

Plan, Sketch - An informal plan indicating salient existing features of a tract and it surroundings and a general layout of the proposed subdivision or land development, to be used as the basis of informal discussions between representatives of the Township and the subdivider or land developer.

Plan, Soil Erosion & Sedimentation Control - A plan approved by the  Bucks  Conservation District for controlling erosion and sediment during construction which shall provide all  steps, including scheduling, to assure erosion and sediment control during all phases of construction, including final stabilization.

Planning Commission - The Haycock Township Planning Commission.

Plat - A map or plan of subdivision or land development whether sketch, preliminary or final.

Public Facilities - Any parks, playgrounds, trails, paths or other recreational areas; any water or sewer collection, transportation or treatment facilities; all street, sidewalk, curb or other roadway facilities to be dedicated; and any drainage or utility easement areas to be dedicated to  the Township. Any public improvements required by Ordinance or otherwise to be constructed and dedicated to the Township.

Public Hearing - A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the Board of Supervisors or Planning Commission of the Township, intended to inform and obtain public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this Ordinance.

Public Meeting - A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July 3, 1986, (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act", 53 P.S. SS271 et seq.

Public Notice - Notice published once each week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in Haycock Township. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the  hearing.  The  first publication shall not be more than thirty (30) days and the second publication shall not be less than seven (7) days from the date of the hearing.

Recreation Facilities - The following definitions apply to the recreation facilities required  by Section 525 of this Ordinance:

1.	Tot Lot - A confined, developed, neighborh ood play area primarily for use by preschool children under the supervision of parents or guardian.

2.	Playfield - A common area within a subdivision or land development for neighborhood residents to use for informal, active recreation purposes such a ball games and other activities requiring a large lawn area, away from homes or other buildings for their proper conduct.

3.	Basketball Court - A complete basketball facility including paved, standard-sized court area, with posts, backboards, and baskets at both ends of the court.

4.	Tennis Court  - A complete tennis facility including paved, standard-sized court area, posts, net and fencing around its perimeter.
 
ARTICLE II - DEFINITIONS

5.	Swimming Pool - A complete swimming facility including the  pool, surrounding paved deck, lawn area, lifeguard and bathroom facilities, and  appropriate  mechanical equipment.

Reserve Strip - A narrow parcel of ground having inadequate area for building purposes separating a street or a proposed street from other adjacent properties.

Re -subdivision - Any subdivision or transfer of land, laid out on a plan which has been approved by the Board of Supervisors which changes or proposes to change property lines and/or public rights-of-way not in strict accordance with the approved plan.

Retention Basin - A  basin designed  to retain stormwater  runoff so  that a  permanent pool  is established.

Right -of -Way - A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, sidewalk, alley, utilities or other similar use.

Runoff - The surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a given watershed after a fall of rain or snow that does not enter the soil but runs off the surface of the land; that part of precipitation which flows over the land.

Sediment - Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, has been transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by water.

Sedimentation - The process by which mineral or organic material is accumulated or deposited by the movement of wind and water, or by gravity. Once this matter is deposited, or remains suspended in water, it is usually referred to as "Sediment".

Select Earth Backfill - Earth backfill material free of organics and other objectionable material being a well graded mixture of rock and soil with no particle size greater than 8 inches.

Select Backfill - Crushed stone backfill graded in accordance with PennDOT Form 408.

Setback (Building Setback Line) - The minimum distance that a building must be held back from an adjacent lot line, depending on the applicable zoning district, or the minimum distance from the ultimate right-of-way, depending on the applicable street classification.

Sewer, Community - A system, whether publicly or privately owned, for the collection of sewage or non-hazardous industrial wastes of a liquid nature from two (2) or more lots,  and  for  the treatment or disposal of the sewage or industrial waste on one or more of the lots or at any other site.

Sewer, Individual - A system of piping, tanks or other facilities serving a single lot and collecting and disposing of sewage in whole or in part into the soil or into waters of the Commonwealth or by means of conveyance to another site for final disposal.

Sight Distance - Includes Safe Sight Distance, Safe Stopping Site Distance, Passing Sight Distance, and Decision Site Distance as defined and regulated by Pennsylvania Code Title 67, Chapter 441 and PennDOT Design Manual, Part 2, Publication 13. Sight distance for intersection of streets, alleys, and driveways shall be measured (unobstructed) from a point 10 feet back from edge of pavement at a height of 3.5 feet above the pavement surface to another point 6 inches above the pavement surface.

Site - The site shall be defined as a parcel or parcels of land intended to have one or more buildings or intended to be subdivided into one or more lots.
 
ARTICLE II - DEFINITIONS

Slope - The face of an embankment of cut section; any ground whose surface makes an angle with the plane of the horizon. Slopes are usually expr essed in a percentage based upon vertical difference in feet per one hundred (100) feet of horizontal distance.

Soil, Percolation Test - A field test conducted to determine the absorption capacity of soil to a specified depth in a given location for the purpose of determining suitability of soil for on -site sewage disposal.

Street, Road or Highway - Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, parkway, lane, viaduct, alley, or any other ways used or intended to be used by vehicular  traffic or pedestrians whether public or private which are identified on the legally adopted Township street or highway plan or the official map together with all necessary appurtenances, including bridges, rights-of-way and traffic control improvements. The term shall not include the interstate highway system.

1.	Expressway - Highways designed for large volumes of high-speed traffic with access limited to grade separated intersections.

2.	Local Access Streets are those used primarily to provide access to abutting properties.

3.	Collector Streets are streets which give minimal emphasis to travel mobility, which is characterized by low travel speeds, full land  access,  neighborhood  penetration,  and which serve minor traffic generators such as local elementary schools, small individual industrial plants, offices, commercial facilities and warehouses not served by principal or minor arterials.

4.	Arterial Streets - are those serving large volumes of comparatively high-speed and long- distance traffic, and include facilities classified as main and secondary highways by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.

5.	Marginal Access Streets are minor streets, parallel and adjacent to arterial streets, providing access to abutting properties and control of intersections with the arterial street.

6.	Cul-de -sac is a minor street intersecting another street at one end and terminated at the other by a vehicular turnaround.

Structure - Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on  or  in  land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.

Subdivision - The division or re-division of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means into two (2) or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than ten (10) acres, not involving any new street or easement, access, or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.

Substantially Completed - Where in the judgment of the Township Engineer, at least ninety percent (90%) (based on the cost of the required improvements for which financial security was posted pursuant to the requirements of this Ordinance) of those improvements required  as  a condition for final approval have been completed in accordance with the approved plan, so that the project will be able to be used, occupied or operated for its intended use.

Surveyor - A licensed surveyor registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
 
ARTICLE II - DEFINITIONS

Swale - A low-lying stretch of  land characterized  as a  depression used  to carry surface water runoff.

Topsoil - Surface soils and subsurface soils which normally are fertile soils and soil material, ordinarily rich in organic matter or humus debris. Topsoil is usually found in the uppermost soil layer called the A Horizon.

Undeveloped Land - Any lot, tract or parcel of land which has not been graded or in any other manner improved.

Unit - A part of the property, structure or building designed or intended for any type of independent use, which has direct exit to a public street or way, or to an easement or right-of-way leading to a public street or way, and includes a proportionate undivided interest in the common elements, which is assigned to the property, structure or building.

Water Facility - Any water works, water supply works, water distribution system or part thereof, designed, intended or constructed to provide or distribute potable water.

Water Survey - An inventory of the source, quantity, yield and use of groundwater and surface- water resources within Haycock Township.

Watercourse  - An intermittent or perennial stream of water, river, brook, creek, swale; a channel or ditch for water, whether natural or man-made.

Wetlands - Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at  a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bog and similar areas.

Wetlands Delineation - The process by which wetland limits are determined. Wetlands must be delineated by a qualified specialist according to the 1989 Federal Manuals (as amended) for the Delineation of Jurisdictional Wetlands (whichever is greater) or according to  any  subsequent Federal or State regulation. Qualified specialist shall include those persons being Certified Professional Soil Scientists as registered with Registry of Certified  Professionals  in  Agronomy Crops and Soils (ARCPACS); or as contained on consultant's list of Pennsylvania Association of Professional Soil Scientists (PAPSS); or as registered with National Society of Consulting Soil Scientists (NSCSS), or as certified by State and/or Federal certification programs; or  by  a qualified  Biologist/Ecologist.

Woodlands – (Refer Forest.)
 
ARTICLE III - SUBMISSION PROCEDURES

Section 301. - General Procedure.

1.	Classification of Subdivision - Whenever any subdivision of land or land development is proposed, before any contract is made for the sale of any part thereof, and before any permit for the erection of a structure in such proposed subdivision or land development shall be granted, the Owner, or his authorized agent, shall apply for and secure approval of such proposed subdivision or land development in accordance with the following procedures for subdivision and land development.

2.	Pre-application DEP Consultation. Prior to the preparation of any plans, it is suggested that prospective developers consult with the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and/or Bucks County Health Department concerning soil suitability when on- site sewage disposal facilities are proposed.

3.	Pre-application  Conservation  District  Consultation.  Prospective  developers  should consult with the Bucks Conservation District re presentative concerning erosion and sediment control and geologic conditions at the proposed development.

4.	Pre-application PennDOT Consultation. When the development  site  has  frontage  on  a State highway and/or proposes access to a State highway, the de veloper should consult with PennDOT concerning design requirements which may be imposed in addition to the requirements of this Ordinance.

5.	Official Filing Date.

A.	For the purpose of these regulations, the official filing date shall be the date of the regular meeting of the Planning Commission next following the date complete application and plans are received in the Municipal Building; provided,  that should said regular meeting occur more than thirty (30) days following the submission of the application, the official filing date shall be the thirtieth (30th) day following the day the complete application has been submitted. An application will not be deemed  complete  unless  all  applicable  fees  have  been paid by the applicant and the application and plans conform with the plan requirements set forth in Article IV of this Ordinance.

B.	Upon receipt of an application for subdivision or land development approval, the Township Secretary shall affix to the application both the date of submittal and the official filing date.

C.	The application record shall be closed fourteen (14) days before the Planning Commission meeting at which the plan will be considered to allow time to examine and study the plans and all appropriate supporting documentation. The Township will not accept changes or  amendments  to  the  application  after  this date unless the applicant shall apply for a rescheduling of the meeting at which the plan will be considered before the Planning Commission and makes suitable provision for an extension of the review time. This policy shall apply to formal sketch, preliminary, and final plan submissions.

6.	Bucks County Planning Commission Review. All plans shall be submitted to  and reviewed by the Bucks County Planning Commission in accordance with its then prevailing rules and regulations.
 
ARTICLE III - SUBMISSION PROCEDURES

Section 302. - Fee Schedule.

1.	All filing, inspection and professional (engineering/legal) fees shall be submitted to Haycock Township.

2.	Plan Filing Fee.  A filing fee shall accompany the preliminary plan.  No application shall be accepted or acted upon unless payment is made to Haycock Township. The Haycock Township Board of Supervisors shall establish by resolution a schedule of fees to be paid by the subdivider or land developer to defray the cost of administering and processing of plans. The schedule of fees may be changed from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township.

3.	Review Fees.

A.	Review fees shall include reasonable and necessary charges by the Township's professional consultants or engineer for review and report to the Township, and shall be set by resolution. Such review fees shall be reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and customary charges by the Township Engineer or consultant for similar services in the community, but in no event shall fees exceed the rate or cost charged by the engineer or consultant to the Township when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants.

B.	In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such review fees, the applicant shall, within ten (10) days of the billing date, notify the Township that such fees are disputed, in which case the Township shall not delay or disapprove a subdivision or land development application due to the applicant's request over disputed fees.

C.	In the event that the Township and the applicant cannot agree on the amount of review fees which are reasonable and necessary, then the fees shall be recalculated and re-certifi ed by another professional engineer licensed as such by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania  and  chosen  mutually  by  the  Township and the applicant or developer.

4.	An applicant shall, by filing a plan, be then obligated to pay the fees herein provided. The professional (engineering/legal) fees required to be paid by this Section shall be promptly submitted to the Township by the applicant upon the submission of bills therefore to the applicant from time to time by the Board of Supervisors.

Section 303. - Lot Line Adjustment Procedure.

Lot line adjustment plans shall be initiated and submitted for review in the form of a Final Plan as specified in Section 402 and shall be otherwise reviewed in accordance with the procedures and standards of Section 305.

Section 304. - Minor Subdivision Procedure.

1.	Minor subdivision plans shall be initiated and submitted for review in the form of a Final Plan as specified in Section 402 and shall be otherwise reviewed in accordance with the procedures and standards of Section 305.
 
ARTICLE III - SUBMISSION PROCEDURES

2.	Additional Subdivision. Any additional subdivision of a tract from which a minor subdivision has already been approved shall be deemed to be a major subdivision for the purposes of this Ordinance and shall follow the procedure applying thereto, if the additional subdivision is submitted for review within five (5) years of the approval of the minor  subdivision.

3.	All minor subdivision plans shall contain a notice regarding future subdivision  (refer sample in Appendix "B").

Section 305. - Major Subdivision and Land Development Procedure

1.	Sketch Plan. Prospective subdividers and developers are strongly urged to  discuss possible development sites with the Planning Commission prior to submission of a preliminary plan. A sketch plan may be presented for review not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the regular meeting of the Planning Commission.  A copy of the application for sketch plan review by the Bucks County Planning Commission must accompany the submission. Submission of a sketch plan will not constitute a formal filing of a subdivision or land development plan with the Board of Supervisors. Sketch plans should include those items listed in Article IV, Plan Requirements.

2.	Preliminary Plan.

A.	Submission of Preliminary Plans.

(1)	The preliminary plan and all information and procedures relating thereto shall in all respects be in compliance with the applicable provisions of this Ordinance. It is the responsibility of the subdivider or developer to coordinate plans with the respective private and public service agencies including but not limited to (where applicable) Bucks County Planning Commission, Bucks Conservation District, Bucks County Department of Health,	Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, PennDOT, and Fire Marshall.

(2)	The application form shall be accompanied by the requisite fee as set forth in Section 302 of this Ordinance and by not less than six (6) copies of all required material and not less than eleven (11) prints of the preliminary plan of the subdivision or development; or as amended by Township Resolution from time to time.

(3)	The Township Secretary shall forward two (2) copies of the preliminary plan prints and required materials to the Township Engineer for review and comment.

(4)	The Township Secretary shall forward the remaining copies of the preliminary plan prints and  required  materials  to  the  Planning Commission.

(5)	When applicable, the submission shall be accompanied by a Planning Module for Land Development, as required by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.

B.	Review of Preliminary Plans.
 
ARTICLE III - SUBMISSION PROCEDURES

(1)	In cases where the subdivision or land development adjoins an existing or proposed state highway or has proposed streets entering onto state highways, the developer shall submit the plans to the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation for review.

(2)	The Planning Commission will consider the plan to determine if it meets the standards set forth in  this  Ordinance,  Township  Zoning  Ordinance, and all other applicable Ordinances and Regulations of the Township.

(3)	The Planning Commission shall act on the preliminary plan in time for the Board of Supervisors to render their decision within ninety (90) days from the official filing date. Any requests for modification or waiver of the requirements of this Ordinance shall be in writing in accordance with PA Act 170, as amended; and be reviewed by the Planning Commission for advisory  comments.

C.	Planning  Commission  Recommendation.

(1)	The Planning Commission shall recommend  whether  the  preliminary plan shall be approved, approved with modifications, or disapproved, and shall notify the Board of Supervisors in writing.

(2)	In making its recommendation, the Planning Commission shall consider the recommendations of the Township Engineer, Township staff, Bucks County Planning Commission, interested residents, and any agency or agencies from which a review was requested under subsection 305.2.A.(3) of this Ordinance.

D.	Township Engineer Review. All plans and associated documents shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer, prior to the transmission of such plans to the Board of Supervisors.

E.	Re-submission of Preliminary Plans. A revised plan submitted after disapproval shall be considered, and processed as a new plan submission. A revised plan submitted after approval shall only be considered a new plan submission if, in the opinion of the Township, it has been substantially revised after said approval.

F.	All plans shall evidence compliance with requirements of the Township Zoning Ordinance. Failure of the applicant to obtain all necessary variances, special exceptions, and/or conditional use appro vals prior  to  preliminary  plan  approval shall be a cause for denial of the plan.

G.	Approval of Preliminary Plans.

(1)	The Board of Supervisors shall act on the preliminary plan within ninety
(90) days of the official filing date. Failure to do so shall be deemed an approval. Before acting on a preliminary plan, the Board of Supervisors may hold a hearing thereon after public notice.

(2)	The Board of Supervisors shall notify the applicant of its decision to approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the preliminary plan in writing. Such notice shall be given to the applicant in person or mailed to him at his last known address not later than fifteen (15) days following the decision. If the plan is approved with conditions or disapproved, the Board of Supervisors shall specify in their notice the conditions which
 
ARTICLE III - SUBMISSION PROCEDURES

must be met and/or the defects found in the plan, and the requirements which have not been  met,  including  specific  reference  to  provisions of the Pennsylvania  Municipalities  Planning Code,  53  P.S. 10101,  or  any other statute or provision of this ordinance which has not been fulfilled.

(3)	Approval of the preliminary plan shall constitute approval of  the subdivision or land development as to the character and intensity of development; and the arrangement  and  approximate  dimensions  of streets, lots, and other planned features. The approval binds the subdivider or developer to the general scheme of the subdivision shown, unless a revised preliminary plan is submitted,  and  permits  the subdivider to proceed with final detailed design of improvements, to arrange for guarantee to cover installation of the improvements, and to prepare the final plan. Approval of the preliminary plan does not authorize the sale of lots nor the recording of the preliminary plan.

(4)	Where preliminary plan approval is given subject to conditions, the applicant shall accept or reject any or all of the conditions   within fifteen
(15) days from the date that he/she receives the written notification from the Board of Supervisors. Failure to accept or reject such conditions in writing within the foregoing time limit shall result in the conditional approval of the plat to become automatically rescinded pursuant to Section 503(9) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and, in the alternate, the plan is denied due to noncompliance with the specified conditions.

3.	Final Plan.

A.	Submission of Final Plans.

(1)	After the subdivider or  developer  has  received official notification from the Board of Supervisors that the preliminary plan has been approved, he must submit a final plan in accordance with the provisions of Section
508  of  the  Municipalities  Planning  Code.     Application  to  the  Bucks
County Planning Commission with appropriate fee must accompany the final plan submission when deemed necessary by the Township.

(2)	The final plan shall conform in all respects with the approved preliminary plan. If it does not, the plan submitted shall be considered a revised preliminary plan and shall be forwarded by the Township Secretary to the Planning Commission  for review  and  recommendation as  a preliminary plan.

(3)	The subdivider or developer must submit with the final plan a guarantee for the installation of improvements which meets the  requirements  of Article VI.

(4)	The application form shall be accompanied  by  the  requisite  inspection and engineering fees as set forth in Section 302.

(5)	Documented approval of the Planning Module for Land Development by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection shall be part of the requisite materials accompanying the final plan submission.
 
ARTICLE III - SUBMISSION PROCEDURES

(6)	The subdivider or developer shall submit eleven (11) prints of the final subdivision or land development plans and at least six (6) copies of all other required information.

(7)	Upon receipt of final plan, the Township Secretary shall forward  the original plans and five (5) copies of the plans and one (1) copy of all the other	material to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation; two (2) copies of the plan and required materials to the Township Engineer for review and comment; and copies to such other agencies whose recommendations would be pertinent to the processing of the plan.

B.	Review of Final Plans.

(1)	The Planning Commission shall review the plan and requisite materials for compliance with the approved preliminary plan and for conformance to requirements of this Ordinance.

(2)	The Planning Commission shall act on the final plan in time for the Board of Supervisors to render their decision within ninety (90) days from the official filing date.

C.	Planning  Commission  Recommendation.

(1)	The Planning Commission shall recommend whether the final plan shall be approved, approved with conditions, or disapproved, and shall notify the Board of Supervisors in writing.

(2)	In making its recommendation, the Planning Commission shall consider the recommendations of the Township Engineer, the Bucks County Planning Commission, the  Bucks  Conservation  District,  PennDOT,  and the recommendations of any agency or  agencies  from  which  a  review was requested under subsection 305.3.A.(7).

D.	Township Engineer Review. All plans and associated documents shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer prior to the transmission of such plans to the Board of Supervisors.

E.	Re-submission of Final Plans. A revised plan submitted after denial shall be considered and processed as a new final plan submission.

F.	Approval of Final Plans. The Board of Supervisors shall act upon the application for approval of a final plan and render its decision and communicate it to the applicant not later than ninety (90) days following the date of the regular meeting of the Planning Commission next following the date the application is filed, provided that should the next regular meeting occur more than thirty (30) days following the filing of the application, said ninety (90) day period shall be measured from the thirtieth (30th) day following the day the application has been filed.

(1)	The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be in writing and shall be communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to him at his last known address not later than fifteen (15) days following the decision.
 
ARTICLE III - SUBMISSION PROCEDURES

(2)	When the application is not approved in terms as filed, the decision shall specify the defects found in the application and describe the requirements which have not been met an d shall, in each case, cite to the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code or any other statute and the provisions of this Ordinance and any other ordinance relied upon.

(3)	Failure of the Board of Supervisors to render a decision and communicate it to the applicant within the time  and  manner  required herein shall be deemed an approval of the application in terms as presented unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time or change in the prescribed  manner  of  pres entation  of communication of the decision,  in which case,  the failure to  meet the extended time or change in manner  of  presentation  or  communication shall have like effect.

(4)	Where final plan approval is given  subject  to  conditions,  the  applicant shall accept or reject any or all of the conditions within fifteen (15) days from the date that he receives the written notification from the Board of Supervisors. Failure to accept or reject such conditions in writing within the foregoing time limit shall result in the conditional approval of the plat to become automatically rescinded pursuant to Section 503(9) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and in the alternate, the plan is denied due to noncompliance with the specified conditions.

G.	Recording of Final Plans.

(1)	Upon approval of the final plan, the subdivider or developer shall prepare two (2) linen reproductions of the original final record plan, including all plan sheets, and five (5) paper prints, all executed and notarized by the applicant bearing appropriate engineering and surveying  seals,  which shall be submitted to the Township not later than thirty (30) days after approval. These plans, upon satisfaction of all conditions attached to the approval, will be signed by the Board of Supervisors. A copy of the signed final plan shall be recorded in the office of the Bucks County Recorder of Deeds within ninety (90) days after approval of the final plan or the approval of the Board of Supervisors shall be null and void. The final plan must be recorded before proceeding with the sale of lots or construction of buildings.

(2)	Recording the final plan shall be an irrevocable offer  to  dedicate  all streets and other public ways to public use, and to dedicate or reserve all park reservations and other public areas to public use unless reserved by the subdivider as hereinafter provided. The approval of the final plan shall not impose any duty upon the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township concerning maintenance of the improvement s  offered for dedication nor shall such approval be  construed  as  an  acceptance  of such dedication.

(3)	The subdivider shall place a notation on the final plan if there is no offer of dedication to the public of streets and certain designated public areas, in which event the title to such areas shall remain with the Owner, and the Township shall assume no responsibility for improvement or maintenance thereof; which fact shall be noted on the plan.
 
ARTICLE III - SUBMISSION PROCEDURES

Section 306. – Rese rved.

Section 307. - Time Limitation of Plan Approval.

When an application for approval of a plan, whether preliminary  or  final,  has  been  approved without conditions or approved by the applicant's acceptance of conditions, no subsequent change or amendment in the zoning, subdivision or other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied to adversely affect the right of the applicant to commence and to complete any aspect of the approved development in accordance with the terms of such approval within five (5) years of such approval. The five-year period shall be counted from the date of the preliminary plan approval. Failure to substantially complete the required improvements within the aforesaid five year period, or within any extension thereof, as may be granted by the Board of Supervisors or as may be permitted by Section 508 (4) (v and vi) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code for staged developments, shall make the application subject to any and all changes in zoning, subdivision, and any other  governing  ordinance  enacted  by  the Township subsequent to the date of the initial preliminary plan approval.

Section 308. - Modifications.

1.	General. The Board of Supervisors may grant a modification of the requirements of one or more provisions  of this Ordinance if the literal enforcement will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question, provided that such modification will not be contrary to the public interest and that the purpose and intent of the Ordinance is observed.

2.	Procedure. All requests for modification shall be in writing and shall accompany and be part of the application for development. The request shall state in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which the request is based, the provision or provisions of the Ordinance involved, and the minimum modification necessary.

3.	Requests for modification shall be referred to the Planning Commission for advisory comments.
 
ARTICLE IV - PLAN REQUIREMENTS

Section 401. - Sketch Plan.

1.	Purpose.	A sketch plan is an optional submission. It is offered to give the applicant an opportunity to consult early and informally in the plan preparation phase with the municipality and Bucks County Planning Commission.  The pu rpose of this submission is to allow the municipality and applicant an opportunity to discuss lot layout, street layout, location of buildings, arrangement and location of open space, etc., before detailed engineering is done. The municipality may comment on not only whether the sketch plan meets the objectives of Township Ordinances but, also if they feel it is consistent with sound planning and design principles. It is not intended in any way to replace  the preliminary plan, but rather to give the applicant guidance in preparing the much more detailed preliminary plan. Recommendations and comments made by the Township in response to Sketch Plan Submission shall in no way be regarded as an official approval, nor shall such action grant any legal rights to the applicant or immunity from full compliance with requirements and procedures set forth for Preliminary and Final Plans.

2.	Data furnished in a sketch plan shall be at the discretion of the subdivider but is suggested to include the following:

A.	Tax map parcel number of property involved.

B.	Tract boundaries and total acreage.

C.	Location map.

D.	North point.

E.	Streets on and adjacent to the tract.

F.	Significant topographical, geological, and physical features  including  but  not limited to floodplains, steep slopes, boulders, wetlands, etc., which may impact or limit the proposed use of the property.

G.	Existing road/utility and other easements and rights-of-way.

H.	Proposed general street layout.

I.	Proposed   general   lot   layout,   including   location   of   open   space   and   other preservation  areas.

3.	A subdivision sketch plan should be drawn to scale although precise dimensions are not required.

Section 402. - Lot Line Adjustment and Minor Subdivision.

1.	Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide an expeditious means of subdivision approval for lot line adjustments and minor subdivisions. A lot line adjustment involves relocation of one or more existing boundary line(s) between  two  adjacent  lots,  or  the shifting of boundary lines to increase the area of an existing lot; provided however, that the lot line adjustment results in the same number or fewer lots than existed prior to the lot line adjustment.
 
ARTICLE IV - PLAN REQUIREMENTS

2.	Plan Preparation.

A.	The plan shall be drawn at a scale of 1"=50' or 1"=100'.

B.	Dimensions shall be set forth in feet and decimal parts thereof and bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds.

C.	Each sheet shall be numbered and shall show its relationship to the total number of sheets.

D.	When the plan is a revision of a previously approved plan, dotted lines shall be used to show features or locations to be abandoned and solid lines to show the currently proposed features. Notations of revisions  shall  be  numbered  and dated.

E.	Plan shall be so prepared and bear an adequate legend to indicate clearly which features are existing and which are proposed.

F.	The boundary line of the subdivision shall be shown as a solid heavy line.

G.	Plan shall be on sheets either 18" x 24" or 24" x 36". All plan sheets shall be of the same size. All lettering shall be so drawn as to be legible if the plan should be reduced to half size.

3.	General Information.   Plan shall show or be accompanied by the following information:

A.	Name of subdivision or land development.

B.	Name and address of owner of record and applicant.

C.	Name and address of the firm which prepared the plan, and professional seal of the individual certifying the accuracy of the plan and compliance with applicable standards.

D.	Date of preparation of the plan, a descriptive list of revisions to the plan, and the revision dates.

E.	Tax parcel numbers, deed book and page numbers of properties involved including any deed restrictions to the property an d recorded plan book and page number for previously recorded subdivisions. A copy of the current deed(s) for the tract shall be submitted with the plan.

F.	Zoning requirements, including but not limited to the following:

(1)	Applicable  district.

(2)	Lot size and yard requirements.

(3)	Natural Resource Protection Standards.

(4)	Copy of order indicating any variances or Special Exceptions granted.

G.	Location map showing relation of site to adjoining properties, proposed property lines, Zoning District boundaries, and streets within 1000 feet.  Scale 1"=800'.
 
ARTICLE IV - PLAN REQUIREMENTS

H.	North point.

I.	Written and graphic scales for plan and location map.

J.	Total acreage of the site (net and gross); proposed lot sizes (net and gross); area of ultimate right-of-way; and in the case of lot line adjustments, area being conveyed, and a summary of pre/post development areas of lots involved.

K.	Tract boundary (as determined by field survey).

L.	Both existing and proposed property lines, including bearing and distance information.

M.	Streets on and adjacent to the site with legal and future rights-of-way.

N.	All existing buildings/structures (temporary or permanent; and their  uses), driveways, wells, sewer systems, utility easements, utility poles (with ownership and pole number I.D. certification), etc.

O.	Monuments - existing and proposed.

P.	USGS contours.

4.	In addition to requirements of Section 402.2. and 402.3. above, minor subdivision plans shall show or be accompanied by the following information:

A.	Soil types within the site based on maps contained in the "Soil Survey of Bucks and Philadelphia Counties, Pennsylvania", U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, 1975. A table shall indicate each soil's limitations for community  development.

B.	Contour lines measured at vertical intervals of two (2) feet.  Contour lines shall be determined by on-site survey, not interpretation of USGS maps. At a minimum, contours shall be established at location of proposed driveways, dwellings, septic systems and other areas of development as deemed necessary by the Township.

C.	Datum to which contour elevations refer.  Benchmark shall be identified.

D.	Existing vegetation including wooded areas, large trees over 6" caliper standing alone, and other significant vegetations limits of trees/vegetation to be removed/preserved.

E.	Planning Modules for Land Development as required by Chapter 71 of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act.

F.	Proposed improvements including buildings (and their uses),  driveways,  sewer lines, storm drains, culverts,  street  improvements,  grading,  and  other requirements of this Ordinance.

G.	Soil erosion and sedimentation control plan prepared in accordance with Section 518 of this Ordinance.

H.	Existing features as may be required by Section 403.4. when deemed necessary by the Township.
 
ARTICLE IV - PLAN REQUIREMENTS

Section 403. - Preliminary Plan - Land Developments and Major Subdivisions

1.	Purpose - The purpose of the Preliminary Plan is to enable the Township to examine proposals for compliance with Zoning, Subdivision and Land Development, and other Township Ordinances. Preliminary Plans are  required  for  all  land  developments  and major subdivisions.

2.	Plan Preparation.

A.	The preliminary plan shall be at a scale of not more than fifty (50) feet to the inch.

B.	Plan and Profile views shall be drawn at a scale of 1"=50' and 1"=5' respectively.
Horizontal and vertical scales of 1"=20' and 1"=2' shall be permitted when greater detail is required as deemed necessary by the Township Engineer.

C.	Enlarged details of special features, intersections, drainage facilities, etc., shall be drawn at a scale of 1"=20', or 1"=10'.

D.	Sheet sizes shall be either 18"x24" or 24"x36".

E.	All sheets shall be the same size and be numbered relative to the total number of sheets (i.e. 1 of 4, etc.) If a new sheet is added, all sheets shall be appropriately renumbered. Use of letters to denote new sheets (i.e. Sheet 1A of 4) shall not be permitted.

F.	Where two or more sheets are required to show the entire tract, a reduced scale key plan shall be included to show how the sheets correspond.

G.	A reduced scale plan of the entire site at a scale greater than 50 feet to the inch may be required in cases where it will facilitate the review process.

H.	Plan shall be so prepared and bear an adequate legend to clearly indicate which features are existing and which are proposed.

I.	Site outboundary shall be shown as solid heavy line.

3.	General Information.  All preliminary plans shall show the following general information.

A.	Proposed subdivision or land development name or identifying title.   Name shall not duplicate an approved plan or plan submitted for review.

B.	Name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) of the property, including reference to deed book, volume and page of current legal owner.

C.	Name and address of applicant.

D.	Name and address of the firm which prepared the plan, and professional seal of the individual certifying its accuracy and compliance with applicable standards.

E.	Date of preparation of the plan and a descriptive list of revisions to the plan, and the revision dates.

F.	North point.
 
ARTICLE IV - PLAN REQUI REMENTS

G.	Location map showing the relationship of the site to adjoining properties, proposed property lines, Zoning District boundaries, and streets within 1000 feet. Scale of the location map shall be 1"=800'.

H.	Written and graphic scales for plan and location map.

I.	Tract boundary with bearing and distance information.

J.	Tax map parcel number(s) of parcels which comprise the subdivision or land development, deed book and page numbers of the properties involved including deed restrictions to the property, recorded plan book, and page number for the previously recorded subdivision (if any). A copy of the current deed(s) for the tract shall be submitted with the plan.

K.	Zoning requirements including the following where applicable:

(1)	Zoning  district;  and  district  boundaries  if  within  500  feet  of  the  site boundary.

(2)	Lot size and yard requirements.

(3)	Variances or special exceptions granted.

(4)	Buffer yard requirements.

(5)	Site capacity calculations.

(6)	Inventory of all natural resources, natural resource protection rates, allowable disturbance to each resource, and  proposed  disturbance  to each resource.

(7)	Parking  requirements.

(8)	Proposed  use  including  Zoning  Ordinance  designation  (i.e.  Use B1, Single Family Detached).

(9)	Allowable and proposed density.

(10)	Impervious surface area ratio, allowable impervious ratio and tabulation of proposed impervious area.

(11)	Dwelling unit mix.

L.	Tax map parcel number and names of current owners of immediately adjacent lands.

M.	Total acreage of the site (net and gross) and number of proposed lots and/or dwelling units, or gross leasable floor area.

N.	Statement identifying existing and proposed method of sewage  disposal  and water service.  If public, name of agency providing service.
 
ARTICLE IV - PLAN REQUIREMENTS

O.	Statements regarding maintenance responsibilities of permanent stormwater management control facilities, swales, drainageways, and open space areas.

4.	Existing   Features   Plan.	Within the tract proposed for subdivision and/or land development, and within 100 feet of the tract boundaries, the following information shall be shown on the Preliminary Plan:

A.	All existing property lines of site if currently containing several smaller parcels.

B.	All property and easement boundaries defined by bearing and  distance information.

C.	Total width of streets and alleys; names of streets and alleys; total width of legal rights-of-way and ultimate rights-of-way.  Half widths of streets and alleys shall be dimensioned as measured from physical centerline to legal and ultimate rights-of-way.

D.	Buildings (and their uses), driveways, wells, sewer systems, pipelines, underground and/or above ground storage tanks, pools, fences, silos, water systems, fire hydrants, valves, towers, etc.

E.	Utility poles with identification information/ numbers and street lights.

F.	Contour lines measured at vertical intervals of two (2) feet.  Contour lines shall be determined by on-site survey, not interpretation of USGS maps. Location of survey benchmark shall be noted. Benchmark shall be based on USGS datum reference points. Assumed benchmark elevations and arbitrary control points will not be acceptable unless approved by the Township Engineer.

G.	Monumentation and pins within and along site outboundary, rights-of-way, easements, etc.

H.	Soil types within the site based on maps contained in the "Soil Survey of Bucks and Philadelphia Counties, Pennsylvania", U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, 1975. Summary Table shall be  included  on  the  plan listing:

(1)	Soils limitations for community development.

(2)	Hydric soils - soils shall be defined as hydric if listed within U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service "Hydric Soils of the State of Pennsylvania 1985" as amended.

(3)	Floodplain soils.

(4)	Prime Agriculture Soils.

I.	Area of vegetation including wooded areas and large trees over 6" caliper standing alone. Areas of scrub growth with an understory height of at least 4 feet shall be delineated independently of wooded areas.

J.	Watercourses, storm sewers, culverts, bridges, or any other significant drainage features and facilities with associated inverts, pipe/cul vert sizes, material, and lengths, and all applicable dimensional information.
 
ARTICLE IV - PLAN REQUIREMENTS

K.	Floodplain areas or districts including information on (100) year flood elevations.
FEMA cross sections and elevations shall be utilized to delineate floodplain boundary where  detailed study information  is available. Where detailed  study information is not available, 100 year flood elevations shall be calculated utilizing HEC I computations to generate flow information and HEC II computations to calculate water surface elevations. Structures culverts, obstructions, bridges or any other significant feature within 500 feet downstream of the site  shall  be included within the study to account for potential  backwater  affects.  Basins, ponds, flood control facilities or any other significant drainage facility within upstream tributary area shall be included in the study. Use of TR -55 "Urban Hydrology for small watersheds" United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service will be an acceptable alternate method for calculating 100 year flow rates. Use of other methods must be approved by  the  Township Engineer.

L.	Utility, private and/or public easements, and purposes for which the easements have been established with all applicable restrictions and/or covenants.

M.	Wetlands, wetland margins, ponds, pond shorelines, lakes, lake shorelines with total area of coverage listed. List of soil consultants qualifications must be submitted with a certification as to accuracy of the delineation. Certification must properly reference plan by title, date and parcel number.

N.	Steep slopes shall be independently mapped by shading for the following ranges: a.	8-15%
b.          16-25%

c.          Over 25%

O.	Pre-developed drainage boundaries with associated areas, time of concentration paths, and runoff factors.

5.	Site Improvement Plan.   A  Site  Improvement  Plan  shall  be  prepared  and  include  the following proposed improvements:

A.	Lot layout, easement and right-of-way boundaries.

B.	Location  of  dwellings  and  structures  including  exterior  dimensions,  first  floor elevation, and garage floor elevation.

C.	Sanitary and storm sewer layout, pipe lengths, size, material, slopes, inverts, and grate/manhole  elevations.

D.	Location of water mains and fire hydrants, electric and gas utilities.

E.	Streets,   curb,   sidewalk,   pedestrian   ramps,   pedestrian   paths,   recreational facilities.

F.	Street and alleys widths.

G.	Driveway  locations.
 
ARTICLE IV - PLAN REQUIREMENTS

H.	Intersections.

I.	Cartway   widening   improvements   and   appropriate   dimensions   from   existing roadway  centerlines.

J.	Existing and proposed sight distances at existing and/or proposed intersections.
Sight  distances  shall  be  determined  in  accordance  with  '67  PA  Code, Chapter 441.

K.	Clear sight triangles at proposed and existing intersections.

L.	Parking areas, parking stalls, aisles, and associated dimensions.

M.	Curb and cul-de-sac radii.

N.	Culverts, bridges, basins, and any other significant drainage facility.

O.	Street signage.

6.	Grading Plan.	Grading Plan shall include the following:

A.	General  site  layout,  property  lines,  easement  boundaries,  structures,  streets, curb, sidewalk, etc.

B.	First  floor  elevation  and  garage  floor  elevation  of  all  existing  and  proposed buildings.

C.	Existing and proposed contours.

D.	Bottom  and  top  of  curb  elevations  around  curb  returns  at  intersection,  and turnaround area on cul-de-sac streets.

E.	General layout of storm sewer.

F.	Grate elevations of storm sewer inlets.

G.	Rim elevations of manholes.

7.	Drainage Plan.	Drainage Plan shall include the following:

A.	General site layout of streets, buildings, sidewalk and curb, and storm sewer.

B.	Post   development   drainage   boundaries   with    associated    areas,    time    of concentration, flow path and runoff factors listed.

C.	Existing  contours.

D.	Proposed grading.

E.	Required stage/storage chart for detention basins.

F.	Discharge location of all roof drains and sump pump lines.
 
ARTICLE IV - PLAN REQUIREMENTS

8.	Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan. Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan shall be prepared in accordance with applicable provisions of '25 PA Code, Chapter  102, "Erosion Control", DEP Erosion  and  Sediment  Pollution  Control  Program  Manual, Erosion and Sedimentation Pollution Control Plan Guide for Small Projects, (as published by the Southeast Pennsylvania Association of Conservation Districts), and Special Protection Waters Implementation Handbook, and in accordance with Section 518 of this Ordinance.

9.	Recreation, Landscaping and Lighting Plan. Landscaping and Lighting Plan shall include the following existing and proposed features:

A.	General lot layout and setbacks, easement and right-of-way boundaries.

B.	Location of driveways, structures, curb and sidewalk.

C.	Layout  of  sanitary  sewer,  associated  laterals,  storm  sewer,  water,  electric  and gas utilities.

D.	Proposed   tree   and   planting   locations   coordinated   with   underground   utilities maintaining required horizontal separation distances.

E.	Location of proposed fencing outside of the dripline of trees intended to be saved in construction areas.

F.	Location of parking area lighting, driveway lamp posts, and street light fixtures with radial extent of illumination in form of isolux contours in units of horizontal foot candles (HFC).  Isolux lines shall be in increments of 0.5 HFC.

G.	Buffer yards with applicable yard widths dimensioned.

H.	Proposed layout and design of recreational facilities and buffering for same.

10.	Plan and Profiles. Plan and Profiles shall be prepared for all streets and utilities where improvements are proposed or are being extended from existing facilities;  and  shall include the following:

A.	Profiles shall include at a minimum the following:

(1)	Existing and proposed ground elevations and profile.

(2)	Proposed profile of ground and/or street.

(3)	All applicable vertical curve data for streets.

(4)	Sight distance requirements.

(5)	Sanitary sewer, storm drainage, and water service facilities; vertical separation distances at utility crossings, and encasements; inverts  of pipes at crossing locations.

(6)	All utility and storm pipe sizes, materials, slopes, inverts and lengths.

(7)	Inlet and manhole inverts, rim and grate elevations; top of wall elevations for endwalls and headwalls.
 
ARTICLE IV - PLAN REQUIREMENTS

(8)	Centerline stationing along profile.

(9)	Profiles for streets shall follow roadway centerlines.

(10)	Stationing of sanitary sewer laterals and inverts for same.

(11)	Manhole and inlet numbering corresponding to profile view.

(12)	Profiles along existing streets for areas of cartway widening shall include existing edge of road profile and bottom of curb profile.

B.	Plan views shall include at a minimum the following:

(1)	Right -of-way and easement boundaries.

(2)	Dimensioning of street widths.

(3)	Location of curb, sidewalk, driveway entrances and pedestrian ramps.

(4)	Centerline stationing along streets.

(5)	Location  of  all  sanitary  sewer  mains  and  laterals,  storm  sewer,  roof drains and sump pump leaders, water mains and gas mains.

(6)	Manhole and inlet numbering corresponding to profile view.

(7)	Location of street and regulatory signs.

(8)	Proposed contours within limits of right-of-way boundaries.

(9)	Top and bottom of curb elevations at ends of returns; and centrally along returns, at intersections and other critical locations as deemed necessary by Township Engineer.

(10)	Plan views of improvements along existing streets shall include existing centerline and edge of road spot elevations every 25 linear feet.

11.	Construction Details Plan.   The Construction Details Plan shall include but not be limited to the following general construction details:

A.	Roadway/widening  construction.

B.	Utilities installation, bedding and backfill.

C.	Storm sewer installation, bedding and backfill.

D.	Sanitary sewer installation, bedding and backfill.

E.	Detention/retention basin, basin berm, and basin outlet structure construction.

F.	Traffic Control.

G.	Miscellaneous erosion and sedimentation control details.
 
ARTICLE IV - PLAN REQUIREMENTS

H.	Sidewalk and curb installation specifications.

I.	Right -of-way and easement restoration.

J.	Special  structures.

K.	Miscellaneous drainage swale design information.

L.	Fencing details.

M.	Any  other  details  as  deemed  necessary  by  the  Township  and/or  Township Engineer.

12.	Additional   Documentation.	The following information shall be submitted with the preliminary plan where applicable:

A.	Traffic Impact Study prepared pursuant to Section 406.

B.	Sewage Facilities Planning Modules prepared pursuant to Section 407.

C.	Water Resources Impact Study prepared pursuant to Section 408.

13.	Notice of Preliminary Plan. For all subdivisions which propose ten (10) lots or more, notice of filing of preliminary plan shall be given by the applicant to all abutting landowners of record.

A.	Proof of notice shall be given at the time of application and shall be by certified letter to each abutting landowner of record.

B.	The foregoing letter shall identify the following:

(1)	Date of Application.

(2)	Record owner of the tract to be developed.

(3)	The  location  of  the  tract  to  be  developed  indicating  street  address, zoning district and tax map parcel number.

(4)	Description  of  the  proposed  development  (i.e.  number/size  of  lots, proposed use).

Section 404. - Final Plan (Record).

1.	Upon completion of all conditions of preliminary and final plan approval, applicants shall submit two (2) clear and legible black line prints on mylar and five (5) paper prints of the Record Plan of Subdivision and/or land development including all sheets of the plan set.

2.	Drafting Standards - The  standards required for a record plan shall be the  standards outlined in Section 402 and 403.

3.	All plans must be acknowledged with a raised Notary Seal affixed; raised seal of registered engineer and/or surveyor responsible for the plan; and raised seal of architect and/or landscape architect who collaborated in the preparation of the plan; and if the applicant is a corporation, a raised Corporate Seal. All plans must be approved by the Board of Supervisors together  with the raised official seal.
 
ARTICLE IV - PLAN REQUIREMENTS

4.	General Information  - The general information required for a Record Plan shall be the general information required by Section 402 and 403.

5.	Existing Features - The existing features required to be shown on a Record Plan shall be the existing features required by Section 402 and 403.

6.	Proposed Improvements  - Proposed improvements as required by Section 402 and 403 shall be included on the Record Plan.

7.	Notes   and   Certificates   -   The  Record  Plan  must  include  the  required  notes  and certificates:

A.	On all applications where Improvement Construction Plans are required, the following note shall appear on the Record Plan:  "Sheets 2 through	inclusive, on record at the Township, shall be considered a part of the approved final plan as if recorded with same." These shall be listed by sheet number and title on the Record Plan.

B.	The signature of the Registered Engineer and/or Surveyor certifying that the plan represents a survey made by him; that any existing  monumentation  shown hereon exists as located; and the dimensional and geodetic details are correct.

C.	An acknowledgment as follows:

(1)	Where the owner(s) are individuals, all shall join as follows:


 
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania:
 


___________________________ Signature of Owner
 

SS.

County of Bucks

On the ______ day of _______________, 20____, before me the subscriber, a Notary Public of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, residing in __________________ personally appeared (name(s) of all owners), known to me (or satisfactorily proven) to be the persons whose name(s) (is/are) subscribed to the foregoing plan, and acknowledge that (he/she/they)(is/are) the registered owner(s) of the designated plan, that all necessary approvals of the plan have been obtained and is endorsed thereon, and that (he/she/they) desire that the foregoing plan be recorded according to law.

Witness my hand and notarial seal, the day and year aforesaid.

___________________________ Notary Public

My  Commission  Expires  ___________________________ (SEAL)
 
ARTICLE IV - PLAN REQUIREMENTS

(2)	Where the owner is a corporation:

 
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania County of Bucks
 


SS.
 
On  the  ______  day  of  _______________,  20____,  before  me  the  subscriber,  a  Notary  Public  of  the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, residing in ___________	personally appeared (name of officer of corporation), who acknowledged (himself/herself) to be the (president/secretary) of (name of the corporation), a corporation, and that as such (president or secretary), being authorized to do so, (he/she) executed the foregoing plan by signing that the said corporation is the registered owner of the designated land, that all necessary approvals of the plan have been obtained and is endorsed thereon, and that (he/she/they) desire that the foregoing plan be recorded according to law.

Witness my hand and notarial seal, the day and year aforesaid.

________________________ Notary Public

My  Commission  Expires__________________________ (SEAL)


D.	Approved Notation by the Township shall be as follows:

 
Approved   by   the   Board   of   Supervisors   of   the   Township   of   Haycock   this    	
 	, 20	.
 
day   of
 

_____________________________

_____________________________


E.	Township Planning Commission Notations:

Recommended  for  approval  by  the  Haycock  Township  Planning  Commission  this	day  of
 	, 20	.

_____________________________

_____________________________

F.	Bucks County Planning Commission Notation: BCPC  No.  ______________________________
PROCESSED  AND  REVIEWED.	Report  prepared  by  the  Bucks  County  Planning  Commission  in
accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code. Certified this date _____ 	

_____________________________________________ Executive Director, Bucks County Planning Commission
 
ARTICLE IV - PLAN REQUIREMENTS



G.	Recording Notation:

"Recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds, Bucks County, Pennsylvania in Plan Book ________ Page	on the	day of	, 20	.

H.	Signatures to appear on Plan  - the following signatures shall be placed directly on the plan in black ink:

(1)	The owner or owners of the land. If the owner of the land is a corporation, the signatures of the president and secretary and the corporate seal shall appear.

(2)	The notary public acknowledging the owner's statement of intent.

(3)	The licensed engineer and/or surveyor who prepared the plan. If an architect and/or a landscape architect collaborated in the preparation of the plan, his signature and seal shall also appear.

(4)	The Bucks County Planning Commission.

(5)	The Planning Commission of Haycock Township.

(6)	The Supervisors of Haycock Township.

Section 405. - As-built Plans. Upon completion of public improvements (prior to acceptance of same by the Board of  Supervisors in  accordance with  provisions set  forth in  Article VI of  this Ordinance),  the subdivider or developer will furnish the Township with as -built plans for all utilities, roads, and stormwater management facilities. As-built plans for detention/retention basins and/or underground storage facilities utilized to control stormwater discharge must be prepared and submitted to the Township Engineer for review immediately upon completion of rough grading to verify required stage/storage capacity. As-built plans for these facilities must be reviewed for compliance with stormwater management plan design requirements prior to any additional site work. As-built plans shall contain information listed in Appendix "D".

Section 406. - Traffic Impact Study.

1.	Purpose - The Traffic Impact Study will enable Haycock Township to assess the impact of the proposed development on the transportation system, both highways and public transportation, in the Township. Purpose of the impact study is to insure that proposed developments do not adversely affect the transportation network and to identify any traffic problems associated with access between the site and the existing  transportation network. The study's purpose is also to delineate solutions to potential problems and to present improvements to be  incorporated  into  the  proposed  development.  The  study shall assist in the protection of air quality, conservation of energy and encouragement of public transportation use.

2.	Traffic Impact Study shall be prepared by a qualified traffic engineer and/or transportation planner with previous traffic study experience. Procedures and standards for the Traffic Impact Study are set forth herein. Applicant may provide funds to the Township which may hire a traffic engineer of its choice to conduct the study, if this procedure is deemed appropriate by the Township.
 
ARTICLE IV - PLAN REQUIREMENTS

3.	Applicability -  A  Traffic  Impact  Study  shall  be  submitted  for  all  subdivisions  and  land developments that meet one or more of the following criteria:

A.	Residential:  50 or more dwelling units or lots.

B.	Non-Residential Subdivision:  10 lots or more.

C.	Commercial: A commercial building or buildings consisting of 25,000 square feet or more of gross floor space (total floor area on all floors within the exterior walls of the building).

D.	Office: A development consisting of 25,000 square feet or more of gross floor space.

E.	Industrial: Any industrial development consisting of 10 or more lots, or 50,000 square feet or more of gross floor area, or having more than 75 employees (immediately or future) with access from the site onto a Township street, or with an expected daily traffic flow of more than 150 vehicle trips per day with site access onto a Township street.

F.	Institutional: Any medical, educational or institutional development consisting of 25,000 square feet or more of gross floor area.

The Haycock Township Board of Supervisors, at its discretion, may require any other subdivision or land development application to be accompanied  by  a  Traffic  Impact Study; provided, however, that the Supervisors notify the applicant within sixty (60) days following the Planning Commission's first meeting to consider the proposal. Such a notification shall specify  the reason  for the requirement,  citing the  proposal's particular location or existing problems or type of use (i.e., generation of heavy truck traffic).

4.	Definitions.

A.	Public Transportation  - Transportation service for the general public provided by a common carrier of passengers generally but not necessarily on a regular route basis, by the Southeastern Pennsyl vania Transportation Authority, or a private operator offering service to the public.

B.	Study Area - This area will extend approximately one-half mile along the adjacent roadways in both directions from all access points or the first major intersection along these roadways whichever is greater. The traffic engineer shall seek guidance from the Township Planning Commission prior to the submission of the Traffic Impact Study.

C.	Major Intersection - Any intersection where traffic generated by the proposal will have an impact on the operation of the intersection and/or any other intersection involving an arterial road. The transportation engineer shall seek guidance from the Planning Commission prior to the submission of the Traffic Impact Study.

D.	Volume/Capacity Analysis – Intersection approach capacity is the maximum rate of vehicular flow that can pass through an intersection under existing roadway, traffic, and signal conditions. The analysis compares the actual and projected traffic volume to the intersection capacity and results in a Volume/Capacity (v/c) ratio.
 
ARTICLE IV - PLAN REQUIREMENTS

E.	Level of Service - Level of service  (LOS), as described  in the 1985 Highway Capacity Manual, Special Report 209, Transportation Research Board is a qualitative measure of the operational conditions within a traffic stream and their perceptions by motorists. There are six levels  of  service  ranging  from  "A" through "F". Level of Service "A" represents ideal operating conditions with no congestion. Level of Service "E" represents maximum capacity of the facility. Level "F" represents a breakdown in operating conditions with  severe congestion.	Level of Service "C" is considered the design level of service, representing a stable traffic flow and a relatively satisfactory travel speed.

F.	Trip Generation Rates - The total count of vehicular trips to and from a study site per unit of land use as measured by parameters such as square  footage, dwelling units, acres, etc. Trip Generation, 6th edition or as amended, by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, shall be referenced to determine trip generation rates.

G.	Warrants for Traffic Signal Installation - This is a series of warrants which detail the minimum traffic or pedestrian volumes or other criteria necessary for the installation of a traffic signal. These warrants are contained in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, 1988, as amended, or the most recent version, whichever is later.

H.	Engineering and traffic studies shall be prepared in accordance with Title 67, Chapter 201, "Engineering and Traffic Studies".

5.	General Requirements and Standards - A Traffic Impact Study shall contain the following information:

A.	General Site Description - The site description shall include the size, location, proposed land uses, construction staging and completion date of the proposed subdivision or land development. If the development is residential,  types  of dwelling units shall also be included. A brief description of other major existing and proposed developments within the study area shall  be  provided.  The general	site description shall  also include  probable socio-economic characteristics of potential site users to the extent that they may affect the transportation needs of the site (i.e., number of senior citizens).

B.	Transportation Facilities Description - The description shall contain a full documentation of the proposed internal and existing external transportation system. This description shall include proposed internal vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian circulation, all proposed ingress and egress locations, all internal roadway widths and rights-of-way, parking conditions, traffic channelizations and any traffic signals or other intersection control devices at all intersections within the site.

The report shall describe the entire  external  roadway  system  within  the  study area and include discussion of existing design deficiencies and potential safety hazards.  Major intersections in the study area shall be identified and sketched. All existing and proposed public transportation services and facilities within a one-mile radius of the site shall also be documented. Report shall include review and discussion of all available accident reports within the study area during the prior three (3) years. All future highway improvements, including proposed construction and traffic signalization, shall be noted. This information shall be obtained from the 12-Year Highway Capital Program for the Delaware Valley
 
ARTICLE IV - PLAN REQUIREMENTS

Region and from the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. Any proposed roadway improvements due to proposed surrounding developments shall be recorded.

C.	Existing  Traffic  Conditions   -  Existing  traffic  conditions  shall  be  measured  and documented for all roadways and intersections in the study area.   Existing traffic volumes   for   average   daily   traffic,   peak   highway   hour(s)   traffic,   and   peak development  generated  hour(s),  and  documentation  shall  be  included  in  the report.  Traffic count data shall not be more than one (1) year old.  Traffic counts shall be taken on a Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday of a non -holiday week. Additional   counts   (Saturdays   for   a   commercial   development   or   residential development in close proximity to a commercial district) may also be required by the  Township).    A volume/capacity  analysis based upon existing volumes  shall be  performed  during  the  peak  highway  hour(s)  and  the  peak  development generated hour(s)  for all  roadways and  major intersections  in the  study area. Levels of service shall be determined for each location using the 1985 Highway Capacity Manual methodology.

D.	Transportation Impact of the Development - Estimation of vehicular trips to result from the proposal shall be completed for the average daily peak highway hour(s) and peak development-generated hour(s). Vehicular trip generation rates to be used for this calculation shall be determined through the use of Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), Trip Generation, 6th edition  or  as  amended. These development-generated traffic volumes shall be provided for the in-bound and out-bound traffic movements as estimated, and the reference source(s) methodology followed shall be documented. All turning movements shall be calculated. These generated volumes shall be distributed to the study area and assigned to the existing roadways and intersections throughout the study area. Documentation of all assumptions used in the distribution and assignment phase shall be provided.   Traffic volumes shall be assigned to individual access points. If school crossings are to be used, pedestrian volumes shall be assigned to each crossing. Any characteristics of the site that will cause particular trip generation problems shall be noted.

E.	Analysis of Transportation Impact - The total future traffic shall be calculated and shall consist of the  combination of existing traffic  expanded to the completion year (using an annual background traffic growth rate available), the development- generated traffic, and the traffic generated by other proposed developments in the study area. A second/volume capacity analysis shall be conducted using the total future demand and the future roadway capacity. If staging of the proposed development is anticipate, calculations for each stage of  completion  shall  be made. This analysis shall be performed during the peak highway hour(s) and peak development-generated hour(s) for all roadways and major intersections in the study area. Level of Service calculations shall be completed for all major intersections.  It is usually at these locations that capacity is most restricted.

All access points and pedestrian crossings shall be examined as to the feasibility of installing traffic signals. This evaluation shall compare the projected traffic and pedestrian volumes to the warrants for traffic signal installation.

F.	Conclusions and Recommended Improvements - Levels of service and volume/capacity ratios shall be listed for all roadways and intersections shall be listed. All roadways and/or intersections showing a level of service below "C" and volume/capacity ratios greater than or equal to 1.0 shall be considered deficient.
 
ARTICLE IV - PLAN REQUIREMENTS

Specific recommendations for the elimination of these deficiencies shall be listed and shall include but not be limited to the following elements: internal circulation design, site access location and design, external roadway int ersection design/safety improvements, traffic signal installation and operation  including signal timing, and transit design improvements. All physical roadway improvements shall be illustrated. Signal timing shall be evaluated for any intersection with a level of service below C but a volume/capacity ratio less than
1.0. Warrants for signalization shall be examined for all unsignalized intersections operating at deficient levels of service.

Existing and/or future public transportation service shall  also be addressed.  A listing of all actions to be undertaken to increase present public transportation usage and improve service, if applicable shall be included.

The study shall outline mitigation measures and demonstrate any changes to the level of service achieved by these measures. Any alternatives or  suggested phasing of improvements shall be described. Mitigation measures may include recommendations such as roadway widening, turning lanes, deceleration lanes/tapers, changes to signalization, use of access management  techniques, traffic calming measures, or reduction in the proposed intensity of use. The responsibility and timing of all recommended improvements  shall  be  described within the transportation study.

6.	Time of Submission - The Traffic Impact Study shall be submitted to the Planning Commission with the preliminary plan submittal. Improvement plans shall not be submitted to PennDOT until after review by the Haycock Township Planning Commission and Board of Supervisors.

7.	Implementation - The Supervisors shall review the Traffic Impact Study to analyze its adequacy in solving any traffic problems that will occur due to the land development or subdivision. The Supervisors may decide that certain improvements contained on and/or adjacent to the site and within the study area are necessary for land development or subdivision plan approval and may attach these conditions to the approval. If the municipality concludes that additional improvements are necessary, the developer shall have the opportunity to re -submit alternative improvements designs to obtain plan approval.

Section 407. - Sewage Facilities.

1.	General - The applicant shall submit the following information for review to insure that the proposed method of sewage collection, treatment, and disposal is adequate to serve the proposed subdivision or land development. The evaluation must establish that each proposed lot, building or structure will be served by an appropriate sewage system.

2.	Development Applications - The applicant shall make application to the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) which shall determine whether or not the application will require submission of Planning Modules. Applicant shall provide written verification of the decision  of the Pennsylvania DEP.

3.	If Pennsylvania DEP determines that Planning Modules are required for the proposed development, then the following steps must be taken.

A.	In order to be deemed a complete subdivision or land development application, any application for preliminary subdivision or land development approval must be
 
ARTICLE IV - PLAN REQUIREMENTS

accompanied by a duly completed Department of Environmental Protection sewage facilities planning module. Such planning module shall also meet all the requirements contained in 25 PA. Code Chapter 71.

B.	Such application and planning module shall meet all the procedural and content requirements of 25 PA Code Chapter 71, Subchapters 71.52 and 71.53, including the requirement that they be accompanied by the comments on the planning module of the Bucks County Health Department and the Bucks County Planning Commission. Evidence that the sewage facilities planning module has been before these agencies for 60 days without comment shall be sufficient to satisfy this requirement.

C.	The Township shall review and act upon the Planning Modules in accordance with the requirements and criteria set forth in 25 PA. Code Chapter 71, and may refuse to adopt a proposed revision to its official sewage facilities plan for new land development for reasons including but not limited to the following:

(1)	The plan is not technically or administratively able to be implemented.

(2)	Present and future sewage disposal needs of the area, remaining acreage or delineated lots are not adequately addressed.

(3)	The plan is not consistent with the Township land use plans and ordinances, this ordinance, or other ordinances or plans controlling land use or development.

(4)	The plan  is  not consistent  with  the comprehensive sewage program of the Township as contained in its official sewage facilities plan.

(5)	The plan does not meet the consistency requirements set forth in 25 PA. Code Chapter 71, Subsection 71.21(a)(5)(i)-(iii).

D.	When the Township refuses to adopt a proposed revision to the official sewage facilities plan, it shall state the reasons for the refusal and forward a copy of this statement to the person making the submission and to the Department of Environmental  Protection.

E.	When the Township adopts the proposed revisions to the official sewage facilities plan, the Township shall forward the proposed revisions to the Department with the information required by  25  PA.  Code  Chapter  71,  Subsection  71.52. Adoption of the proposed revisions of the official plan shall be by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.

F.	Approval of the planning modules by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection shall be a condition of subdivision or land development plan approval by the Township.

4.	Requirements for Final Plan Approval - Where on -lot sewage disposal is proposed, Final Plan  Approval  shall  not  be  granted  for  any  subdivision  or  land  development  until satisfactory  evidence  has  been  presented  by  the  applicant  to  the  Township  that  the Bucks  County  Health  Department  and  the  Pennsylvania  Department  of  Environmental Protection have determined that the lots proposed for subdivision are generally suitable for on-lot septic systems and provided further that a note shall be placed on the final plans as follows:
 
ARTICLE IV - PLAN REQUIREMENTS

"The planning module for land development has been approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and the Bucks County Department of Health as to the subdivision plan. However, the septic system permit has not been issued for the lot(s) upon which new building(s) are proposed. Prior to issuance of a building permit, a septic system permit shall be obtained and presented to the Zoning Officer for each new building."

Section 408. - Water Resources Impact Study.

1.	All projects withdrawing 10,000 gpd or greater of groundwater or surface water, or a combination of these two sources are required to obtain a permit from the DRBC. Copies of all submissions by the applicant to the DRBC shall be sent to the Township. Additionally, copies of all submissions to the Department  of  Environmental  Protection (DEP) and all correspondence received by the applicant from the DEP shall be forwarded to the Township.

2.	Any water withdrawal project not under the jurisdiction of the DRBC will be reviewed by the Township. A Water Resources Impact Study shall be required when the proposed development is not served by public water supplied by a Municipal Authority approved by the Township; and one or more of the following conditions are met:

A.	The proposed residential subdivision contains fifteen (15) lots or more and the average lot size is less than two (2) acres in area.

B.	The non-residential subdivision contains 3 lots or more.

C.	A  proposed  well  is  intended  for  non-residential use (i.e. industrial, commercial, institutional,  community,  agricultural).

3.	The Water Impact Study shall be prepared by a hydrologist or professional  engineer qualified to conduct groundwater investigations. Th e purpose of the study will be to determine if there is an adequate supply of water for the proposed use and to estimate the impact of the additional water withdrawals on existing nearby wells, underlying aquifers and  streams. The  Township  Engineer shall be involved in the study as the Township feels is necessary and appropriate.

4.	A water system which does not provide an adequate supply of water for the proposed use, considering both quality and quantity; and/or adversely affects nearby wells  and streams shall not be approved by the Township.

5.	The adequacy of water supply shall be determined based upon the assumption that there are 3.5 persons per dwelling unit using 75 gallons of water per person per day. The applicant shall submit an analysis which evaluates the consistency between the proposed use and the groundwater preservation guidelines included in the Township's Sewage Facilities Plan/201 Facilities Plan.

6.	The Water Impact Study shall be signed by the person(s) preparing the study and shall include the following information:

A.	Calculations  of  the  projected  water  needs  using  the  criteria  set  forth  in  the following  references:
 
ARTICLE IV - PLAN REQUIREMENTS

(1)	PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY MANUAL, Bureau of  Water  Quality Management Publication No. 15 by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, Harrisburg, Pennsylvania.

(2)	GUIDE  FOR  DETERMINATION  OF  REQUIRED  FIRE  FLOW  by  the
Insurance Services Office (ISO) as modified.

(3)	AMERICAN WATER  WORKS  ASSOCIATION  Standards  and Manuals for the American Water Works Association, Denver, Colorado.

B.	A geologic map of the area within a 1.0 mile radius of the site.

C.	The location of all faults, lineaments and fracture traces within 1/4 mile of the site.

D.	The locations of all existing and proposed wells within 1/4 mile of the site, and all large withdrawal wells (10,000 gpd+) within 1.0 mile of the site.

E.	The location of all existing and proposed on-lot septic systems within 1/4 mile of the site.

F.	The location of all streams, perennial and intermittent, within 1/4 mile of the site.

G.	A discussion of the aquifers underlying the site and their long -term drought recharge capability based on accepted published data or detailed site specific investigations.

H.	Based on the drought recharge capacity of the underlying aquifer and the calculated daily groundwater withdrawals of the project, a hydrologic budget shall be calculated for the site property itself, and for the area within 1/4 mile of the site.

I.	Based on the results of the hydrologic budget, a determination shall be made on whether or not the potential exists for adverse affects on the hydrologic environment caused by the project.

J.	The study shall include a brief statement of the qualifications of the person(s) preparing the study.

7.	The following site specific investigations shall be required:

A.	For each well that is constructed:

(1)	An accurate geologic log should be constructed during the drilling of the well giving a detailed description of the type and thickness of rocks encountered.	Additionally, the log should contain information on  the depth and thickness of all water bearing zones encountered and the yield from each zone. Yield from the well must be measured using a quantitative method.

(2)	Samples shall be collected every 20 feet during drilling, or at  each change in rock type. Each sample shall be placed in a non -breakable container. The container, in a sturdy box, shall be made available to the Township.
 
ARTICLE IV - PLAN REQUIREMENTS

B.	A pumping test of not less than 48 hours duration shall be conducted at a rate of not less than 150% of the intended long-term withdrawal from the well. The 48 hour test shall be conducted at a constant pumping rate that should not deviate greater than +/- 5% during the test.

C.	In order to determine the impact of the project well on existing wells, a representative sample of existing wells, evenly spaced around the pumping well, shall be monitored for changes in water level.

The number and location of monitoring wells shall be subject to approval by the Township Planning Commission. Sufficient well monitoring shall be performed to allow for the construction of hydrographs showing a  continuous  record  of  well levels before, during and after the pumping test.

D.	A means of accurately measuring the well discharge shall be provided subject to approval by the Township.

E.	Well discharge shall be directed away from the site by a method suitable to the Township and to a point suitable to the Township.

F.	Records shall be compiled in typewritten form to  include  the  following information:

(1)	Name of driller and personnel conducting test.

(2)	Description of test well to include horizontal and vertical dimensions, casing installed and grouting details.

(3)	List of formation samples.

(4)	Static water level immediately prior to yield testing.

(5)	Hydrograph of depth to water surface during test pumping and recovery period at the test well showing corresponding pump and discharge rate in gallons per minute and time readings were taken.

(6)	Log of depth to water surface at existing and monitoring wells during test pumping period showing time readings were taken.

G.	A report shall accompany the test well data which analyzes and interprets all of the data as to the impacts on the groundwater supply and existing wells. Conclusions shall be drawn from the analysis.

H.	The submission to the Township shall include any and all applications, reports, or supplemental information submitted to the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and/or the Delaware River Basin Commission.

Section 409. - Wetland Delineation. When the National Wetlands Inventory  (NWI)  Maps  indicate wetlands on a site or when a site contains hydric soils (Refer Section 202) or an area with a predominance of wetlands vegetation (Refer Appendix "F"), an on-site investigation shall be conducted to determine if wetlands are present on the site. A landowner or an applicant shall use one of the following methods to delineate wetlands:

1.	Wetland  boundaries  shall  be  delineated  through  an  on-site assessment which shall be conducted by a professional soil scientist or others of demonstrated qualifications.  Such
 
ARTICLE IV - PLAN REQUIREMENTS

a person shall certify that the methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts, including the presence of wetlands vegetation, hydric soils and/or hydrologic indicators. A study shall be submitted with sufficient detail to allow a thorough review by the municipality.  The study must be approved by the Governing Body.

2.	A wetlands delineation validated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.  In the event that a wetlands delineation validated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is shown to vary from a wetlands boundary derived from subsection (a) above, the Corps delineation shall govern.
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

Section 501. - Application. The following principles, standards and requirements will be applied by the Township to evaluate plans for proposed subdivision or land developments. The standards and requirements outlined herein shall be considered minimum standards and requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and  general  welfare.  Where literal compliance with the standards herein specified is clearly impractical, the Board of Supervisors may modify or adjust the standards to permit reasonable utilization of property while securing substantial conformance with the objectives of this Ordinance.

Section 502. - General Standards.

1.	All portions of a tract being subdivided or developed shall be taken up in lots, streets, public lands or other proposed uses so that remnants and landlocked areas shall not be created.

2.	Reserve strips controlling access to lots, public rights-of-way, public lands or adjacent private lands shall be prohibited unless their control is placed with the Township under conditions of the Board of Supervisors.

3.	Lot lines shall follow Township boundary lines rather than cross them.

4.	Subdivisions and land developments shall be laid out so as to avoid the necessity for excessive cut or fill.

5.	Land subject to flooding or other hazards to life, health, or property shall not be platted for residential occupancy or for such other uses as may increase danger to health, life, or property, or aggravate erosion until all such hazards have been eliminated or unless adequate safeguards against such hazards are provided by the subdivision plans. Such land within the subdivision or land development shall be set aside on the plan for uses which shall not be endangered by periodic or occasional inundation and shall not produce unsatisfactory living conditions.

6.	Every possible means shall be provided to preserve trees, groves, waterways, scenic points, historic spots, or other community assets and landmarks that are located within a proposed subdivision or land development.

7.	All discarded materials, including but not limited  to:  waste  paper,  rags,  metal,  bottles, cans, building materials, house furnishings, machinery,  and  vehicles  or  parts  thereof, shall be removed from land proposed to be subdivided or developed, and disposed of properly.

8.	Proposed subdivisions or land developments shall  be  coordinated  with  adjoining properties so that the community as a whole may develop harmoniously.

9.	Where the preliminary plan includes a portion of a tract which could be further subdivided or developed under the standards of the Zoning Ordinance, the applicant shall submit a prospective street/lot layout for the entire tract which shall respect the Environmental Performance Standards included in Article V of the Zoning Ordinance.

10.	Name of the Subdivision/Land Development is subject to review and approval by the Township.  Names which conflict with, or are similar to, existing developments shall not be approved. During construction, the development name shall be in accordance with the approved plan.
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

11.	Areas designated as open space shall not be used for storage of construction materials, construction trailers, sales trailers, or parking; or to stockpile fill or topsoil material except as necessary  to  construct  grading or  other  improvements  on the  open  space  area as required by the approved plan.

Section 503. - Community Facilities.

1.	In reviewing subdivision plans, the Planning Commission will consider the adequacy of existing or proposed community facilities to serve the additional dwellings proposed by the subdivision.

2.	Where deemed essential by the Board of Supervisors upon consideration of the particular type of development proposed and especially in large-scale planned residential developments, the Board of Supervisors may  require  the  dedication  or  reservation  of such areas or sites of an extent and location suitable to the needs created by the development for schools, parks and other purposes.

3.	Areas provided or reserved for such community facilities shall be adequate to provide for building sites, landscaping, and off-street parking as appropriate to the use proposed.

Section 504. - Blocks and Lots.

1.	The length, width, shape, and design of blocks shall be determined with due regard to the provision of adequate site for buildings of the type proposed, land use and/or zoning requirements of the Township, topography of the land being subdivided,  and requirements for safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian circulation.

2.	Unless the topography of the land being subdivided  or  the  existing  pattern  of development in the immediately adjacent area shall be otherwise than herein required, the following minimum standards for the design and size of blocks and lots shall prevail:

A.	Blocks shall not exceed sixteen hundred (1600) feet in length, nor be less than five hundred (500) feet in length. Block length shall be measured along  the centerline of a street between centerlines of intersecting streets.

B.	Residential blocks shall generally be of sufficient depth to accommodate two (2) tiers of lots, except where reverse frontage lots bordering an arterial or collector street are used, or where due to the contour of the land, or the necessary layout of the subdivision, there is insufficient depth between streets for such two (2) tier design.

C.	Blocks for commercial and industrial areas may vary from the elements of design contained in this section if the nature of the use requires other treatment. In such cases, off-street parking for employees and customers shall be provided along with safe and convenient limited access to the street system. Space for off -street loading shall also be  provided  with  limited  access  to  the  street  system. Extension of streets, and utilities shall be provided as necessary.

D.	Lot lines intersecting street lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines from the street line to the rear lot line. “Substantially at right angles” shall mean an intersection angle of not less than 800.
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

E.	Lots shall front on a street which has already been dedicated to the Township, or which the subdivider or developer proposes to dedicate to the Township in connection with approval of the final plan.

F.	The Township shall assign house numbers to each lot within a subdivision.

G.	Minimum lot sizes shall be in accordance with the Township Zoning Ordinance.

H.	Remnants of land, smaller than required for a lot, shall not be permitted within any subdivision. Such remnants shall be incorporated into existing or proposed lots, or dedicated to public use if acceptable to the Board of Supervisors.

I.	Double frontage lots are prohibited except in accordance with Section 504.2.B. above.

J.	Residential lots shall not be created which front upon an  arterial  or  collector street, as defined in Section 506 herein, except as permitted  by  Section  511 herein.

K.	Residential lot depth shall not be less than one (1) nor more than three (3) times the lot width. Lot depth shall be measured as the average distance from the ultimate right-of-way line to rear property line. Lot width is the distance between side property lines measured at the required minimum building setback line.

L.	Minimum lot width required by the Haycock Township Zoning Ordinance must be continuous along an existing or proposed street upon which the lot abuts. Lot width is measured along the minimum required front yard building setback line between the side lot lines.

Section 505. - Street - General.

1.	Proposed streets shall be properly related to such street plans or parts thereof as have been officially prepared and adopted by the Township and shall be  coordinated  with existing or proposed streets in adjoining subdivisions or land developments.

2.	Any developer subdividing or developing a parcel which fronts a State highway or proposes access thereto shall be required to obtain  a  PennDOT  Highway  Occupancy permit for any access, improvement, and encroachment within the roadway right -of-way. No plat which will require access to a highway under the jurisdiction of the Department of Transportation shall be finally approved unless the plat contains a notice regarding permit requirements.  (Refer sample in Appendix "B")

3.	Proposed streets shall further conform to such County and State road and highway plans as have been prepared, adopted or filed as prescribed by law.

4.	Streets shall be related to topography so as to produce usable  lots  and  acceptable grades.

5.	Centerlines of proposed streets must coincide with centerline of right -of-way.
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

6.	Access  shall  be  given  to  lots  and  portions  of  the  tract  in  the  subdivisions  or  land development  and  to  adjacent  un-subdivided  property  unless  the  topography  clearly indicates  that  such  connection  is  not  feasible.	Streets  giving  such  access  shall  be improved to the limits of the subdivision or land development to Township specifications. Reserve strips and landlocked areas shall not be created.

7.	Streets shall  be laid  out to  preserve  the integrity  of their  design. Local  access  streets shall be laid out to discourage their use by through traffic and, where possible, collector streets shall be designed for use by through traffic.

8.	Where the proposed subdivision or land development contains or  is  adjacent  to  an arterial street, provision shall be made for marginal access streets. The Township may also require rear service areas, reverse frontage, or such other treatment as will provide protection for abutting properties, reduction in number of intersections  with  arterial streets, and separation of local and through traffic.

9.	Screening through the use of appropriate plant materials, fences, or berms subject to site plan review shall be provided along the rear property line of lots with reverse frontage to buffer lots from the higher order street.

10.	Half or partial streets will not be permitted in new subdivisions or land developments.

11.	Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except as stubs to permit future street extension into adjoining tracts, or when designed as cul-de-sacs. Temporary stub streets shall be permitted only if the street is less than two hundred (200) feet in length and provides access to two or less dwelling units.

12.	Street names shall be coordinated with existing or platted street names, and  shall  be reviewed by the Postmaster. If a new street is a continuation of, or is aligned with, an existing or platted street, it shall bear the same name as the existing or platted street. All street names shall be of historical, geographic, topographic, or other local significance. Street names shall be subject to approval of the Board of Supervisors.  All  street regulatory signage shall be in accordance with PA Title 67, PennDOT Publications 236 and 68 (Chapter 211), and shall be installed on standard PennDOT approve d breakaway posts.

13.	No street shall be laid out or opened which extends to or crosses any boundary between the Township and any other municipality except with the specific approval of the Board of Supervisors and upon such condition as the Township may impose.

14.	All streets shall have a uniform width throughout their respective lengths except where otherwise required by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to Section 506.

15.	All lots, public lands, open space, remnants of land, or other proposed uses within subdivisions shall be served by, and have frontage on, a paved public street.

16	Where a subdivision or land development abuts an existing street, drainage improvements shall be  made to  the existing  street. Required  improvements must  be extended as necessary to provide positive drainage to existing storm drainage facilities or drainage channels. Additionally, existing  cartways  shall  be  reconstructed  where necessary to establish minimum construction standards of Section 506.  Where
 
ARTICLE V - GE NERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

reconstruction is not required, leveling with ID -2 binder and wearing course material may be required to improve the cartway surface.

17.	No new street will be permitted which will cause an existing principal structure to become nonconforming to front yard requirements of the Township Zoning Ordinance.

18.	Except where an alley is permitted pursuant to Section 524 of this Ordinance, one way streets shall be prohibited within new residential developments.

19.	All new residential subdivisions or land developments containing twenty-five (25) dwelling units or more, or generating two hundred fifty (250) daily vehicle trips or more shall have a minimum of two access/exits on existing public streets. No residential subdivisions or land developments of twenty-five (25) units or more shall be served only with a cul-de- sac street or loop street but shall include construction of a new through street.

Section 506. Street Standards.

1.	Street  Classification.    Four  (4)  functional  classifications  are  hereby  established for the streets and roads in Haycock Township:

A.	Arterial. This classification includes highways which provide intra -county or inter-municipal traffic of substantial volumes where the average trip lengths are usually five miles or greater. Generally, these highways accommodate operating speeds of 40 to 55 miles per hour.

B.	Collector. This classification is intended to include those highways which connect local access primary highways to arterial highways. They may serve intra-county and  intra-municipal traffic. They may serve as traffic corridors connecting residential areas with industrial, shopping, and other service.	They may penetrate residential areas. Generally,  these highways will accommodate operating speeds of 35 to 45 miles per hour.

C.	Primary. This classification is intended to included those highways that connect secondary streets to collector highway systems. Primary streets typically provide access  between  and  connect  residential  areas  within the Township. Generally, these highways will accommodate operating speeds of 35 to 45 miles per hour.

D.	Local. This classification is intended to include streets and roads that provide direct access to abutting land and connections to higher classes of roadways. Traffic volumes will be low and travel distances generally short. These streets and roads should be designed for operating speeds of 25 to 35 miles per hour or under.

2.	Right -of-Way Widths.  Minimum widths for each type of public street shall be as follows:

Type of Street	Right -of -Way Width

Arterial	120'
Collector	80'
Primary	60'
Local	50' or greater depending on development type/on-street
parking	requirements	as	determined	by	the	Board	of
Supervisors.
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

A.	Where a proposed subdivision abuts or contains an existing public street or road having a right -of-way width less than would be required if said street or road were created under this Ordinance, sufficient additional width for right-of-way shall be provided and dedicated to meet the foregoing standards.

B.	Additional right-of-way and cartway widths may be required by the Board of Supervisors to promote public safety and convenience when required by special conditions and to provide parking space in areas of intensive use.

3.	Street Classification.   Streets within Haycock Township are classified as follows:

A.	Arterial:  Route 563.

B.	Collector:  Old Bethlehem Road, Thatcher Road

C.	Primary: Applebachsville Road, Stoney Garden Road, Deerwood Lane, Sawmill Road (between Old Bethlehem Road and Stoney Garden Road).

D.	Local:  All other roads not classified above as arterial, collector, or primary.

4.	Cartway Width.

A.	Minimum width of paving on existing streets shall not be less than the following:

Type	Cartway Width (Feet)

Arterial	As required by PennDOT
Collector	24’ (28’ if curb required)
Primary	24’ (28’ if curb required)
Local	24’ (28’ if curb required)

B.	Residential   Streets.	Proposed   residential   streets   shall   be   constructed   in accordance with the following requirements:

Minimum  Requirements*

Minimum Lot Size

2 Acres or greater	ROW (Feet)

50’	Cartway (Feet)

24’

20,000 SF or greater 20,000 SF or less	
50’	
28’
(Parking permitted one side)**  20,000 SF or less	
56’	
32’
(Parking permitted both sides)**	
60’	
36’

*	The Township reserves the right to require additional cartway width.
**	On-street parking requirements determined by Board of Supervisors.
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

C.	Non-residential Streets. Non -residential streets shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 56 feet.  Minimum cartway width shall be 34 feet.

5.	Design Standards. Design  of streets  shall  conform with  PennDOT  Design Manual, Part 2, Highway Design (PDT Pub. 13), and all applicable PennDOT RC standards, unless specifically modified by this Ordinance.

6.	Pavement Design.

A.	All components of the pavement structure shall be designed  and constructed	in accordance with Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Specifications, Form 408 and shall be noted as such on the plan.

B.	Minimum   Requirements.	The  following  shall   be  considered  to  be minimum standards for local access street construction:

SECTION	TYPE	MIN. DEPTH*

(1)	Surface ID-2 Wearing Course	1-1/2" Base	BCBC	4-1/2"
Subbase	3A Modified Stone	6" Or
 
(2)	Surface ID-2 Wearing Course	1"
Base	ID-2 Binder Course	2"
Subbase	AASHTO #1 Stone	8"
w/2" Screenings
 





*Compacted
 

Note:	AASHTO #1 stone subbase required on new streets constructed without curb.

C.	Pavement design for non-residential streets shall be subject to approval of the Township Engineer dependent upon anticipated traffic type and volume.

D.	Minimum requirements for cartway widening cross-section along existing roadways shall be in accordance with Section 506.6.B.(1).

E.	Minimum requirements for storm sewer and utility trench  pavement  restoration within existing roadways shall be in accordance with standards as contained in Appendix "A".

7.	Roadside Barriers. Roadside barriers and guide rail shall be required in accordance with PennDOT Design Manual, Part 2, Highway Design, Chapter 12. (PDT Pub. 13) Construction and materials shall be in  accordance  with  applicable  PennDOT  RC standards.

8.	Traffic Control. Vehicular traffic control in work zone areas on and along streets open to the public shall be in strict accordance  to  requirements  of  PennDOT Publication 203, Work Zone Traffic Control ('67 PA Code, Chapter 203).
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

9.	Speed limit, stop, no parking, and advisory  signs  shall  be  installed  along  new development streets in accordance with PennDOT Regulations and as required by the Township.

Section 507. - Cul-de-sac Streets.

1.	Cul-de-sac streets  shall not  be  permitted unless  the  applicant can  demonstrate  to the satisfaction of the Township that construction of a thru street is not feasible.

2.	Cul-de-sac streets shall be designed to permit future extension into  adjacent undeveloped property. Unless future extension is clearly impractical or undesirable, the turnaround right-of-way shall be placed adjacent to a property line and contained within an easement area. A right-of-way of the same width as the street shall be carried to the property line in such a way as to permit future extension of the street into the adjoining tract. At such time as such a street is extended, the overage created by the turnaround outside the boundaries of the extended street shall revert in ownership to the property owners fronting on the cul-de-sac turnaround.

3.	Permanent cul-de-sac streets shall be kept to a minimum and shall  not  exceed  five hundred (500') feet in length or serve as access to more than twelve (12) dwelling units, whichever is more restrictive, unless specifically authorized by the Board of Supervisors. The minimum length of a cul -de-sac shall be two hundred and fifty (250) feet. For the purpose of this Ordinance, cul-de-sac streets shall be measured from the intersection of the right-of-way line with the future right-of-way line of the existing street to the center of the turnaround area.

4.	Cul-de-sac streets, whether permanent or temporary, shall be provided with a turnaround at the closed end having a minimum radius to the edge of the finished street or curb line of not less than forty (40) feet. Permanent cul-de-sac streets shall be provided at the terminus with a right-of-way radius of sixty (60) feet.

5.	A planted island may be required by the Township in the center of the cul-de-sac turnaround. The planted island shall have a radius of thirty (30) feet with a twenty (20) feet wide cartway around the island. Fifty (50) feet paving radii  shall  be  provided to transition the cartway at the entrance and exit to the turnaround. The turnaround shall be restricted to one-way traffic. Landscaping of the island shall be subject to approval by the Township.

6.	Commercial and industrial cul-de-sacs shall be reviewed for adequacy by the Township Engineer. When deemed necessary by the Township, additional cartway and/or right-of- way radius may be required.

7.	A snow storage area shall be provided along the right-of-way of the turnaround. The snow storage area shall be contained within an easement not less than fifteen (15) feet measured from the right-of-way line, and of sufficient length as deemed necessary by the Township to provide adequate snow storage area.

Section 508. - Street Alignment.

1.	Whenever street lines are deflected in excess of one and one half (1-1/2) degrees, connection shall be made by horizontal curves. Long radial curves shall be used rather than a series of short curves and tangents.
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

2.	The minimum radius at the centerline for horizontal curves  on  collector  and  arterial streets shall be three hundred (300) feet, and for local streets the minimum radius shall be one hundred fifty (150) feet.

3.	On local access streets, the minimum tangent between reverse curves shall be at least one hundred (100) feet; on collector and arterial streets, the minimum tangent shall be at least two hundred fifty (250) feet.

Section 509. - Street Grades.

1.	The minimum centerline grade on all streets shall be three quarters  of  one  (0.75%) percent on streets with curbs, one (1%) on streets without curbs.

2.	The maximum grade on collector or arterial streets shall be seven (7%) percent and on local access streets ten (10%) percent.

3.	Vertical curves shall be used in changes of grade exceeding one (1%) percent and shall provide proper sight distance.

4.	Minimum vertical sight distance shall be in accordance with PennDOT Chapter 441, as amended.

5.	Maximum grade of proposed street within fifty (50) feet of the ultimate right-of-way of an existing or proposed street shall not exceed four (4%) percent.

Section 510. - Street Intersections.

1.	Local streets shall not intersect with collector or arterial streets on the same  side  at intervals of less than eight hundred (800) feet as measured from centerline to centerline.

2.	The distance between centerlines of streets opening onto the opposite side of a proposed or existing street shall be not less than one hundred and fifty (150) feet unless the streets are directly opposite each other.

3.	Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two streets shall not be permitted.

4.	Proposed street intersections shall be designed at right angles. The intersection of a new street with an existing street shall not be at an angle of  less  than  seventy  five  (75) degrees, except that all intersections with an arterial or collector street shall be at ninety
(90) degrees.

5.	Horizontal curves will not be permitted on a proposed street within fifty (50) feet of the ultimate right-of-way of an existing or proposed street.

6.	Minimum curb radius at the intersection of two local streets shall be at least twenty (20) feet; and minimum curb radius at an intersection of a  local  street  and  a  collector  or arterial street shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet.

7.	A clear sight triangle of seventy-five (75) feet in all directions shall be provided and maintained   at   all   intersections   measured   along   the   centerline   from   the   point   of
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDA RDS

intersection.   Nothing which obstructs the vision of a motorist shall be permitted in this area.

8.	Minimum horizontal and vertical sight distances shall be established in accordance with PennDOT Chapter 441, as amended.

Section 511. - Driveways.

1.	General.

A.	Driveways shall be located no  less  than  sixty  (60)  feet  from  any  street intersection (measured from the intersection of  the  ultimate  right-of-way lines). Sight distance requirements for all residential and non -residential driveways shall be in accordance with PennDOT Chapter 441.

B.	Driveways to corner lots shall gain access from the street of lower classification when a corner lot is bounded by streets of two different classifications as described herein. A corner lot  created  by  a  proposed street and an existing street shall gain access to the proposed street.

C.	When two (2) adjacent lots front on an arterial or collector road, shared access shall be provided unless it is determined by the Township to be infeasible due to existing conditions such as topography and location of natural resources.

D.	When three (3) or more adjacent lots front on an arterial road, the applicant shall be required to provide a marginal access street for common ingress and egress. Provisions shall be made for the eventual continuation of the street to adjacent properties.

E.	All driveways serving single family dwellings, except shared driveways, shall be at least five (5) feet from any side or rear lot line.

F.	All driveways serving single family dwellin gs shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet in width with a grade not to exceed fifteen percent (15%). Maximum change in grade at any location on the driveway shall not exceed eight (8) percent.

G.	A driveway permit from Haycock Township is required prior to the construction of a new driveway or any alteration of an existing driveway which accesses Township roads.

H.	All single family residential driveways shall be paved from the edge of cartway to the ultimate right-of-way, or for a length of 15 feet, whichever is greater using the following minimum standards:

(1)	A  crushed  aggregate  base  course  with  a  compacted  depth  of  six  (6) inches.

(2)	A bituminous paving course (ID-2) with a compacted depth of  2 inches.

(3)	In the case where sidewalks  are  provided,  a  concrete  driveway  apron shall be required.
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

I.	Where an existing roadside drainage swale is too shallow to permit installation of a driveway pipe, a concrete trench box with grate may be required to be installed. Grates must be recessed below edge of cartway  to  establish  a  minimum  2% slope from the cartway to the grate. Trench boxes must extend beyond edge of driveway paving a minimum 5 feet.

J.	Driveway Pipes.

(1)	Driveway pipes must include flared end sections.

(2)	End of pipes must extend a minimum of 5 feet beyond edge of paving.

(3)	Minimum pipe length is 20 feet.

(4)	Minimum pipe size shall be 12 inch round or 14 inches x 9 inches arch.

(5)	Pipe must be reinforced concrete pipe unless an alternative pipe material is permitted by the Township.

(6)	Minimum 9 inches of cover must be maintained between top of pipe and finished paving elevation.

K.	Intersection of single family driveways with cartways shall be installed with minimum paving radii of 5 feet at both sides.

L.	Where curb and sidewalk are required, concrete aprons shall be poured with a minimum thickness of six (6) inches on a minimum four (4) inch thick bedding of PennDOT 2B stone. All concrete shall be PennDOT Class "AA" 3750 psi mix. 1/2 inch expansion shall be placed between apron and curb. 1/4 inch score contraction joints shall be installed at 1/3 intervals.

2.	Shared Residential Driveways.

A.	Minimum driveway width shall be eighteen (18) feet within the street ultimate right-of-way.

B.	Entrance must be paved in accordance with 511.1.H. within the ultimate right -of- way or for a minimum length of 20 feet (whichever is greater).

C.	Intersection of driveways with cartways shall  be  installed  with  minimum  paving radii of 10 feet at both sides.

D.	Driveways must be centered on property lines.

3.	Non-residential  Driveways.

A.	Design requirements shall be in accordance with PennDOT Chapter 441.

B.	Driveways shall be paved. Design of paving section shall be in accordance with expected loading and frequency of loading.  Minimum paving specification shall be in accordance with Section 511.1.H., except that minimum compacted depth of the coarse aggregate base course must be eight (8) inches.
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

Section 512. - Curbs.

1.	Curbs shall be installed on all streets and parking areas  located  within  single  family cluster, multi-family, and apartment developments. Curbs shall also be required on new residential streets in subdivisions or land developments in which the minimum lot size is less than 2 acres, where on-street parking is required by the Township, and all new non- residential streets. Curbs may also be required on all streets in any subdivision in which the lot areas exceed the above minimum, when the centerline street grade of any street exceeds six (6%) percent; and along all existing streets where deemed necessary by the Township. In such cases curbs or other drainage controls shall be installed to properly control surface drainage and protect the streets from erosion. The requirement of the curbs may be waived at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors.

2.	All curbs shall be depressed at intersections to sufficient width to accommodate wheelchairs and shall be in accordance with the latest PennDOT and Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) standards.

3.	Curb shall be plain cement concrete curb, 18 inches in depth placed and finished in accordance with requirements set forth in the latest edition of PennDOT Spec ifications, Form 408. Material shall consist of cement concrete Class "AA" with a minimum 7 day design compressive strength of 3000 psi and a minimum 28 day  design  compressive strength of 3750 psi. After completion of the bituminous paving, Class BM-1 asphalt shall be applied to the joint between the curb and bituminous paving for a distance of one (1) foot from the curb toward the center of the road to seal the joint between the curb and bituminous  paving.

4.	As an alternate to concrete curb, Belgian block curb may be used where authorized by the Township. Belgian block curb must be installed in accordance with the construction detail included in Appendix A.

5.	Curb cuts (driveway depression) shall be a maximum of 1-1/2" above roadway surface, a minimum of 1" above the roadway surface, and a minimum of 14 feet in width.

6.	Profile of curb design along existing streets shall be shown on the plan. Profiles shall be smooth and designed with vertical curves where there is a change in grade. Breaks in grade shall not be permitted.  Existing edge of road and bottom of curb elevations shall be identified every fifty (50) feet and at locations specified by the Township Engineer. Minimum cross-slope for cartway widening sections shall be 3/8 inch per foot to establish positive drainage from the existing edge of road to the curb line.

Section 513. - Sidewalks.

1.	Sidewalks are required along both sides of all existing streets unless waived by the Board of Supervisors. Sidewalks are also required on both sides of all new residential streets where curb is required.

2.	Sidewalks shall be located within a public  right -of-way,  public  easement,  or  common open space area.  Any such system shall be interconnected and not disjointed.

3.	All sidewalks within the street right-of-way shall be located in such  a  manner  as  to provide sufficient area for street trees.
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

4.	Sidewalks shall have a minimum width of four (4) feet.

5.	Sidewalks shall be all weather and constructed of 4-inch thick, Class "AA"  cement concrete (3750 psi) on a four (4) inch PennDOT 2B stone base. At driveways, sidewalks shall have a minimum depth six (6) inches of concrete and be reinforced with wire mesh.

6.	Sidewalks shall not exceed a  ten (10) percent grade. All sidewalks shall be finished using methods that will provide a skid-resistant surface.

7.	Curb depressions designed to accommodate wheelchairs shall be provided at street and other crossings and shall be in accordance with the latest PennDOT and Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) standards.

8.	Sidewalks shall be laterally pitched at a slope of one-fourth inch per foot to provide for adequate surface drainage.

9.	Pedestrian and bike paths within open space and recreational facilities shall be concrete, asphalt, wood chips with stone base, or stone, subject to approval by the Board of Supervisors. Width and  design of  cross sections shall  be subject  to approval by  the Township Engineer. Maximum centerline grade of pedestrian paths shall be 7%. Des ign centerline profile of pedestrian paths shall be shown on the plan. Vertical curves must be designed for changes in grade. Breaks in grade are not permitted. Horizontal curves must be designed for changes in direction. Location of the pedestrian path centerline must be defined by detailed bearing and distance information. Where pedestrian paths are designed for combined use with bicycles, centerline grades and curves shall be designed as specified by the Township Engineer.

Section 514. - Reserved.

Section 515. - Landscaping and Street Trees.

1.	Street Trees and Landscaping:

A.	Street trees shall be planted along all existing and proposed streets within any land development or major subdivision where suitable street trees do not exist.

B.	Street trees shall be planted at intervals of not more than forty (40) feet and must be coordinated to provide adequate separation from overhead and underground utilities.

C.	Street trees shall not be planted opposite each other, but shall alternate.

D.	Street trees shall be planted within the street right-of-way unless otherwise approved by the Township.

E.	At the time of installation, the minimum trunk diameter of canopy trees measured at a height of six (6) inches above finished grade shall be two and one-half (2- 1/2) inches.

F.	Any plant material which does not survive shall be replaced by the developer.
Financial  security  shall  be  posted  with  the  Township  in  an  amount  equal  to
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

the estimated cost of trees and plantings, to be released eighteen (18) months from Township acceptance of the installation and satisfactory replacement of all dead plantings.

G.	The following plant material  is  permitted  for  use  as  tree  plantings  when placement is within four (4) feet of curb, sidewalk, or asphalt surface:

Acer campestre - Hedge Maple.
Acer rubrum - Red Maple (all cultivars).
Acer x freemanii `Armstrong' - Armstrong Freeman Maple. Carpinus caroliniana Tree Form - American Hornbeam. Cercidiphyllum japanicom – Kastura Tree.
Fraxinus pennsylvania – Green Ash.
Prunus sargenti `Columnaris' Tree Form - Columnar Sargent Cherry. Gleditsia triacanthos - Honeylocust (thornless cultivars only).
Tilia cordata - Littleleaf Linden.
Zelkova serrata - Japanese Zelkova.

H.	The following plant material  is  permitted  for  use  as  tree  plantings  when placement is greater than four (4) feet from curb, sidewalk, or asphalt surface.

Acer rubrum - Red Maple (all cultivars).
Acer saccharum - Sugar maple (all cultivars). Fraxinus americana - White Ash (all cultivars). Fraxinus nigra – Black Ash.
Fraxinus pennsylvania - Green Ash.
Ginko biloba - Ginko (male only). Platanus x acerifolia  - London Planetree. Quercus acutissima - Sawtooth Oak. Quercus imbricaria - Shingle Oak.
Ulmus americana – American Elm (American ‘Liberty’ variety only).

I.	In addition to plant material included in Section 515 1.G. and 515 1.H. above, the following may be utilized where required for buffer yards, detention  basins, parking areas, open space planting, etc.

SMALL TREES

Acer buergeranum tree form - Trident Maple Acer ginnala tree form - Amur Maple
Acer griseum tree form - Paperback Maple Acer tataricum tree form - Tatarian Maple Amelanchier canandensis - Shad-bush
Amelanchier laevis tree form - Serviceberry (all cultivars)
Amelanchier canadensis - Shad-bush Asimina triloba - Pawpaw
Betula nigra - River Birch Betula populifolia - Grey Birch
Carpinus betulus - European Hornbeam
Carpinus caroliniana - American Hornbeam Cercis canadensis - Red Bud
Cercis canadensis tree form - Eastern Redbud
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

Cornus kousa tree form - Kousa Dogwood
Crataegus (many species) - Hawthorn (thornless only) Crataegus mollis - Scarlet Thorn
Ilex montana - Large-leaved Holly Ilex opaca - American Holly Magnolia tripetala - Umbrella-tree
Magnolia x loebneri `Merrill' - Merrill Magnolia Malus `Centzam' tree form - Centurion Crabapple
Malus `Hargozam' tree form - Harvest Gold Crabapple Malus `Snowdrift' tree form - Snowdrift Crabapple  Malus `Spring Snow' tree form - Springsnow Crabapple Malus x zumi `Calocarpa' tree form - Redbud Crabapple Ostrya virginiana - American Hop-Hornbeam
Prunus americana - Wild Plum
Prunus pennsylvanica - Bird-cherry
Prunus serrulata tree form - Kwanzan oriental cherry Pyrus betulifolia - Birchleaf Pear
Pyrus calleryana - Callery Pear (all cultivars except Bradford) Sorbus (many species/hybrids) - Mountain Ash
Sorbus americana - American Mountain-Ash
Syringa reticulata `Ivory Silk' - Ivory Silk Japanese Tree Lilac

LARGE TREES

Acer negundo - Box Elder Acer nigrum - Black Maple
Aesculus hippocastanum `B aumannii' - Bauman Horse Chestnut Aesculus x carnea `Briotii' - Ruby Red Horse Chestnut
Betula nigra - River Birch
Betula papyrifera - Paper Birch Carya cordiformis - Bitternut Hickory Carya glabra - Pignut
Carya ovata - Shagbark Hickory
Carya tomentosa - Mockernut Catalpa bignonioides - Catalpa Fagus granifolia - American Beech
Gymnocladus dioicus - Kentucky Coffee-tree Juglans nigra - Black Walnut
Larix laricina - American Larch Liquidambar styraciflua - Sweet -Gum Liriodendron tuliptree - Tulip-tree Magnolia acuminata  - Cucumber-tree
Ostrya virginiana tree form - American Hophornbeam Prunus serotina - Black Cherry
Quercus alba - White Oak Quercus borealis - Red Oak Quercus coccinea - Scarlet Oak Quercus falcata - Spanish Oak Quercus macrocarpa - Burr Oak
Quercus muehlenbergii - Yellow Chestnut Oak
Quercus palustris - Pin Oak Quercus phellos - Willow Oak
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

Quercus rubra - Northern Red Oak Quercus stellata - Post Oak
Robinia pseudoacacia - Black Locust Tilia americana  - American Linden Tilia heterophylla - White Basswood Tilia tomentosa - Silver Linden

EVERGREENS (4 FEET HIGH MINIMUM)

Abies balsamea - Balsem Fir Ilex opaca - American Holly Picea abies - Norway Spruce Picea omorika - Serbian Spruce
Picea pungens - Colorado Spruce
Picea rubens - Red Spruce Pinus echinata - Short-leaf Pine Pinus nigra - Austrian Pine Pinus strobus - White Pine Pinus virginiana - Virginia Pine
Pseudotsuga menziesli - Douglas Fir
Tsuga canadensis - Canada Hemlock

HEDGE (4 FEET HIGH MINIMUM)

Crataegus intricata - Thicket Hawthorn Forsythia intermedia - Border Forsythia
Rhamnus frazula columnaris - Tallhedge Buckthorn Syringa chinensis - Chinese Lilac
Syringa vulgaris - Common Lilac
Viburnum alatus - Viburnum

HEDGEROW (4 FEET HIGH MINIMUM)

Crataegus crus-galli - Cockspur Thorn   Crataegus phaenopyrum - Washington Hawthorn Elaeagnus angustifolia - Russian Olive  Euonymus alatus - Winged Euonymus
Viburnum sieboldii - Siebold Viburnum
Viburnum tomentosum - Doublefile Viburnum

SHRUBS (3 FEET HIGH MINIMUM)

Juniperus virginiana - Upright Juniper Phracantha lalandi - Laland Firethorn Taxus capitita - Upright Yew
Taxus hicksi - Hicks Yew
Thuja occidentalis - American Arborvitae

SHRUBS (4 FEET HIGH MINIMUM)

Euonymus alatus - Winged Euonymus Hamamelis vernalia - Vernal Witch Hazel
 
ARTICLE V - GE NERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

Hamamelis virginiana - Common Witch Hazel Ilex verticillata - Winterberry
Rhamnus frangula - Glossy Buckthorn Viburnum dentatum  - Arrowwood Viburnum Viburnum lantana - Wayfaring tree Viburnum

Note:	Additional trees and other plant material and cultivars may be utilized when approved by the Township.

J.	Plant Material Specifications:

(1)	Name of Plants: shall agree with the nomenclature of "Standard Plant Names" as adopted by American Joint Committee on Horticulture Nomenclature, 1942 edition as amended;  size  and  grading  standards shall conform to those specified by the American Association of Nurserymen in the latest edition of the "USDA Standards for  Nursery Stock". No substitutions shall be permitted except by written permission of the Township.

(2)	Quality: All plants shall be typical of their species or variety; and shall have normal, well-developed branches and vigorous  fibrous  root systems. All plants shall be nursery -grown unless otherwise stated; they shall have been growing under the same climate conditions as the municipality for at least two (2) years prior to date of planting. All plants which are found unsuitable in growth or condition or which are not true to name shall be removed and replaced with acceptable plants.

(3)	Preparation of Plants: All precautions customary in good trade practice shall be taken in preparing plants for moving. All balled and burlapped plants shall be dug to meet or exceed the "USDA Standards for Nursery Stock".

(4)	Delivery: Plants shall be packed, transported and handled with utmost care to insure adequate protection against injury.

2.	Landscaping of Off-street Parking Areas:

A.	Within the parking facility there shall be planted at least one (1) tree of 2-1/2" caliper minimum for every five (5) parking spaces in single bays and one (1) tree of 2-1/2 inch caliper minimum for every ten (10) parking spaces in double bays. Trees shall be planted in such a manner to afford maximum protection from the sun for parked vehicles.

B.	A minimum of ten percent (10%) of any parking lot facility over two thousand (2,000) square feet in gross area shall be devoted to landscaping, inclusive of required trees.

C.	The perimeter of all parking facilities shall be landscaped with one or any combination of the following buffers in order to visually screen the vehicles:

(1)	One (1) 18" - 24" tall shrub per each three feet of buffer;
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

(2)	One (1) 4 - 4-1/2 feet high berm;

(3)	One (1) 5 feet high wooden or stockade type fence.

D.	All plantings shall be able to survive soot, gas fumes and salt. Trees which have low growing branches, gum or moisture which may drop on vehicles; blossoms, thorns, seeds or pods which may clog drainage facilities shall be avoided. The plantings chosen should be of sufficient size to be effective the first year they are planted.

E.	All landscape planting areas shall be raised in order to prevent road salts from seeping into the planting area.

3.	Open Space Plantings:

A.	The applicant shall provide a method of physically delineating open space areas from private lots. Such methods shall include shrubbery, trees, markers, fencing, or other methods acceptable to the Township.  Trees,  shrubs,  markers,  or fencing shall be placed on the linked open space at its boundary. Where hedge plant material is provided as screening or a barrier between private lots and open space areas, additional markers or plant material  for  delineation  are  not necessary.

B.	Open  space  areas  not  existing  as  forest  or  proposed  as  natural  areas  (i.e. wetland) shall be established in lawn conditions.  Prior to seeding these areas, a soil test must be conducted by a soil testing laboratory and the soils amended to achieve pH and N.P.K. levels as recommended for turf.  At time of dedication, all open land areas must have at least 90% cover with appropriate grasses or other species  and  be  free  of  noxious  weeds  as  defined  by  the  Commonwealth  of Pennsylvania.

4.	Existing Vegetation: In cases  where natural features existing on the site duplicate  or essentially duplicate the requirements of the street tree, buffering, or landscaping provisions of this Ordinance, these requirements may be waived by the Board of Supervisors.

5.	Protection of Existing Plant Material:

A.	All subdivisions and land developments shall be laid out in such a manner so as to preserve healthy trees and shrubs on the site.

B.	During the construction of any site, trees and shrubs to be preserved shall be protected by snow fencing, safety fencing, or silt fencing, to insure that there is no encroachment within the area of their dripline by changing grade, trenching, stockpiling of building materials or topsoil, or the compaction of the soil and roots by any motor vehicle unless the following regulations are met:

(1)	The grade of land within the entire area of dripline shall not be raised more than 6" unless tree wells are  constructed  around  each  trunk  or group of trunks and aeration pipes are extended out to the edge of the dripline.
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

(2)	Tree wells are to be constructed of uncemented stone, or any  other suitable material. Such walls shall be a minimum of three (3) feet in diameter or one (1) foot in diameter for each inch in caliper measured twelve (12) inches above natural ground level, whichever is greater; and shall be a maximum of 3 feet deep.

(3)	Retaining walls are to be constructed around each tree or group of trees immediately after  any  grade is lowered within the area of the dripline. This retaining wall is to be constructed of 8" x 8" pressure treated landscape ties or any other suitable material. Retaining walls must be designed and constructed to withstand overturning and frost heave.

C.	If any plant material is to be moved, it must be done in accordance with specifications set forth by the American Association of Nurserymen.

D.	All diseased or dead trees shall be promptly removed from the site. All trees to be preserved shall be pruned when necessary to remove dead limbs.

E.	Any grading within ten (10) feet of tree trunks must be done by hand.  No equipment is to be driven over this area and no building materials  are  to  be stacked against the trees or within the area of this barrier.

F.	No tree is to support any scaffolding, signs, temporary utilities, surveying spikes, or any other device.

G.	If topsoil is to be stockpiled, it shall be located in an area at least ten (10) feet from any tree designated to remain, and shall in no case be removed from the site.

H.	Those trees whose removal will damage other trees which are to remain must be removed by hand. The resulting stumps must be carefully removed to minimize damage to roots and trunks of other trees.

I.	Trees Damaged During Construction.

1.	Tree trunks and exposed roots damaged during construction shall be protected from further damage. Damaged branches shall be pruned according to National Arborist Association standards. All cuts  shall  be made sufficiently close to the trunk or parent limb but without cutting into the branch collar or leaving a protruding stub. All necessary pruning cuts must be made to prevent bark from being torn from the tree and to facilitate rapid healing.

2.	All trees which have been disturbed or have experienced damage to their roots or branches shall be fertilized in early fall or mid -spring. Fertilizer grade shall  have  approximately  3  parts  nitrogen  to  1  part  phosphorus and potassium (3-1-1 ratio). Fertilizer shall be broadcast over the soil surface in an area twice the size of the tree protection zone at a rate of one (1) pound of nitrogen per 1000 square feet.
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

J.	Stumps, branches and other wood debris shall not be buried on site. Where trees are removed outside of an area to be excavated, it is preferred that stumps be removed by grinding to a point six (6) inches below existing grade.

K.	Cut trees shall not be pushed or pulled into an area where trees  are  to  be retained.

Section 516 – S tormwater Management. All subdivisions and land developments shall comply with the Haycock Township Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance No. _____, adopted on ______, as amended. Requirements of the Stormwater Management Ordinance shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, requirements set forth within Section 516 of this Ordinance.

1.	General  Requirements.

A.	Lots shall be laid out and graded with a minimum slope of two (2%) percent to provide positive drainage away from buildings. The Township may require a grading and drainage plan for individual  lots  indicating  a  buildable  area  within each lot, complying with the setback requirements, for which positive drainage is assured.

B.	On-lot drainage swales shall be designed to provide pos itive conveyance of surface water from the individual lot. Each swale lot shall convey stormwater from the lot to a storm sewer system, street, open space area, or stormwater management easement without crossing or combining with stormwater  from more than the adjacent lot.

C.	Drainage swales necessary to control surface drainage between lots shall be centered about the common property line.

D.	No person, corporation, or other entity shall block, impede the flow, alter, construct any structure, or deposit any material or thing, or commit any act which will affect normal or flood flow in any stream or watercourse without  having obtained prior approval from the Township and/or Department of Environmental Protection, whichever is applicable.

E.	Whenever a watercourse, perennial stream or intermittent  stream  is  located within a development site, it shall remain open in its natural state and location, and shall not be piped (except for road crossings). It is the responsibility of the developer to stabilize existing eroded stream/channel banks.

F.	Where a subdivision or land development is traversed by a natural watercourse, there shall be provided a drainage easement or right -of-way conforming substantially with the line of such watercourse.  The width of the easement shall be adequate  to  provide  for unimpeded  flow  of  stormwater runoff  from  the  100 year return storm event. Terms of the easement shall prohibit excavation, the placing of fill or structures, and any alterations which may adversely affect the flow of stormwater runoff within any portion  of  the  easement.  Periodic maintenance of the easement to ensure proper runoff conveyance shall be required by the landowner.

G.	Existing points of concentrated drainage discharge onto adjacent property shall not be altered without written approval of the affected property owner(s).
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

H.	Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge onto adjacent property shall be managed such that, at a minimum, the peak diffused flow does not increase in the general direction of discharge, except as otherwise provided in this Section. If diffused flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto adjacent property, the developer must document that there are adequate downstream conveyance facilities to safely transport the concentrated discharge or otherwise prove that no harm will result from the concentrated discharge.

I.	Any drainage facilities required by this Section that are located on, or discharge to, a State highway rights-of-way shall be subject to approval  by  the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.

J.	Storm drainage facilities and appurtenances shall be so designed and provided as to minimize erosion in swales, watercourse channels and at all points of discharge.

K.	Minimization of impervious surfaces and infiltration of  runoff  through  seepage beds, infiltration trenches, etc. are encouraged, where soil conditions permit, to reduce the size or eliminate the need for retention/detention facilities.

L.	Roof drains and sump pumps shall be discharged to a natural watercourse, drainage swale, or stormwater easement. Roof drains and sump pumps shall not be connected to a storm sewer or street unless designed as part of a stormwater management facility within a proposed development. In no case shall roof drains or sump pumps be connected to a sanitary sewer.

2.	Storm Drainage System Requirements.

A.	Any proposed storm drainage plans which affect the drainage basin  in  any stream or watercourse shall be approved by the Division of Dams and Waterway Management of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection in accordance with the Title 72, Chapter 105, as amended.

B.	Easements shall be dedicated to the Township along all natural or  manmade streams and watercourses and/or stormwater management facility areas within a subdivision or land development. These easements shall be of sufficient width to convey a 100-year design storm. Easements shall be provided where  storm drainage swales, culverts, or other structures traverse, enter or discharge onto private property. On private property, the entire easement area and fencing and landscaping (if any) shall be maintained by the property owner. The Township shall not maintain and/or repair any improvements within that easement unless stormwater runoff from public roads or public land crosses through the easement. If stormwater runoff from public roads or public lands cross through the easement, the Township shall, upon satisfactory installation of improvements as specified	in a Developer’s Improvement Agreement and  Maintenance Agreement, maintain and repair only the structural stormwater management improvements within the easement such as:

(1)	Piping
(2)	Inlets
(3)	Outlet, Headwalls
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

(4)	Energy Dissipation Structures or Facilities
(5)	Stormwater Management Facility Control Structures

The  landowner  shall  be  responsible  for  all  other  maintenance  and  repairs  within  this easement.  For example, the landowner must:

(1)	Mow the lawn.
(2)	Repair or replace fencing.
(3)	Repair or replace landscaping.
(4)	Control vermin and repair damage from animals.
(5)	Keep the area free of obstructions, structures, vegetation, or accumulated sediment that may block or hinder the function and purpose of the easement.
(6)	Keep the area free of litter or garbage.
(7)	Repair erosion and restore vegetation as necessary to keep the easement in good repair.

C.	Storm sewers, culverts, and related installations shall be provided to permit the flow of natural watercourses, to ensure the drainage of all low points (except in protected “wetlands”) on the subdivided lots or developed land areas and along the line of streets, and to intercept stormwater runoff along the streets at intervals related to the extent and grade of the area drained. The system shall also be designed to accommodate or receive and discharge all runoff from adjacent upstream properties. Where adequate existing storm  sewers  are  readily accessible, the developer must connect new stormwater facilities to the existing system.

D.	Flood Protection: No stormwater runoff or natural drainage water shall be so diverted as to overload existing drainage systems, or create flooding or the need for additional drainage structures on other private properties or public  lands, without proper and approved provisions being made to address these conditions.

E.	Whenever the location of concentrated runoff from a site is changed due to development, the developer must secure written approval from any adjacent downstream property  owners. The developer  shall indemnify  and/or  hold harmless the Township against any claim of damage from any downstream property owners that may result from the proposed development.

F.	Scour and Erosion Prevention: In areas in which the street curbs are not required by either this Ordinance or by the Township, drainage may be accomplished by natural or artificial swales and culverts. Special structures such as check dams, drop-outlets, concrete flow channels, or other energy dissipating structures, rip- rap or non-degradable geotextile linings, may be required to prevent scour  or erosion in locations with large runoff  quantities  or  steep  slopes.  Bituminous paved swales will not be permitted.

G.	All proposed streets shall be designed  so  as  to  discharge  surface  water  from their rights-of-way. Storm drainage improvements as deemed necessary by the Township shall be required along all existing streets on which a subdivision or land development abuts.
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

H.	Design Criteria: Unless a more conservative design is required by another Regulation, or is required because of conditions particular to an individual development, the following storm criteria shall be used to design storm collection and conveyance systems:

DESIGN STORM RETURN
(Years)

Fixed Pipe	10
Total Conveyance	100


I.	Design Preparation: Designs of Storm Drainage Systems shall be prepared by a licensed Professional Engineer.   Complete detail calculations shall be submitted to the Township for review. Calculations shall cover the entire drainage basin involved, including consideration of areas outside the proposed subdivision or developed land areas.

J.	Setback to Boundaries: No piped storm sewer system outlet, detention basin, or energy dissipation structure shall discharge closer than twenty (20') feet from the boundary of any drainage easement under the control of the developer or which may be utilized by the developer, so as to allow for adequate space for stormwater dissipation in vegetated land areas controlled by or available to the developer and/or to allow adequate space for equipment access for future maintenance.

3.	Collection System Design.

A.	The collection system shall be designed by the Rational Method of Design in accordance with American Society of Civil Engineers Manual  No.  37  except where noted, using the formula Q=CiA, unless otherwise approved by the Township.

(1)	Capacity: "Q" is the required capacity in cubic feet per second for the collection system at the point of design.

(2)	Runoff Coefficient: "C" is the runoff coefficient applicable to the entire drainage area. It shall be based on consideration of  soil  conditions, average slope of the drainage area and the ultimate development of the entire drainage area according to comprehensive plans. For the various types of ultimate development, the runoff coefficient shall be taken from the table in Appendix "C" unless sufficient engineering data has been presented to the Township Engineer by the Developer which information in the judgment of the Township Engineer is sufficient to warrant the use of an alternate runoff coefficient.

(3)	Rainfall Intensity Formula: "i" is the rainfall intensity in inches per hour and shall be determined from rainfall intensity charts for this area, based on time of concentrations, including Overland Flow Time, Manning's Formulae for channelized flow time and pipe  flow  time.  The  design rainfall frequency shall be taken from the PennDOT Intensity-Duration- Frequency Field Manual, Region 4 as presented in Appendix "C".
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

(a)	A five (5) minute storm duration  shall  be  used  if  the  duration does not result in a maximum expected discharge that exceeds the capacity of a thirty inch pipe.

(b)	If a five (5) minute  storm  duration  results  in  a  pipe  size exceeding thirty (30) inches, the time of concentration approach shall be used in determining storm duration.

(c)	If a five (5) minute  storm  duration  results  in  a  pipe  size exceeding thirty (30) inches, within any run of pipe, the time of concentration approach may be used for sizing of pipes from that point on by adjusting the time of concentration.

(4)	Drainage Area: "A" is the drainage area, in acres, tributary to the point of design, and shall include areas tributary from outside sources as well as from within the subdivision or developed land area itself.

B.	Collection System Standards:

(1)	Curb Inlets: Curb inlets shall be located at curb tangents on the uphill side of street intersection, and at intervals along the curb line to control the maximum amount of encroachment of  runoff  on  the  roadway pavement so that same does not exceed one half of the traveled lane width during the design storm event. Design and location of curb inlets shall be approved by the Township.

(2)	State Approvals: Drainage structures that are located on State highway rights-of-way shall be approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, and a copy of the Highway Occupancy Permit shall be submitted to the Township.

(3)	Pipe Materials: All storm piping shall be Class III reinforced concrete pipe, except when pipe class and strength is required to be increased in accordance with PennDOT Specifications. Piping shall be saw-cut  at ends, as needed, and not hammered or broken. All pipe joints and lift holes must be mortared.

(4)	Minimum Pipe Size:  Minimum pipe size shall be 18 inches.

(5)	Inlet and Manhole  Construction:  Inlet  and  manhole  castings  and concrete construction shall be equivalent to Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Design Standards.

(6)	Roof Drainage: Stormwater roof drains and  pipes  shall  not  discharge water over sidewalks or walkways.

(7)	Open end pipes must be fitted with concrete endwalls or wing walls in accordance with PennDOT Standards.

(8)	Open culvert endwalls or wing walls for pipes larger than eighteen (18) inches in diameter and longer than sixty (60) feet in length shall be fitted
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

with durable protective grates. Design of protective grates is subject to approval by the Township.

(9)	Flow Velocity: Storm drains shall be designed to produce a minimum velocity of 3.0 feet per second when flowing full. The maximum permissible velocity shall be 15.0 feet per second. However, in no case shall the pipe slope be less than 0.5%.

(10)	Inlets and manholes shall be spaced at intervals not exceeding 300 feet, and shall be located wherever branches are connected or sizes are changed, and wherever there is a change in alignment or grade. For drainage lines of at least thirty-six (36) inches diameter, inlets and manholes may be spaced at intervals of four hundred (400) feet. Manholes shall be equipped with open grate lids.

(11)	Storm sewer bedding/backfill requirements shall conform to the construction details included in Appendix "A".

(12)	Inlets shall be located to intercept concentrated runoff prior to discharge over public/private rights-of-way, sidewalks, streets, and driveways.

(13)	The capacity of all inlets shall be based on a maximum surface flow to the inlet of 4.0 cfs, calculated based on the design storm event. The maximum flow to inlets located in low points (such as sag vertical curves) shall include the overland flow directed to the inlet as well as all bypass runoff from upstream inlets.  The bypass flow from upstream inlets shall be calculated using inlet efficiency curves included in PennDOT Design Manual Part 2, latest edition. If the surface flow to in inlet exceeds 4.0 cfs, additional inlets shall be provided upstream of the inlet to intercept the excessive surface flow.

(14)	A minimum drop of two (2) inches shall be provided between the inlet and outlet pipe invert elevations within all inlets and manholes. When varying pipe sizes enter an inlet or manhole, the elevation of the crown of all pipes shall be matched.

(15)	Storm sewer pipes shall have a minimum of 12 inches of cover over the bell of the pipe, and in no case shall any part of the pipe project into the road subbase or curb. Where cover is restricted, equivalent pipe arches may be specified in lieu of circular pipe.

(16)	The capacity  of all  storm sewer  pipes  shall be  calculated utilizing  the Manning Equation for open channel flow  as applied to  closed conduit flow. The Manning’s roughness coefficient shall be 0.13 for all concrete pipe. In cases where pressure flow may occur, the hydraulic grade line shall be calculated throughout the storm sewer system to verify that at least 1 foot of freeboard will be provided in all inlets and manholes for the design storm event.

(17)	Culverts shall be designed based on procedures contained in Hydraulic Design	of Highway Culverts, HDS #5, U.S. Department of Transportation,  Federal Highway Administration.
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

(18)	Storm sewer structures (i.e. endwalls, inlets, end sections, etc.) may not be located on top of or within ten (10) feet of electric, water, sanitary sewer, and gas services and/or mains, unless approval is received from the Township, and from the Authority or Utility  having  jurisdiction  over same.

(19)	Storm sewer pipes must  be oriented at  right angles to  electric, water, sanitary sewer, and gas utilities when crossing above or beneath same. Crossing angles of less than 900  will only be permitted at discretion of the
Township Engineer. When skewed crossings are  permitted,  interior angles between alignment of the storm sewer pipe and utility may not be less than 450.   Vertical and horizontal design of storm sewer must be
linear.

(20)	Where a public storm sewer system is not located within a right-of-way, or dedicated public property, a twenty (20) feet wide easement shall be established to encompass the storm sewer system. For multiple pipes or utilities, the width of the easement shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet.

C.	Open Swales and Gutters: Open swales shall be designed on the basis  of Manning's Formula as indicated for collection systems with the following considerations:

(1)	Roughness Coefficient: The roughness coefficient  shall  be  0.040  for earth swales.

(2)	Bank Slopes: Slopes for swale banks shall not be steeper than one (1) vertical for three (3) horizontal.

(3)	Flow Velocity: Design velocity in grass or vegetated swales shall not exceed four (4) feet per second.

(4)	To minimize sheet flow of stormwater across lots located on the lower side of roads or streets, and to divert flow away from building areas, the cross-section of the street as constructed shall provide for parallel ditches or swales or curbing on the lower side which shall discharge only at drainage easements, unless otherwise approved by the Township.

(5)	Gutters and swales adjacent to road paving shall be permitted to carry a maximum flow of five (5) cubic feet per second prior to discharge away from the street surface, unless it is proven to the satisfaction of the Township by engineering calculations that the road slopes or other factors would allow higher gutter or swale capacity.

(6)	Flows larger than those permitted in gutters and roadside swales may be carried in swales outside the required road right -of-way in separate drainage easements, or may be carried in pipes or culverts  inside  or outside the required road right-of-way.

(7)	Swales shall be  stabilized  with  vegetation  or  other  materials,  approved by the Township, to prevent erosion.
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

(8)	Swales shall be provided with underdrains as deemed necessary by the Township should overland seepage result in potential  maintenance problems for same. Underdrains must discharge into a natural drainage channel or storm sewer system.

D.	Bridges and Culverts: Bridges and culverts shall be designed in accordance with Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Construction Standards. Separate design plans and specifications shall be required for  each  bridge  and  culvert which plans and specifications shall be subject to review and approval of the Township.

Section 517. - Excavation and Grading.   All construction wherein excavation, placement of fill, and/or grading activities are performed shall conform with the following general requirements:

1.	No excavation or fill shall be made with a face steeper than three (3) horizontal to one (1) vertical, except under one or both of the following conditions:

A.	The material is sufficiently stable to sustain a steeper slope. A written statement to that effect from a Professional Engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and experienced in erosion control shall be submitted to the Township. The statement shall affirm that the site has been inspected and the deviation from the slope restriction shall not result in injury to persons or damage to property. A detail of the treatment of the slope (proposed grade, seeding, erosion protection, etc., shall be submitted with the application.

B.	A concrete, masonry, or other approved retaining wall is designed by a Registered	Professional Engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania constructed to support the face of the excavation or fill.

2.	If the vertical drop of an excavation or fill slope is greater than five (5) feet, then the maximum slope shall not exceed four (4) horizontal to one (1) vertical.

3.	The top or bottom edges of slopes shall be a minimum of five (5) feet from property lines or right -of-way lines of streets in order to permit the normal rounding of the edge without encroachment on abutting property.

4.	Adequate provision shall be made to prevent surface water from damaging the cut face of excavation and the sloping surfaces of fills.

5.	No person, corporation, or other such entity shall block, impede the flow of, alter, construct any structure, or deposit any material or  thing  or  perform  any work that will affect the normal or flood flow in any stream or watercourse without having obtained prior approval from the Township and/or Department of Environmental Protection, whichever is applicable.

6.	All lots, tracts, or parcels shall be graded to provide positive drainage away  from buildings and dispose of it without ponding, except where ponding (detention/retention facilities, swales, etc.) is part of the stormwater management plan for the site.

7.	Concentration of surface water run-off shall be permitted only in swales, watercourses, or stormwater management facilities.

8.	In no case shall grading be done in such a manner as to divert water onto the property of another landowner unless part of a stormwater management plan.
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

9.	Earth  disturbance/staging  shall  be  in  strict  accordance  with  the  approved  grading  and erosion/sedimentation control plan.

10.	Areas of the site to remain undisturbed shall be protected from encroachment by construction equipment/vehicles to maintain the existing infiltration characteristics of the soil.

11.	The minimum depth of topsoil to be replace shall be eight (8) inches, or the existing depth of topsoil encountered on the site, whichever is greater.

12.	Topsoil shall not be removed from the development site. Topsoil shall be stripped, stockpiled, and redistributed on the site. Prior to plan approval, the applicant/designee shall provide the Township with calculations  to  determine  the  volume  of  topsoil anticipated to the stripped, stockpiled, and replaced on the site to  verify  that  excess topsoil will not be generated as a result of construction activity.

13.	During grading operations, necessary measures for dust control must be exercised.

14.	No grading equipment shall be permitted to be loaded and/or unloaded on a paved public street, and no grading equipment shall be permitted to travel on or across a public street unless licensed for operation on public thoroughfares.

15.	Grading equipment shall not be permitted to cross streams. Temporary crossings shall only be permitted where application is made to, and  approval  received  from  PADEP (where applicable), Bucks Conservation District, and the Township.

Section 518. - Erosion and Sedimentation Control.

1.	An erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be submitted with all  applications wherein excavation, placement of fill, and/or grading activities are proposed. The plan shall include a construction staging narrative indicating the sequence of earthmoving activities, and proposed erosion and sedimentation control procedures.   Measures used to control erosion and reduce sedimentation during construction activities shall strictly conform to the standards and specifications of the Bucks Conservation District and sequence of earthmoving activities. No subdivision or land development wherein earth disturbance is proposed shall be approved unless there has been an erosion and sediment control plan approval by the Bucks Conservation District. At a minimum, the following measures shall be included where applicable:

A.	Stripping of vegetation, regrading, or other activities shall be done in a way that will minimize erosion and resulting sedimentation.

B.	Cut and fill operations shall be kept to a minimum. Wherever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented.

C.	All erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be installed per the approved plan prior to any earthmoving activities. Where  a  stormwater management basin is in volved, the basin  shall be constructed, functional,  and stabilized prior to any additional site activity. An as-built plan of  the  facility prepared by a Registered Professional Land Surveyor or Engineer, licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, shall be submitted to the  Township  for review to verify adequate stage/storage capacity prior to commencement of other site activity.  Plan must include note stating the same.
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

D.	Disturbed earthen areas and duration of exposure shall be kept to a practical minimum, but shall not exceed twenty (20) days. All disturbed soils and topsoil stockpile areas shall be stabilized as quickly as possible  and,  if  necessary, seeded with temporary vegetation and mulched. If stockpile areas are located on sloping ground or near waters  of  the  Commonwealth,  same  shall  be  enclosed with silt fencing.

E.	Permanent vegetation shall be installed as soon as practical on all sites.

F.	All runoff from project areas shall be collected and diverted to facilities  for removal of sediment.

G.	Runoff from a project area shall not be discharged into the waters of the Commonwealth without means to prevent sedimentation.

H.	Sedimentation in the runoff water shall be trapped and filtered until the disturbed area is stabilized by the use of debris basins, sediment  basins,  silt  traps,  or similar measures.

I.	Sediment barriers shall be properly installed with silt fencing trenched and haybales staked.

J.	Tire cleaning areas constructed of AASHTO #1 stone and at least fifty (50) feet in length shall be provided at each point of access to the site and individual lots (once internal streets are constructed).

K.	During construction activity, necessary measures for  dust  control  must  be exercised.

L.	It shall be the responsibility of each person, corporation or other entity performing grading	and/or building activities to install and  maintain  erosion  and sedimentation controls until the site is stabilized. In the event any mud and/or debris is transported from the site onto a public roadway, the debris shall be immediately removed and the roadway swept and/or  washed  as  deemed necessary by the Township at the owner's expense.

2.	Design of energy dissipation for high volume and/or high velocity discharge from storm sewer pipes and channels shall be in accordance with Hydraulic Engineering Circular No. 14, "Hydraulic Design of Energy Dissipaters for Culverts and Channels" as published by Department of Transportation, FHA, when deemed necessary by the Township Engineer, and as approved by the Bucks Conservation District".

3.	Design of Reno mattress and gabions shall be in accordance with any of the following publications:

A.	"Flexible Linings In Reno Mattress and Gabions for Canals and Canalized Water Courses" (as amended) published by Maccaferri.

B.	"Flexible Gabion Structures In Earth Retaining Works" (as amended) published by Maccaferri.
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

C.	Any other similar technical publication as prepared by a manufacturer or which has been prepared based on engineering study.

4.	Improvements shall be made to existing drainage channels, roadside swales, and areas of shallow concentrated or sheet flow to eliminate erosion.

5.	Open  space  areas  designated  for  agricultural  use  shall  include  implementation  of  an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved by the Bucks Conservation District.

Section 519. - Water Supply, Distribution Systems and Fire Protection.

1.	Water Supply.   All lots and leased units in a  subdivision or land development shall be provided with adequate water supply by means of one of the following methods:

A.	Connection to a centralized or public water supply.

B.	On-lot water supply.

2.	Centralized Water Supply and Distribution Systems:

A.	All residential  subdivisions  of fifteen  (15)  lots  or more  wherein  the  average lot size is less than two (2) acres; and all non-residential subdivisions shall  be required to be provided with centralized water supply and distribution system.

B.	All centralized water supply and distribution systems shall be designed to Township standards. Systems offered for dedication to the Township shall be accepted at the sole discretion of the Township.

C.	All private centralized water supply systems shall have an operations and maintenance program approved by the Township.  The system shall be operated by	a certified operator licensed by the  Pennsylvania  Department  of Environmental  Protection.

D.	Water quality requirements for a proposed centralized water system shall conform	to applicable standards of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and Bucks County Department of Health.

E.	Water mains shall be constructed by the developer in such a manner as to make adequate water service available to each lot, building or dwelling unit within the subdivision. A minimum pressure of thirty-five (35) pounds per square inch shall be provided at each house or other building to be connected to the water supply main.	The water supply must comply with regulations and standards of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, and when applicable, the Delaware River Basin Commission.

F.	The system shall also be designed with adequate capacity and appropriately spaced fire hydrants for fire fighting purposes as determined by the Township. Hydrant locations shall be reviewed by the Fire Marshall and Fire Company servicing the area, and approved by the Township.
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

G.	Water Impact Study. A water impact study pursuant to Section 408 shall be required for all centralized water supply and distribution systems wherein a new water supply source is proposed to be developed.

3.	Individual On-lot Wells.

A.	Where individual on-lot wells are proposed within a new subdivision or land development, wells shall be drilled, installed, and tested for  adequate  water supply to serve the proposed use prior to plan approval  in  accordance  with Section 519 3.B. thru E. Where existing wells are proposed to be abandoned, well closure must be in accordance with PADEP Well Abandonment Procedures.

B.	Well  Certification.

(1)	The well yield shall be determined by a pumping test of not less than 4 hours duration conducted at a rate of not less than 150% of the intended long-term withdrawal from the well.  The 4 hour test shall be conducted at a  constant pumping  rate that  should not  deviate greater  than +5% during the test.

(2)	In the event the well does not yield a minimum of 6 gpm, the proposed water system shall be designed to be able to provide sufficient storage via oversize tanks and/or storage in the well bore for the length of time it would take for the expected peak demand to empty a standard pressure tank being supplied by a well pumping 6 gpm.

(3)	All well drillers shall, upon completion of the well, provide the Township with a copy of the report submitted to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and sufficient data and documentation to verify compliance with Section 519.3.A.

(4)	A minimum of one (1) water sample shall be collected for the following tests a. thru i. (except as noted). Samples must be collected 10 minutes prior to the end of the pump test. All test results must meet established maximum contaminant levels (MCL's) for Pennsylvania. Water samples must be tested by a State certified water laboratory.

a.	Coliform - A minimum of three (3) water samples shall be collected during the pump test for analysis of coliform bacteria. The first sample shall be collected 15 minutes prior to the end of the test with the remaining two samples collected at 5 minute intervals.

b.	PH

c.	Iron

d.	Nitrates

e.	Total dissolved solids

f.	TCE, PCE, and 1-1-1 trichlorethane
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

g.	Detergents

h.	Benzene, toluene, xylene

i.	Total petroleum hydrocarbons

C.	Well Construction. Each well shall be provided with a water tight casing. The minimum length of the casing to be 40' or 10' into bedrock, whichever is greater. The material of the casing shall be steel with a weight of 18.97 lbs. per linear foot. All joints between sections of casing shall be made by continuous welding. Where a pump section or discharge pipes enter or leave a well through the side of the casing, the circle of contact shall be water tight. All casing shall extend at least eighteen (18) inches above final grade. The annular space between the earth and outside of the casing shall be filled with cement grout or Bentonite to a distance of at least six (6) feet below the ground surface. Unconsolidated or carbonate water bearing formations will require special consideration.

D.	Permit Required. Prior to commencement of well drilling operation, owner shall be required to make application to,  and  receive  approval  from,  Haycock Township. Issuance of a permit to drill well shall not be made until payment of a permit fee in the amount established by Resolution of the Board of Supervisors.

Section 520. - Sanitary Sewage Disposal.

1.	The developer shall install the most effective type of sanitary disposal consistent with the Township's Official Plan for sewage facilities prepared in accordance with  the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act 537), the Township Sewage Facilities Plan, and Chapter 71 of the Pennsylvania Depart ment of Environmental Protection Regulations, for the subdivision or development.

2.	When centralized/public sewer is proposed, the applicant shall insure that sufficient capacity is available to serve all of the proposed lots or units of occupancy within the site.

3.	In subdivision/land developments where connection to centralized/public sewage system is not proposed, on-lot sewage disposal systems shall be installed by the property owner in accordance with the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Chapter 73 of DEP Regulations and the requirements of applicable Township regulations.

4.	Sanitary sewer systems shall be located and/or designed to prevent flood damage and to eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system, or discharges from the system into flood waters.

5.	On-lot sewage disposal systems shall be located and/or designed to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding.

6.	The developer shall be responsible for the completion of the appropriate Planning Module for land development components as required by the Department of Environmental Protection, including Alternatives Analysis and Feasibility Studies. (Refer Section 407 of this Ordinance)
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

7.	All final plans shall contain a notice regarding sewage disposal systems (refer sample in Appendix "B").

A.	ON-LOT SEWAGE DISPOSAL - All subdivision  and  land  development  plans shall contain a plan note specifying that approval of the plan does not guarantee permit issuance for sewage disposal.

B.	PUBLIC OR CENTRALIZED SEWERS - All subdivision and land development plans shall contain a plan note specifying that connection to public sewer is required.

8.	Design standards and specifications for public/centralized sanitary sewer systems shall conform to requirements of the Township.

Section 521. - Utilities.

1.	Easements for utilities shall have a minimum width of twenty (20) feet.

2.	To the fullest extent possible, easements for public utilities shall be centered  on  or adjacent to rear or side lot lines.

3.	Telephone, electric, TV, cable, and such other utilities shall be installed underground and shall be provided within right-of-way easements to be dedicated for such utilities, and in accordance with plans approved by the Board of Supervisors and the applicable utility company. Underground installation  of  the  utility distribution  and  service lines  shall  be completed prior to street paving, curb and sidewalk installation.

Section 522. - Monuments and Markers.

1.	Any existing monument, iron pipe, pin, or marker determined and identified to be existing found property corners are to remain undisturbed.

2.	Permanent stone or concrete monuments shall be accurately placed by a Registered Surveyor at the intersection of all lines forming angles and at changes in directions of lines in the boundary (perimeter) of the property subdivided; and at all corners of lots and open space areas within the subdivision. Monuments shall be pre -manufactured and not field constructed.

A.	Monuments shall be a minimum twenty four (24) inches in length.

B.	Monuments less than twenty four (24) inches in length may only be utilized when obstructions are encountered and use is approved by the Township.

3.	All streets shall be monumented on the ultimate right-of-way lines, at the following locations:

A.	At least two (2) monuments at each intersection.

B.	At changes in direction of street lines, excluding curb arcs at intersection.

C.	At each end of each curved street line, excluding curb arcs at intersection.
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

D.	At intermediate points, wherever topographical or conditions make it impossible to sight between two otherwise required monuments.

E.	At such other places along the lines of streets as may be determined by the Township Engineer to be necessary so that any street may be readily defined in the future.

4.	Utility and stormwater management easements shall be monumented on one (1) side at the beginning and end of the easement and at all changes in direction.

5.	All monuments shall be placed so that the scored point shall coincide exactly with the point of intersection of the line being monumented.

6.	Monuments shall be set with their top level at the finished  grade  of  the  surrounding ground, except as follows:

A.	Monuments which are placed within the lines of existing or proposed sidewalks shall be so located that their tops will not be affected by lateral movement of the sidewalks.

B.	Where sidewalks are existing, a stone point - a four (4) inch square chisel cut in the sidewalk with a drill hole in the center - may be substituted for a monument. Where bituminous paving is existing, a railroad spike may be substituted for a monument or iron pin where required.

7.	Permanent reference marker pins of 1/2 inch OD solid iron rod, at least thirty (30) inches long shall be set at the following points:

A.	At all points where easements intersect property lines.

B.	At all other changes in direction of easement boundaries not located within future lawns.

8.	All outboundary (site perimeter) monuments shall be installed and certified as to  their accuracy and conformance to plan information by the responsible surveyor prior to plan recordation.

9.	All property pins and monuments shall be installed and certified as to their accuracy and conformance to plan information by the responsible surveyor prior to  issuance  of  a building permit for the subject lot. In the event it is determined by the Township that installation prior to construction start is not practical due to future grading operations, temporary wood stake corners shall be set by a licensed surveyor to permit stakeout inspection of proposed construction activities relative to required setbacks. Permanent property pins and monuments shall then be required to be installed prior to issuance of a Zoning Permit for the parcel.

9.	All monuments along right -of-way being dedicated to the Township, and pins delineating easements being granted to the Township, shall be installed an d certified as to their accuracy and conformance to plan information by the responsible surveyor. Installation and certification shall be provided prior to execution and acceptance of public improvements.
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

10.	Any pre-existing or new property markers/monuments of a property under construction, or properties surrounding the subject property under construction, which are disturbed by construction activity are required to be reset and re-certified by a licensed surveyor. Property owner and/or developer of the property under construction resulting in the disturbance shall be held responsible for proper replacement and re-certification of disturbed  property  markers/monuments.

Section 523. - Parking Facilities.

1.	Off-street parking facilities shall be provided in compliance with the parking requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and the regulations contained herein.

2.	Angled or perpendicular parking shall not be permitted along public streets.

3.	General Parking Lot Standards.

A.	Parking shall not be permitted along driveways which serve as the entrance(s) or exit(s) to parking areas.

B.	Parking areas shall be set back  from  boundary  lines  and  ultimate  right -of-way lines in compliance with the requirements of the Township Zoning Ordinance. In any case not regulated by zoning, parking areas shall not be located closer than 15 feet from any tract boundary line or ultimate right-of-way line.  These setback areas shall be landscaped in accordance with the requirements of Section 515 of this Ordinance.

C.	Where the edge of an existing parking area is located close to a street, driveway, or other parking area and the property is proposed for subdivision and/or land development, a minimum separation of ten feet shall be provided between these features where feasible. This spacing shall consist of a raised landscape area, preferably curbed, with planting in conformance with Section 515, herein.

D.	Dead-ended parking areas shall be discouraged when the required parking capacity can be accommodated in a layout that permits more convenient vehicular movements. However, extraneous through -traffic flow should  be avoided.

(1)	Up to 30 parking spaces may also be located in a dead-ended parking area if there is no more desirable alternative feasible, and sufficient back-up areas are provided for the end stalls.

(2)	More than 30 parking spaces may be located in a dead-ended parking area only if a turnaround area is provided at the closed end, suitable for passenger car turning.

E.	Handicapped parking stalls shall be installed in all parking lots as close and convenient to building entrances as is reasonable. The specific  number  and location of handicapped stalls shall be determined by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with current standards and with the advice of the Township Planning Commission and Engineer.

F.	All signage for parking facilities shall be as specified within Section 505.12.
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

G.	All parking lots shall be provided with adequate lighting to assure safe maneuverability of vehicles, and to promote safety for pedestrians. Lighting shall be so arranged that no glare affects abutting residences or streets.

H.	All non-residential parking facilities  and  all  multi-family  residential  parking facilities and access driveways shall be paved. Minimum requirements for residential and institutional parking facilities will be 8 inches of 3A modified stone, 1-1/2 inches of ID -2 binder, and 1 inch of ID-2 wearing course. Commercial and industrial parking facility design requirements shall be subject to approval by the Township Engineer based upon expected traffic loads.  Driveway entrances will be paved in accordance with same requirements.

I.	Outdoor garbage collection facilities must be screened from view by landscaping and/or fencing.

J.	Parking facilities must be screened in such a manner that vehicle headlights are not intrusive  to  adjacent  residential  properties. Grading  to  recess  the  parking facility, raised berms, landscaping and fencing are acceptable methods to screen the parking facility.

4.	Residential Parking Lots.

A.	Parallel rows of parking spaces, which are not separated by a driveway, shall be separated by a raised and/or curbed planting strip, a minimum of ten feet wide, landscaped in accordance with Section 515 herein.

B.	A single row of parking spaces located parallel to and between two driveways, shall be separated from one of the driveways by a raised and/or curbed planting strip, a minimum of five feet wide, landscaped in accordance with Section 515, herein.

C.	Parking lots shall be divided into sections of not more than 20 cars each, with the sections separated by raised and/or curbed planting strips, a minimum of ten feet wide, landscaped in accordance with Section 515, herein.

D.	The entire parking lot perimeter shall be landscaped in compliance with Section 515, herein.

5.	Non-Residential Parking Lots.

A.	Parking lots with a capacity of from 15 to 100 cars shall require a raised and/or curbed planting strip, a minimum of ten feet wide, landscaped in accordance with Section 515, herein, around the entire perimeter except where the buildings, driveways, and walkways are located.

B.	Parking lots for more than 100 cars shall be  divided  into  sections  by  raised and/or curbed planting strips, a minimum of ten feet wide, landscaped in accordance with Section 515, herein.

(1)	These planting strips shall be located parallel to the rows of parking, to serve the following purposes:
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

a.	To separate main access (entrance-exit) driveways from rows of parking spaces.

b.	To separate other major driveways from rows of parking spaces (service drives, general internal circulation).

c.	To separate large parking areas into smaller units at intervals of not more than four rows of parking stalls with each unit capacity not greater than 100 cars.

d.	Refer Appendix  "C" for  an  illustration  of  appropriate  locations and use of these planting strips.

(2)	The ends of rows of parking shall be marked as islands by means of painted lines or the use of different paving materials such  as  paving blocks, bricks, or round stones.

a.	Each row of spaces shall contain a marked end island equal in size to one parking space.

b.	Parking shall be prohibited on these islands.

c.	The first parking space abutting the end of each island shall be reserved and marked for handicapped parking, at the end of the row closest to the building unless more convenient locations are possible and reasonable. Ramps shall be  provided  at convenient intervals for access between parking surface and sidewalks.

(3)	For parking areas with an ultimate capacity greater than 500 cars, the requirements of 523.5.B.(1) may be modified by the Supervisors to provide separation into units at intervals of six rows of parking stalls, with each unit capacity no greater than 150 cars.

(4)	The applicant may request the Township to permit an alternative design which achieves the purposes of these parking area requirements as well or better than the requirements herein. The final decision to permit an alternative design shall be made by the Board of Supervisors.

C.	The primary plant materials used shall be shade or canopy trees, chosen from the list of plant materials in Section 515. These trees shall be planted in the planting strips at a spacing equal to the minimum spacing recommended for the type of tree.

D.	Additional planting is encouraged and may include a variety of ornamental trees, shrubs, and ground covers, chosen from the list of plant materials in Section 515, provided that:

(1)	At the ends of planting strips at driveway intersections, drivers' visibility shall be maintained by limiting planting for the end 35 feet.
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

(2)	At the ends of planting strips between rows of parking spaces, visibility shall be maintained by limiting planting for the end 20 feet.

(3)	Limiting planting shall mean:

a.	Not more than one shade or canopy tree within the area.

b.	No shrubs or ground cover plants exceeding two feet in height.

c.	No evergreen trees.

E.	The specific purposes to be served by these requirements are:

(1)	To  add  visual  character  and  improve  the  appearance  of  large  parking areas by reducing their massiveness into smaller units.

(2)	To provide shade for parked cars.

(3)	To reduce random vehicular flow across parking areas.

(4)	To permit a high level of visibility for these uses (stores, offices) for which visibility is an important factor.

(5)	To facilitate snow removal and storm drainage, and to conserve energy in construction and resurfacing operations, by permitting relatively large units of paving surface, not obstructed by numerous, small, barrier island areas.

F.	Non-residential parking facilities must be located or designed in such a manner that they are visibly secluded from eye level to adjacent residential properties.

6.	Driveways/Access Aisles. The following requirements  apply  to  all  driveways/access aisles within all sites proposed for land development, as well as to other sites proposed for development which will provide parking capacity for 50 or more cars:

A.	A smooth transition shall be provided between the driveway section required for access to a public street and the driveway(s) required for internal site circulation.

B.	The width of entrance and exit drives shall be:

(1)	A minimum of twelve (12) feet for one-way use only;

(2)	A minimum of twenty four (24) feet for two-way use;

(3)	A maximum of thirty five (35 ) feet at the street line and fifty four (54) feet at the curb line.

C.	Storefront driveways in shopping centers shall have a minimum paved width of 35 feet, to allow one lane in each direction and a drop-off/pick-up lane along the sidewalks.
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

D.	Driveways along other non-residential buildings shall have  a  minimum  paved width of 24 feet, except where a drop-off/pick-up lane is proposed, the width shall be 35 feet.

Wherever feasible, internal circulation driveways shall extend from access drives in locations which permit and encourage entering traffic to turn and enter the parking aisles without first traveling along a building-front driveway.   This feature is intended to reduce the volume of vehicular traffic along building front driveway to make it safer for pedestrian traffic. Refer Appendix "C" for illustration of this concept.

7.	Parking Space and Driveway Dimensions

A.	Parking space and parking aisle driveway dimensions shall be in compliance with the following standards, except when reduced in compliance with Section 423.2, herein;

Angle of	Parking Space	Aisle Width
Parking	Depth	Width	One-Way	Two-Way

90o	
19'	
9.5'	
20'	
24'
60o 45o	21'
19'	10'
10'	18'
15'	20'
18'

B.	Where appropriate, parallel parking may be provided utilizing a stall width of 8 feet and a minimum length of 22 feet.

C.	Where vehicles may overhang, a planting strip or other landscaped area provided in compliance with this Ordinance, the depth of  the  row  of  parking spaces may be reduced up to three feet, provided the planting strip or other landscaped area is increased an equal amount. Refer to  Figure  3  for  this concept.

D.	A minimum of twenty (20) feet of open space shall  be  provided  between  the outside wall of any multiple family dwelling or non-residential building and any parking space to provide access for fire fighting equipment, unless waived by the Township.

E.	All paved parking stalls must be delineated with 4 inch wide line striping along their entire length. When curb is not installed along perimeter of parking areas and paving is not required, parking stall locations must be delineated with concrete tire stops, bollards, or by other means acceptable to the Township.

Section 524. - Alleys.

1.	Alleys may be permitted upon approval of the Board of Supervi sors in Use B5, Single- family Detached Cluster, Use B6, Performance Standard Subdivision, and Use B9, Urban Dwelling developments as a means of providing direct off -street parking and access for narrow lots.

2.	Alleys are intended to provide access to the rear of residential lots for services and on-lot parking.
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

3.	Frontage on an alley shall not be construed to satisfy the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance for frontage on a street.

4.	No parking shall be provided for, or permitted within, the cartway of the alley.

5.	Street systems which contain alleys shall be designed to discourage through traffic on the alleys.

6.	Any portion of an alley located between two (2) points of ingress and egress shall provide rear access to no more than fifty (50) dwelling units.

7.	Alleys may only intersect local streets.

8.	Alley length shall not exceed a distance of six hundred sixty (660) feet  as  measured between two (2) points of ingress and egress.

9.	Alleys shall be centered on a rear or side lot line and shall be designed with a twenty (20) feet wide easement and a paved cartway width of twelve (12) feet. Except where specifically approved by the Board of Supervisors, all alleys shall be designed for one way traffic. Where two way traffic is permitted by the Board of Supervisors, a cartway width of twenty (20) feet shall be provided.

10.	Parking shall be limited to a distance not to exceed thirty (30) feet from the  alley centerline.

11.	Alley construction must be in accordance with street construction standards of Section 506.6.

12.	Alleys not accepted for dedication to the  Township  shall  provide  permanent  easement rights of access to all properties served by the alley and adequate funds or financial guarantees to insure snow plowing, maintenance, and repair by property owners served by the alley.

Section 525. - Recreational Facilities.

1.	Haycock Township requires the public dedication of land suitable for the use intended; and upon agreement with the applicant or developer, the construction of recreational facilities, payment of fees in lieu thereof, private reservation of land, or a combination, for park or recreation purposes as a condition precedent to final plan approval; or as the governing body selects and prefers for developments of 15 lots or more.

2.	General  Requirements.

A.	For all residential subdivisions of 25 or more dwelling units, recreational facilities shall be provided by the developer.

B.	Recreation facilities shall be constructed on recreation land within detached clustered subdivisions and performance standard developments.

C.	Recreation facilities shall be readily accessible to all development residents; or in the case of recreation facilities dedicated to the  Township, shall be easily and safely accessible to the general public.   At least one (1) side of the recreation
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

area shall abut a street for a minimum distance of 50 feet for access of emergency and maintenance vehicles, and parking facilities where deemed necessary by the Township.

D.	The configuration of recreation areas must be able to accommodate recreation activities proposed by the development plans. Required minimum area shall not include narrow or irregular pieces of land which are remnants from plotting and/or street and parking areas.

E	Recreation areas shall not be traversed by utility easements unless said utilities are placed underground and no part of them or their supportive equipment protrudes above ground level.

F.	No outdoor active recreation area shall be located nearer to any lot line or street line than one hundred (100) feet, except for bikepaths and walking, jogging, or fitness trails, which shall be located no less than twenty-five (25) feet from a lot or street line. Adequate buffering/fencing shall be constructed to separate recreational facilities from private properties.

G.	The developer shall be required to improve the recreation land so that it is usable for the intended ac tivity, including necessary facilities and equipment.  Proposed improvements, including facilities and equipment, shall be acceptable to Haycock Township.

H.	A public water fountain shall be located within active recreation areas.

I.	Haycock Township may, but shall not be required to, accept any portion(s) of the recreational land/facilities provided. Recreational facilities not dedicated to, or accepted by Haycock Township, shall be owned and maintained by a Homeowner's Association or other method acceptable to the Township.

J.	Proposed recreation areas and facilities may be reviewed by the Haycock Township Park and Recreation Board pursuant to Section 306 of this Ordinance as deemed necessary by Board of Supervisors.

3.	Minimum Recreation Facility Requirements.   The following table lists facilities required by this section:

Total No. of Lots/Dwelling Units	No. of Playfields		No. of Tot Lots*		No. of Basketball or Tennis Courts
25 to   49	1	and	1	and	0
50 to   99	2	and	2	and	0
100 to 149	3	and	3	and	1
150 to 199	4	and	4	and	2
200 to 249	5	and	5	and	2
250 to 299	6	and	6	and	3
300 to 349	7	and	7	and	3
350 to 400	8	and	8	and	4

*    Where more than one (1) tot lot is required, tot lots may be combined to provide a larger structure with additional play events, when approved by the Township.
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

In addition, for over 300 lots/dwelling units, the applicant shall install one swimming pool.

4.	Tot Lot Requirements.

A.	Use of tot lots shall be limited to daylight hours only; no lighting shall be installed.

B.	Low maintenance play equipment and structures shall be included and confined by a gated fence, a minimum of three (3') feet  high.  The  gate  shall  be  self- closing and self-latching.

C.	Tot lot shall include a coordinated commercial “play structure” with a minimum of ten (10) play events designed to serve a minimum of twenty (20) children aged 12 and under. All equipment shall be installed over a resilient safety surface and shall conform to safety guidelines established by  the  International  Play Equipment Manufacturers Association (IPEMA).

D.	Sitting areas, including benches, shall be provided for the convenience of persons supervising the children.

E.	Shade trees shall be provided for sitting and play areas; gazebo or picnic-type shelters may be used in addition to shade trees.

F.	Where a  tot  lot  is placed  adjacent  to  a  playfield, practical  measures,  such  as fencing and orientation of facilities, shall be used to reduce hazards, especially from balls, frisbees, or other flying objects.

G.	Minimum dimensional standards shall be as follows:

(1)	Minimum area:  2,500 square feet within the fenced area.

(2)	Minimum horizontal dimension:   35 feet.

(3)	Minimum  setbacks:

a.	From lot lines:  10 feet.

b.	From the ultimate right-of-way of local streets: 25 feet.

c.	From  the  ultimate  right-of-way  of  collector/arterial  streets:	50 feet.

(4)	A landscaped buffer shall be provided between the proposed tot lot and any proposed or existing dwelling located within 100 feet of the tot lot.

H.	Locations: At convenient, centralized intervals, requiring not longer than a 1,000 feet walk from any dwelling unit.

5.	Playfield  Requirements.

A.	Playfields shall be used only during daylight hours; no lighting shall be installed unless specifically approved by the Township.
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

B.	Playfields are intended for informal, neighborhood use. Playfields shall not be used for formalized programs such as Little League Baseball, Soccer, or Midget Football unless located, designed, and intended for use by the entire community.

C.	Playfields shall consist of a lawn area, unobstructed by trees, shrubs, benches, and other playground equipment. Trees and shrubs shall be installed along the perimeter of a playfield to define its limits, enhance its appearance, and filter noise generated by activities.

D.	Playfields shall be gently sloped, not less than 1 percent or more than 2 percent grade, and shall be well drained so that they are suitable for  use  in  good weather.

E.	Playfields must be fenced unless waived by the Township.

F.	Sitting areas must be provided along the perimeter unless waived by the Township.

G.	Minimum dimensional standards shall be as follows:

(1)	Minimum area:  25,000 square feet.

(2)	Minimal horizontal dimension:   150 feet.

(3)	Minimum setbacks to the edge of a playfield.

a.	From any dwelling unit:  100 feet.

b.	From any property line:  50 feet.

c.	From the ultimate right-of-way of local streets:  50 feet.

d.	From  the  ultimate  right-of-way of collector/arterial streets:   100 feet.

6.	Basketball and Tennis Court Requirements.

A.	Courts shall  be  constructed  in  accordance  with specifications  approved  by  the Township Engineer, and shall be oriented in a north-south direction.

B.	Minimum dimensional standards shall be as follows:

(1)	Court areas shall be of standard size. (Basketball courts shall be at least 50 feet by 84 feet with a minimum of 5 feet clearance on all sides; tennis courts shall be at least 36 feet by 78 feet with 12 feet clearance on both sides and 21 feet clearance on both ends.)

(2)	Minimum setbacks to the edge of paving:

a.	From any dwelling unit:  125 feet.

b.	From any property line:  50 feet.
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

c.	From the ultimate right-of-way of local streets:  50 feet.

d.	From  the  ultimate  right-of-way of collector/arterial streets:   100 feet.

C.	Tennis courts shall be fenced around the entire perimeter with minimum ten (10') feet high fencing.

D.	Basketball courts shall be fenced with a minimum six (6') feet high fencing when the edge of pavement is less than 30 feet from an area with a downward slope exceeding 8%.

E.	Lighting may be provided for nighttime use of courts, so arranged that no glare affects abutting residences or streets, on a demand-activated basis, until no later than 10:00 P.M.

F.	Locations:   At convenient, centralized intervals.

7.	Swimming Pool Requirements.

A.	Minimum pool surface area shall be 3,000 square feet (i.e. 40 feet by 75 feet).

B.	A toddler's pool shall be provided.

C.	The pool shall be surrounded by a paved, non-slip surface, a minimum of eight (8') feet wide.

D.	Lawn area of not less than 4,000 square feet shall be provided around the pool, at a slope not exceeding 6% percent.

E.	A permanent building shall be provided for bathrooms  and  lifeguard/supervisor room.

F.	The entire facility shall be surrounded by a minimum six (6') feet high fence with a lockable gate.

G.	Minimum setback to edge of paving, pool building, and perimeter fencing shall be as follows:

(1)	From any dwelling unit:  200 feet.

(2)	From any property line:  100 feet.

(3)	From any street right -of-way:  100 feet.

H.	Lighting may be provided for nighttime use, so arranged that no glare  affects abutting residences or streets, until no later than 10:00 PM.

8.	Consolidation of Facilities.   Applicants are required to provide the numbers and types of facilities  as  required  in  this  section,  spaced  for  convenient  access  by  the  residents. However, applicants are encouraged to consolidate several facilities in fewer locations to better serve the residents' needs in the following possible ways:
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

A.	By locating all required tennis or basketball courts in one area, thereby restricting noise and light to one area, and precluding the need to search the neighborhood for a free court.

B.	By combining two 25,000 square feet playfields into one 50,000 square feet area to permit larger  fields for  softball, football,  soccer, or other  fields sports,  while maintaining the neighborhood use character.

C.	By creating one or more park -like facilities rather than simply several sets of scattered  facilities.

D.	By locating some tot lots in combined areas while retaining others on individual sites to guarantee short walking distances to tot lots.

Section 526. - Lighting.

1.	Lighting shall be provided along public streets, within parking facilities and recreational facilities as required by the Township Board of Supervisors. Glare shall be controlled in accordance with Zoning Ordinance nuisance standards.

2.	Lighting plan shall be prepared in accordance with Section 403.9.

3.	Suggested values for Average Horizontal Footcandles (HFC) of roadway illumination for midblock segments are:

A.	Commercial Areas (high pedestrian activity) - 2.0 HFC (22 lux).

B.	Intermediate Areas (moderate pedestrian traffic) - 1.4 HFC (15 lux).

C.	Residential Areas (low pedestrian activity) - 1.0 HFC (11 lux).

4.	Typically 5800 lumen lights spaced at 250 feet will establish an average illumination of
1.5 HFC pending mounting height and obstructions such as street trees.

5.	Illumination within intersection areas (considered all pavement within the inner crosswalk lines) should be equal to the sum of the recommended levels of the two intersecting streets as listed in the following table:



Predominant Land Use	Arterial Route	Collector Street	Local Street

Single Family Area Multiple Family Area	
2.0 HFC
2.8 HFC	
1.6 HFC
2.3 HFC	
1.4 HFC
2.0 HFC

6.	Intensity of illumination for parking facilities and recreational facilities shall be determined by Haycock Township on a case by case basis pending actual needs to accommodate the facility.

7.	Lighting  shall  be  installed  at  developer's  expense.	The  developer  shall  also  be
 
responsible
 
of r all costs  involved in lighting public facilities/streets until such time that
 
ARTICLE V - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

public  facilities/streets  are  accepted  or  condemned  as  public  facilities/streets  by  the Township.

8.	Within major subdivisions, individual driveway lampposts shall be installed at the ultimate right-of-way line on all single-family dwelling lots.

Section 527. - Easements.

1.	Easements for storm sewer, sanitary sewer, utilities and drainage shall be a minimum 20 feet wide.

2.	Easements for site access and driveways shall be a minimum 25 feet wide.

3.	To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be adjacent to or centered on rear and side lot lines.

4.	Nothing shall be permitted to be constructed, placed, planted, set or put within the area of any easement that will interfere with the intended use of the easement, the facilities for which the easement was established, or maintenance of the easement and/or facilities.

5.	Driveways shall be centered within access easements unless topographic conditions do not permit same.

6.	No easement or right -of-way for any purpose whatsoever shall be recited or described in any deed unless the same has been shown on an approved subdivision or land development plan.
 
ARTICLE VI
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND GENERAL STANDARDS

Section 601. - Intent. The required land improvements shall be designed, furnished, and installed by the developer in accordance with the provisions of these regulations, the "Improvements Construction Standards" of the Township as adopted by this Ordinance as Appendix "A", which shall be considered a part hereof, and other codes of the Township.  They shall be installed before the Final Plan is approved, or in lieu thereof, financial security shall be posted and agreem ents to install improvements shall be approved concurrent with the approval of Final Plans.

The developer shall dedicate all land required for rights-of-way and easements within the Subdivision and Land Development, and furnish and install all improvement s to  provide  a  complete  and  coordinated system of streets and utilities for  the  neighborhood,  in  accordance  with  the  Township  Comprehensive Plan, the Township Official Map, the Township Zoning Ordinance, this Ordinance and neighboring approved  developments.

Section 602. - Required Improvements. All improvements shall be dedicated without  cost  to  the Township as required by this ordinance and/or as stipulated in the Improvements Agreement and in a manner approved by the Township consistent with sound construction methods.  This includes:

1.	Grading:

A.	Grading of roadways and street rights-of-way and grading of slopes adjacent to roadways and street rights-of-way.

B.	Grading of all drainage swales on public or private property and grading of individual lots, to establish positive drainage away from buildings and eliminate low spots.

C.	Implementation and  maintenance  of  soil  erosion  control  and  sedimentation control facilities.

D.	Replacement of topsoil and vegetative  restoration  in  disturbed  areas  not stabilized with building, paving or other non-vegetative ground cover.

E.	Removal of temporary soil erosion and sedimentation control facilities when they are no longer required.

2.	Street or road subbase, base and paving.

3.	Curbs and gutters.

4.	Sidewalks, crosswalks, pathways and bike paths.

5.	Underground facilities for electric, telephone and television cable lines.

6.	Storm sewers and drainage facilities.

7.	Public sanitary sewer system.

8.	Public or centralized water supply and distribution  system  including  but  not  limited  to wells, pumping equipment, water laterals, submains, storage tanks and equipment systems (if required).
 
ARTICLE VI –REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND GENERAL STANDARDS

9.	Street name signs at all street intersections and official traffic control signs and markings.

10.	Permanent monuments and lot pins.

11.	Fire hydrants.

12.	Street trees and landscaping.

13.	Open space improvements and/or recreational facilities, buffer or screen plantings.

14.	Street lights.

Section 603. - Construction of Facilities.

1.	The developer shall construct and install, at no expense to  the  Township,  the improvements specified in this Ordinance. Construction and installation of such facilities and utilities shall be subject to inspection by appropriate  Township,  public  agency  or public utility officials during the progress of the work and shall be in conformance with the Improvements Construction Standards contained in Appendix "A".

2.	During the construction and installation of all facilities and utilities required by this Ordinance, the developer shall insure that access to the job site from a public road shall be kept clear and  free of all obstructions  and otherwise in a  passable condition to all areas of the job site for emergency, fire, and police vehicles. In the event of a dispute, passable access for the foregoing purposes shall be determined by the Township Engineer.

3.	No utility trench including but not limited to trenches for sanitary sewer, storm sewer, waterlines, electric service, or gas shall be left open at the end of the work day unless the trench is covered with steel plate or enclosed by an eight (8) feet high chain link fence.

Section 604. - General Standards. The following  principles  of  subdivision  and  land  development, general requirements and the minimum standards of design, shall be observed by the developer in all instances.

1.	It is the developer's responsibility to comply with all applicable Plans, Ordinances, Statutes, Regulations, etc., of Haycock Township, Bucks County, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and United States of America.

2.	Proposed subdivisions and land development shall be coordinated with existing nearby development so that the area as a whole may develo p harmoniously. Provisions shall be made to assure that the street patterns included in a proposed subdivision shall complement existing or proposed streets shown on the current official Township Street and Road Map, and on nearby approved developments.

3.	Standards incorporated in this Ordinance. In those cases where precise design standards are not specified in this Ordinance, or other Ordinance adopted by Haycock Township, design standards of the following organizations shall govern where applicable.

A.	Roads and Streets - Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, American Association of State Highway and Transportation  Officials,  Institute  of Transportation Engineers, Transportation Research Board, U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, and Haycock Township.
 
ARTICLE VI –REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND GENERAL STANDARDS

B.	Sanitary Sewer - Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, Bucks County Department of Health, and servicing Municipal Authority.

C.	Water - Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, Bucks County Department of Health, Delaware River Basin  Commission,  and  servicing Municipal  Authority.

D.	Soil and Erosion Control - Bucks County Soil  Conservation  District  and Department of Environ mental Protection, U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service, and Haycock Township

E.	General Engineering - American Society of Civil Engineers, Army Corps of Engineers,	Federal Emergency Management Association, and  Haycock Township Engineer.

Section 605. - Completion of Improvements. No plat  shall  be  finally  approved  unless  the  streets shown on such plat have been improved as required by  this  Ordinance,  and  any  walkways,  curbs, gutters, street lights, fire hydrants, trees, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers and other improvements as may be required by this Ordinance have been installed in accordance with this Ordinance.

Section 606. - Guaranties to Complete Improvements and Financial Security.

1.	In lieu of the completion of any improvements required as a condition  for  the  final approval of a plat, including improvements or fees required pursuant to Section 509 (i) of the Municipalities Planning Code, this Ordinance shall provide for the deposit with the municipality of financial security in an amount sufficient to cover the costs of such improvements or common amenities including, but not limited to, roads, stormwater detention and/or retention basins  and  other  related  drainage  facilities,  recreational facilities, open space improvements, or buffer or screen plantings which may be required.

2.	When requested by the developer, the governing body shall furnish the developer with a signed copy of a resolution or letter of contingent approval indicating approval of the final plat contingent upon  the developer  obtaining satisfactory  financial security,  which must be presented to the Township within ninety (90) days. The resolution or letter  of contingent approval shall expire and be deemed to be revoked if the Financial Security Agreement is not executed within ninety (90) days unless a written extension is granted by the governing body.

3.	Without limitation as to the types of financial security which the Township may approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, federal or Commonwealth chartered lending institution irrevocable letters of credit and restrictive or escrow accounts in such lending institutions shall be deemed acceptable financial security for the purposes of this section. Such financial security shall be posted with a bonding company or federal or Commonwealth chartered lending institution chosen by the party posting the financial security, provided that said bonding company or lending institution is authorized  to conduct such business within the Commonwealth. Such security shall provide for, and secure to the public, the completion of any improvements fixed in the formal action or accompanying agreement for completion of such improvements.

4.	Amount of financial security. The amount of financial security shall be equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated cost of the required improvements for which financial security is to be posted. The cost of the required improvements  shall  be estimated as of ninety (90) days following the date scheduled for the completion of said improvements.  Annually, the municipality may adjust the amount of the financial security
 
ARTICLE VI –REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND GENERAL STANDARDS

by comparing the actual cost of the improvements which have been completed and the estimated cost for the completion of the remaining improvements as of the expiration of the ninetieth (90th) day after either the original date scheduled for completion or rescheduled date of completion. Subsequent to such said adjustment, the municipality may require the developer to post additional security in order to assure that the financial security equals one hundred ten percent (110%).

5.	Basis for establishing amount of security.

A.	The amount of financial security required shall be based upon an estimate of the cost of completion of the required improvements, submitted by an applicant or developer and prepared by a professional engineer licensed as such in this Commonwealth and certified by such engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of such cost. The municipality, upon the recommendation of the municipal engineer, may refuse to accept such estimate for good cause shown. If the applicant or developer and the municipality are unable to agree upon an estimate, then the estimate shall be recalculated and re -certified by  another professional engineer licensed as such in this Commonwealth and chosen mutually by the municipality and the applicant or developer.  The  estimate certified by the third engineer shall be presumed fair and reasonable and shall be the final estimate. In the event that a third engineer is so chosen, fees for the services of said engineer shall be paid equally by the municipality and the applicant or developer.

B.	If the party posting the financial security requires more than one (1) year from the date of posting of the financial security to complete the required improvements, the amount of financial security may be increased by an additional ten percent (10%) for each one-year period beyond the first anniversary date from posting of financial security or to an amount not exceeding one hundred ten percent (110%) of the cost of completing the required improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the preceding one -year period by using the above bidding procedure or as established by the Township Engineer. In the case where development is projected over a period of years, the Supervisors (or the planning agency) may authorize submission of final plans by section or stages of development, subject to such requirements or guaranties as to improvements in future sections or stages of development as it finds essential for the protection of any finally approved section of the subdivision or land development.

6.	Dispute over amount of financial security. Whenever a dispute may arise between an applicant or developer and the Township in that neither party can reach an accord or the amount of financial security to be posted, the procedures set forth in Section 509(g) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code shall be employed.

7.	Contracts. As a condition of final plan approval for all subdivisions or land developments, the applicant or developer shall enter into a written agreement with the Township in a manner and form approved by the Township Solicitor, where they shall agree to:

A.	Construct or cause to be constructed, at their own expense, all streets, curbs, sidewalks, fire hydrants,  street  lights,  drainage  facilities,  street  signs, monuments, capped sewers, parks and other improvements shown on said final plan when required to do so by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the final plans, as finally approved, and in strict accordance with the standards and specifications of the Township.
 
ARTICLE VI –REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND GENERAL STANDARDS

B.	Maintain, at their own cost, said streets,  curbs,  sidewalks,  drainage  facilities, street signs, parks, monuments, fire hydrants, street lighting, capped sewers and other improvements, until the same are accepted or condemned by the Township for public use, and for a period of eighteen (18) months thereafter, to repair and reconstruct the same or any part of one of  them  when  such  repair  or reconstruction shall be specified by the Board of Supervisors as necessary by reason of faulty construction, workmanship or materials and at  or  before acceptance of such improvements by the Township.

C.	Install or cause to be installed, at their own expense and without any cost to the Township for any part of such installation, street lighting facilities on all streets within and abutting the subdivision or land development if proposed to be dedicated to the Township, as required by this section.

D.	Obtain the easements and releases required when any street, drainage facility or other improvement wherein a subdivision abuts  or  traverses  lands  of  persons other than the person holding legal title to the lands of the subdivision, at his own cost, and obtain from the owner of lands so abutted or traversed full releases from all damages which may cha nge in grade, construction or otherwise of the street, drainage facility or other improvement, and such releases shall inure to the benefit not only of the owner of the subdivision, but to the Township as well.

E.	Promptly reimburse to the Township reasonable attorneys' and engineers' fees in accordance with this Ordinance.

F.	Construct or cause to be constructed, at their expense, road improvements along the frontage of the tract in accordance with this Ordinance.

G.	Additional conditions as may be determined to be necessary by the  Township Solicitor.

Section 607. - Completion of Improvements.

1.	A partial completion and release of financial security.

A.	As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the party posting the financial security may request the Township Supervisors to release or authorize the release, from time to time, of such portions of the financial security necessary for payment to the contractor or contractors performing the work.

B.	Any such request shall be in writing, addressed to the Supervisors, and the Supervisors shall have forty-five (45) days from receipt of such request within which to allow the Township Engineer to certify, in writing, to the Supervisors that such portion of the work upon the improvements has been completed in accordance with the approved plans.

C.	Upon such certification, the Supervisors shall authorize release by the bonding company or lending institution of an amount as estimated by the Township Engineer fairly representing the value of the improvements completed, or if the Supervisors fail to act within said forty five (45) day period, the governing body shall be deemed to have approved the release of funds as requested.

D.	The Supervisors shall, prior to final release at the time of completion and certification by its engineer, require retention of ten percent (10%) of the
 
ARTICLE VI –REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND GENERAL STANDARDS

estimated cost of the aforesaid improvements for purposes of securing the maintenance bond on said improvements.

E.	If the required financial security of one hundred plus ten percent  (10%)  is secured in separate accounts and the specified ten percent (10%) remains secured for the life of the security agreement and the construction period or unt il dedication, then the ten percent (10%) specified above shall not be retained from the requested partial release.

2.	Completion of improvements and release from financial security.

A.	When the developer has completed  all of the necessary  and appropriate improvements, the developer shall notify the Township, in writing, by certified or registered mail, of the completion of the aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Township Engineer.

B.	The Township Supervisors shall, within ten (10) days after receipt of such notice, direct and authorize the Township Engineer to inspect all of the aforesaid improvements. The Township Engineer shall, thereupon, file a report, in writing, with the Supervisors and shall promptly mail a copy of the same to the developer by certified or registered mail.  The report shall be made and mailed within thirty
(30)	days after receipt by the Township Engineer of the aforesaid authorization from the Supervisors. The report shall be detailed and shall indicate approval or rejection of said improvements, either in whole or in part,  and  if  said improvements or any portion thereof shall not be approved or shall be rejected by the Township Engineer, said report shall contain a statement of reasons for such non-approval or rejection.

C.	The Township Supervisors shall notify the developer, within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the Township Engineer's report,  in  writing,  by  certified  or  registered mail, of the action of said Township Supervisors within relation thereto.

D.	If the Township Supervisors or Township Engineer fail to comply with the time limitation provisions contained herein, all improvements will be deemed to have been approved and the developer shall be released from all liability, pursuant to the performance guaranty bond or other security agreement.

E.	If any portion of said improvements shall not be approved, or shall be rejected by the Township Supervisors, the developer shall  proceed  to  complete  the  same and, upon completion, the same  proc edure  or  notification,  as  outlined  herein, shall be followed.

F.	Upon satisfactory completion of all the necessary and appropriate improvements as approved by the Township Engineer and receipt by the Supervisors of the appropriate letter of certification of completion of said improvements,  the Supervisors shall release or authorize to be released the balance of the financial security, minus the ten percent (10%) as specified above. The ten percent (10%) shall be retained until such time as the developer establishes additional financial security to ensure the structural integrity and functioning of the specified improvements as specified in Section 608 herein.
 
ARTICLE VI –REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND GENERAL STANDARDS

Section 608. - Maintenance Guarantees and Financial Security.

1.	Where the Supervisors accept dedication of all or some of the required improvements following completion, the Supervisors shall require the posting of financial security as a maintenance guaranty to secure the structural integrity of said improvements, as well as the functioning of said improvements, in accordance with the design and specifications as depicted on the final plan for a term not to exceed eighteen (18) months from the date of acceptance of dedication. Said financ ial security shall be of the same type as otherwise required in this section with regard to installation of such improvements, and the amount of the financial security shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the actual cost of installation of said improvements.

2.	To secure release from the maintenance guaranty and financial security, the developer shall notify the Township Supervisors by certified or registered mail ninety (90) days or as otherwise specified in the guaranty prior to the expiration date of said maintenance guaranty and request an inspection and written report by the Township Engineer as to the structural integrity and functioning of the specified improvements.

3.	Upon receipt of said report and approval of the Engineer of the structural integrity and functioning of said improvements, the Township Supervisors shall release or  authorize release of the maintenance guaranty financial security.

4.	If the specified improvements are not found acceptable to the Township Engineer, the developer shall correct the same to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer and Supervisors before the maintenance guaranty financial security is released.

Section 609. - Remedies to Effect Completion of Improvements. In the event that any improvements which may be required have not been installed as provided in this section or in accord with the approved final plan, the Supervisors are hereby granted the power to enforce any corporate bond or other security by appropriate legal and equitable remedies. If proc eeds of such bond or other security are insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections to  all  the  improvements  covered  by  said security, the repairs or corrections to all the improvements covered by said security, the Supervisors may, at their option, install part of such improvements in all or part of the subdivision or land development and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action to recover the monies necessary to complete  the remainder of improvements. All of the proceeds, whether resulting from the security or from any legal or equitable action brought against the developer, or both, shall be used solely for the installation of the improvements covered by such security and not for any other purpose.
 
ARTICLE VII - DEDICATION OF RECREATION LAND

Section 701. - Recreation Land/Fee Requirements. Recreation land shall be defined as usable area that can be developed for playgrounds or tot lots, neighborhood parks, or community parks for active outdoor recreation. All residential subdivision or land development plans shall provide for suitable and adequate recreation land and/or fees as set forth in this Ordinance in order to  fulfill  the  following purposes.

1.	Insure adequate recreational areas and facilities to serve future residents of the Township.

2.	Maintain compliance with recreation standards as recommended by the Haycock Township Park and Recreation Comprehensive Plan as adopted by the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors.

3.	Minimize overuse of, and excessive demand for, existing recreational areas and facilities by future residents.

4.	Allow for orderly acquisition and development of recreational areas to serve new residents.

5.	Ensure that dedicated recreation land is suitable for the intended use.

Section 702. - Recreation Land Dedication.

1.	All residential subdivision or land development plan submissions to the Township shall be required to provide for public dedication of land suitable for park and/or recreation use in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.

2.	A minimum of 0.0303 acres or 1,322 square feet of suitable recreation land shall be provided per dwelling unit within all residential subdivision or land developments, unless the applicant agrees to a fee-in-lieu of as outlined in Section 705. This requirement  is  based  on  the following: a goal of providing 10.5 acres of recreation land per 1,000 population in accordance with the standards of the National Park and Recreation Association as reflected by the Township Comprehensive Park and Recreation Plan; and an average household size of 2.89 persons per household as determined by the U.S. Census of 1990.

3.	This recreation land requirement shall in no way diminish  the  requirement  for  open  space where an open space requirement is set by the Township Zoning Ordinance.

Section 703. - Criteria for Determining Location and Suitability of Recreation Areas.

1.	Site(s) must be easily and safely accessible, have good ingress and egress and have access to a public road.

2.	Site(s) must have suitable topography for the development as a particular type of recreation area.

3.	Size and shape of the site(s) must be suitable for the development as a recreation area.

4.	Site(s) must meet the minimum size with respect to usable acreage as recommended by the Park and Recreation Comprehensive Plan for Haycock Township.

5.	Sites designated for recreation land shall not contain lands with natural resources restrictions, as defined by the Township Zoning Ordinance, stormwater detention facilities, or lands designated for any other purpose.
 
ARTICLE VII - DEDICATION OF RECREATION LAND

6.	The recreational activities and/or facilities for which the area is intended must be specified on the development plans and recorded on the linens.

7.	Recreation areas shall not be traversed by utility easements unless said utilities are placed underground and no part of them or their supportive equipment protrudes above ground level.

8.	The configuration of the recreation area must be able to accommodate recreation activities proposed by the development plans. The required areas shall not include narrow or irregular pieces which are remnants from lotting and/or street and parking areas.

9.	On-site improvements shall be commensurate with the adjacent on-site development improvements, including but not limited to grading, curb, sidewalks, and utilities.

10.	Open space which is required to be set aside as part of a cluster development, performance subdivision, or other use which requires open space shall be provided in addition to the recreation land required by this Article. Where both open space and recreational land are required, the requirements for mandatory dedication of recreation land shall be  met  in addition to the requirements for open space.

Section 704. - Ownership/Dedication to Township of Recreation Land.

1.	The Haycock Township Planning  Commission and Park and  Recreation Board will provide recommendations on any proposed recreation land dedication and any proposed assessment of recreation fees -in-lieu of land dedication.

2.	If the Board of Supervisors determines that recreation land dedication would be in the public interest, such recreation land shall be owned and maintained by an entity that the Board of Supervisors determines is acceptable to ensure proper long-term oversight and maintenance of the land.  This may be any of, but not limited to, the following, providing such entity agrees to accept such land for permanent recreation purposes:

A.	Retention by the owner of the development if such dwelling units are to be rented, subject to restrictions acceptable to the Township Solicitor which shall ensure the perpetual dedication of the land for recreational use.

B.	Dedication to a formal homeowner or condominium association, with such agreement subject to approval of the Board of Supervisors, after review by the Township Solicitor. If any entity responsible for such recreation land should dissolve or become inactive or decide that it no longer wishes to be responsible for such land, it shall offer such land at no cost to the Township or to another entity that the Township so designates  for continued use as recreation land.

C.	Dedication to an established State, county or regional organization acceptable to the Board of Supervisors.

D.	Dedication to Haycock Township.

3.	If the Board of Supervisors deems it to be in the public interest to accept dedication of land for recreational purposes, such acceptance shall be by adoption of a Resolution of the Board of Supervisors and acceptance of a deed of dedication from the developer. Acceptance of dedication of recreational land by the Township shall occur following a formal offer by the developer with title insurance and other information and conditions as required by the Township.
 
ARTICLE VII - DEDICATION OF RECREATION LAND

4.	Recreation land shall include deed restrictions to permanently restrict its use for recreation and to prohibit the construction of buildings on the land, except building for non-commercial recreation or to support maintenance of the land.

Section 705. - Fee in Lieu of Dedication. Where, (upon agreement with the applicant or developer) it is determined that the dedication of all or any portion of land area required for recreational purposes is not feasible under the criteria set forth in the section, the Township shall require the applicant or developer to pay a fee in lieu of dedication of any such land or to construct recreational facilities in lieu of recreation land dedication to the Township as follows:

1.	The fee shall be equal to the fair market value of the land otherwise required to be dedicated and improved for recreational use as established by separate Resolution of the Board of Supervisors.

2.	Limitations on Use of Fees:

A.	Any recreation fees collected under this section shall be placed within  an  interest- bearing “Recreation Fee Account” which shall function as a capital reserve fund and shall be accounted for separately from other Township funds.

B.	Any such fees collected under t his subsection shall only be expended within the same “Recreation Fee District” as may be adopted by the Township  as the subdivision and land development that contributed the fee if the fee is used for neighborhood parks. Fees collected from any district may be expended for the township-wide Community Park.

C.	All fees and interest within the Recreation Fee Account shall only be used for acquisition of recreation land, development of, and capital improvement to, public recreational facilities, landscaping of recreation land, engineering, legal, planning, architecture, landscape architecture and the payment  of  debt  directly  resulting  from such expenditures. Such fees specifically shall not be used for maintenance, routine repairs, operating expenses or recreational programs.

3.	Fees required under this Section shall be paid prior to the recording of the applicable final plan or as building permits are issued with appropriate guarantee given, as determined by the Board of Supervisors.

4.	If such fees are paid in installments or prior to the issuance of each building permit, then for the purpose of determining limits for the time within such funds are required to be expended under State law, such time limit shall begin when the total fees related to the final approval are paid in full, and not from the date of payment of any portion of such fees.

Upon request, the Township shall refund such fee, plus interest accumulated thereon from the date of payment, if the Township has failed to utilize the fee paid for the purposes set forth in this section within 3 years.
 
ARTICLE VIII – ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS; PENALTIES

Section 801. - Enactment of Amendments.

1.	Proposals for amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal may be initiated by the governing body or by the Planning Commission.

2.	In case of an amendment other than that prepared by the Planning Commission, the governing body shall submit each such amendment to the Planning Commission for recommendations at least thirty (30) days prior to the date fixed for the public hearing on such proposed amendment. At least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing on the amendment, the municipality shall also submit the proposed amendment to the Bucks County Planning Commission for recommendations.

3.	Within thirty (30) days after adoption, the governing body shall forward a certified copy of any amendment to the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance  to  the  Bucks County Planning Commission.

Section 802. - Amendment Hearings.

1.	Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the governing body shall hold a public hearing.  No amendment shall become effective until after such hearing at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard.

2.	Notice shall be given once each week for two (2) successive weeks, the first notice being not more than thirty (30) days, and the second notice not less than seven (7) days in advance of such hearings and shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and shall include either the full text of the proposed amendment, or the title and a brief summary, prepared by the municipal solicitor and setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail. If the full text is not included:

A.	A copy shall be supplied to a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at the time the public notice is published.

B.	An attested  copy  of  the proposed  ordinance  shall  be  filed in  the  County  Law Library or other County office designated by the County Commissioners.

Section 803. - Penalties.

1.	Preventative Remedies - In addition to the right of the Township to enforce a Subdivision or Land Development Ordinance violation by means of an action in equity in the Court of Common Pleas of Bucks County, and other rights the Township may have  at  law, including actions to recover damages and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure, or premises, the Township may:

A.	Refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval necessary to further improve or develop any real property which has been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of real property in violation of this Ordinance. This authority to deny such a permit or approval shall apply to any of the following applicants:

(1)	The owner of record at the time of such violation.
 
ARTICLE VIII – ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS; PENALTIES

(2)	The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.

(3)	The current  owner  of  record  who  acquired the  property  subsequent  to the time of violation without regard as to whether such current owner had actual or constructive knowledge of the violations.

(4)	The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent to the time of violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.

B.	As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting of approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee, or lessee for the development of real property which was subdivided in violation of this Ordinance, the Township may require compliance with the conditions that would have been applicable to the property at the time the applicant acquired an interest in such property.

C.	Any person, partnership or corporation, or the members of such partnership or the officers of such corporation, who or which, being the owner or agent of the owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land, shall:

1.	lay out, construct, open and/or dedicate any street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main or other improvement for public use, travel or other purposes  or  for  the  common  use  of  occupants  of  buildings  abutting thereon; or

2.	sell, transfer or agree or enter into an agreement to sell or transfer any land in a subdivision or land development, whether by reference to or by use of a plan of such subdivision or land development or otherwise; or

3.	erect any building or buildings which constitute a land development thereon; or

4.	commence site grading or construction of  improvements  prior  to recording of a Final Plan unless such grading or construction is for the sole purpose of installing improvements as prescribed in  Section  602 herein

unless and until a Final Plan has been prepared in full compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and has been recorded as provided herein, or who or which in any way is in violation of or violates any of the provisions of this Ordinance, shall be subject to the penalties and remedies set forth in Section
703.2 hereof.

2.	Enforcement Remedies - Any person, partnership or corporation who or which  has violated the provisions of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, upon being found liable therefore in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the municipality in District Justice Court, shall pay a judgment of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the municipality as a result thereof. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the District Justice determining that there has  been  a  violation  further  determines that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating the Ordinance to have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth (5th) day following the date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
 

 
APPENDIX  A CONSTRUCTION   DETAILS

















 



I


TACK COAT	----
 
UTlLITY
EASEMENT

-
 
I" ID-2 WEARING

2" BINDER

8" PENNDOT #4 STONE BASE WI SCREENINGS

2·· FINE MATERIAL
 
12·
'"""'".---........-.--
 
"?>"·\  ---

- -...}:i,.,_
-.:. -


°$.--TYPICAL UTILITY
 
5·	LINE LOCATION


U-ORAIN AS DEEMED
NECESSARY BY TOWNSHIP












TYPICAL ROADWAY HALF -SECTION 	

50 FEET RIGHT-OF-WAY WITH 24 FEET WIDE CARTWAY, WITHOUT CURB NOTE: BALLAST SUBBASE REQUIRED.













A-1
 
.	- ......
. ... .:..; .... - . ·-  :






wz
:::;
>-·

I
 




..25'
 

I
1-
::i:
£er?,
 

 

14'
 
rr

 	4' 	
 

10'
 









...











 	TYPICAL  ROADWAY   HALF -SECTION . 	

50 FEET RIGHT-OF-WAY WITH 28 FEET WIDE CARTWAY, WiTH CURB AND SiOEWALK-- --  - ..





















A-2
 









w
:z
:J


.....
0
I

 


28'
 
(!) I
iEI
 

 
16'
 



0.67"
 


 	6'	4' 	
 



L33'

UTILITY
EASEMENT
 



















 


 	TYPICAL ROADWAY HALF-SECTION 	

56. FEET RIGHT-OF-WAY  WITH  32 FEET WIDE  CARTWAY,  WITH CURB  AND SIDEWALK

















A-3
 
·-.-
 







wz
:::;

 





.  30·
 

3::: I LL. 0
I
!I: C>I CC.•
 

 
re·
 


 	6"	4• 	
 















T  ..
I







  TYPICAL  ROADWAY  HALF.:.:.SECTiON 	

60 FEET RIGHT-OF-WAY WITH 36 FEET WIDE CARTWAY, WITH CURB AND SIDEWALK-



















A-4
 
r· 10-2 WEARING COURSE (FULL WIDTH OVERLAY)
LEVELING SHALL SE PROVIDED AS DIRECTED SY TOWNSHIP
TO CORRECT ROAD CROWN OR IRREGULARITIES


 


. i{jill I
11
12..
 
2·· ID-2 BINDER
5.. B.C.B.C.
 


 	,.    BACKFILL WITH 2A MODIFIED
STONE COMPACTED  IN MAXIMUM
8" LOOSE LIFTS









REQUIRED 28 STONE BEDDING;

6" MINIMUM



Notes:

1.	Developer/Contractor shall be responsible for proper implementation	of safety requirements in conformance to all Federal and State Department of Labor and Occupational Safety and ijcuard.Administration Regulations.

2.	Backfill for new road construction may be select earth backfill when	suitable material is available as determined by the Township.

3.	Full depth 2A stone backfill shall be required for all storm sewer, sanitary sewer and utility trenching when edge of trench is within 15 feet of existing roadway edge of paving; and for all trenching within area of roadway widening.     · ·

4.	Roadway crown shall be 3/8 inch per foot.

5.	3 inch temporary patch of BCBC shall be provided and mAintained for less than 30 days prior to final restoration of existing roadway or driveway. Temporary patch shall be removed with final restoration· performed ·.no .more than 90 days from date of sewer installation	providing testing has been satisfactorily accomplished and no settlement has occurred.


STORM SEWER BEDDING DETAIL (WITHIN  RIGHT-OF-WAY.  BENEATH  A.LL   EXISTING ROADWAYS  AND  DRIVEWAYS.  PUBLIC OR  PRIVATEJ









A-5
 






---RESTORE WITH SEEDING / SOOOiNG AS SPECIFIED


 
MATCH EXISTING TOPSOIL
DEPTH OR El, WHlCHEVER
 	IS  GREATER 	



SELECT EARTH BACKFILL J
COMPACTED IN MAXIMUM
e· LOOSE LIFTS
 



1§1
111
 
\













6- MINIMUM








STORM  SEWER  BEDDING DETAiL
(EARTHEN AREA)



















A-6
 














"'-+' -4000 PSI AIR ENTRAINED PORTLAND CEMENT  CONCRETE
 




11	14"
(
 



%I\
;
 

1/2" BITUMINOUS PREMOLOED EXPANSION JOINTS INSTALLED FULL WIDTH AND. HEIGHT AT  30· INSTERVALS.


28 STONE WHERE REQUIRED
 

BELGIAN BLOCK CURB DETAIL

NTS















4000 PSI AIR ENTRAINED PORTLAND CEMENT  CONCRETE






28 STONE WHERE REQUIRED




BELGIAN BLOCK  DEPRESSED	CURB  DETAIL

NTS




A-7
 



APPENDIX "B" - PLAN NOTIFICATION.


Where  applicable,   the  following   notices  shall  be  included  on  the  subdivision   and/or  land development plan:

1.	NOTICE  OF  PENNSYLVANIA   DEPARTMENT   OF  TRANSPORTATION   (PennDOT) STATE HIGHWAY ACCESS PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.

Driveway access to a State Highway shall be authorized only by Highway Occupancy Permit issued by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation as required pursuant to Section 420 of the Act of June 1, 1945, (P.P. 1242, No. 428), known as the State Highway Law. Building permits shall not be issued until said highway occupancy permit has been issued.

Approval of this plan does not represent any guarantee or assurance by Haycock Township that a Highway Occupancy Permit will be issued by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.

2.	NOTICE FOR ON-LOT SEWAGE PERMITS.

The planning module for land development has  been approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and the Bucks County Department of Health as to the subdivision plan. However, the septic system permit has not been issued for the lot(s) upon which new building(s) are proposed. Prior to issuance of a building permit, a septic system permit shall be obtained and presented to the Zoning Officer for each new building.	•

3.	NOTICE FOR ON-LOT WATER SUPPLIES.

The lots or building(s) in this development are planned to be served with water by means of individual wells constructed, owned and operated by the owner of the lot. No well water supply or quality testing has been conducted to verify suitability of individual wells for this purpose. It is possible that any or all of these lots do not have adequate soils or geology to provide an adequate volume or quality of on-site water. The lot well must be drilled and water supplies tested for volume and quality in accordance with Township requirements prior to occupancy of any building.

4.	NOTICE FOR FLOODPLAIN IDENTIFICATION.

The grant of a permit or approval of a subdivision and/or land development plan in the identified floodplain area shall not constitute a representation, guarantee, or warranty of any kind by the Township or by any official, consultant, or employee thereof of the practicability or safety of the proposed use, and the owners hereby agree and acknowledge that such permits or approvals shall not create any liability upon the Township, its officials, employees, or consultants.
 
APPENDIX "B"





5.	NOTICE OF USE OF FLOODPLAIN SOILS FOR FLOODPLAIN DELINEATION.

Floodplain delineation is based on floodplain soils and not a detailed engineering study. No construction is permitted within aieas mapped as floodplain soils, nor within 50 feet of top of bank unless a detailed study as prepared by a licensed engineer is submitted to the Township for review to verify extent of floodplain boundary.

6.	NOTICE OF POTENTIAL WETLANDS BASED ON HYDRIC SOILS.

No disturbance to hydric soils including construction, re-grading, and  filling activity is permitted unless a wetland study and delineation is conducted to verify existence or non­ existence of wetlands, and not until applicable permits have been received from the Township, Bucks Conservation District, Army Corps of Engineers, and DER.

7.	NOTICES FOR DRAINAGE FACILITIES AND EASEMENTS.

A	All drainage easements shown on this plan shall be maintained in a grassed or otherwise improved condition, in accordance with the grades and designs shown on the approved development plans for this project. All these easements shall be kept free cf all obstruction, including but not limited to, such obstructions as fill, temporary or  permanent structures.. and plants, (other than grass). The maintenance of all such easements shall be the responsibility of the lot owner on which the easement exists.

B.	Drainage easements shall allow passage of stormwater in underground  storm sewer piping and associated structures, and/or allow passage of stormwater over the surface of the ground and shall allow access across the area for purposes of maintenance of the storm conveyance systems.

C.	Existing roadside gutters or swales shall not be obstructed by driveways or other fill or structures.

8.	NOTICE	REGARDING	MAINTENANCE	OF	PUBLIC	STREETS	DURING CONSTRUCTION  ACTIVITY.

Mud sediment and/or debris tracked fiOm the site onto public caitway shall be immediately removed by brooming and/or mechanical means to the satisfaction of the Township. Use of a backhoe bucket to scrape roadway surface is prohibited. Where mud and/or sediment is causing slick and/or hazardous conditions, roadway surface shall be immediately pressure washed to remove condition. All sediment laden water must be filtered in a manner satisfactory to the Bucks County Conservation District before entering storm sewers and/or drainage channels.

9.	NOTICE FOR MINOR SUBDIVISION PLANS.

Pursuant to Section 304 of the Haycock Township Subdivision Ordinance, any additional subdivision of this tract submitted within five (5) years of the date of approval of this plan shall be deemed to be a major subdivision for the purposes of the Subdivision Ordinance and shall follow the procedure applying thereto.
 
APPENDIX	C
NON-RESIDENTIAL  PARKING  LOTS



I io	                                                                             
'I 5r:






 
co
w
£
&.r..


§	...
co
w

co
 







<	I
1	§
co	I  +z-
I	0c::
I	"w-
I
 
co











1
I I I I
 		I


LJl.{!TE.D  PLANTING









C-1
 

APPENDIX "D" -AS-BUILT DRAWING REQUIREMENTS

1.	GENERAL.

A.	The following requirements listed within 1. thiu 6. shall be considered ·minimum standards.   Additional  detail and  information  may  be required  by the Township depending on amount of detail needed.

B.	All individual sheets of as-built plans  shall  be  signed  and  sealed  by  the responsible licensed Professional Land Surveyor.

C.	Storm sewer, sanitary sewer, and utility as-built information shall all be included on same plan and profile views. Independent plan sets for each shall not be permitted unless specifically requested by the Township.

D.	Proof set of plans shall be submitted to the Township for review of completeness
·	prior to preparation of final drawings. "Proof plan" shall be titled as such. Final drawings shall consist of two (2) sets of reproducible mylars and two (2) sets of opaque blue line prints of all plan sheets.                                                       -  •

E.	Final as built  plan set shall  include a iepioducible  mylai sheet  of the detention
basin as-built.

F.	All plan sheets shall include a standard Act 38 notification requirement for location of underground utilities prior to excavation.

2.	DETENTION  BASINS.

A	As-built plan for detention basins shall be prepared on standard 24" x 36" plan sheets.
B.	Plan shall be prepared at a scale of 1" = 50 Ft. or at design plan scale (if larger).

C.	As-built plan shall include but not be limited to the following: (1)	Contours at 1 foot intervals.
(2)	Spot elevations on the top of berm along interior and exterior edges at 25
feet intervals.

(3)	Spot elevations on the top of berm and spillway crest at all four corners of the spillway; and spot elevations centrally on interior and exterior edge of the spillway.

(4)	Stage/storage calculations must be included on the plan.


(5)	Size, type, length, inverts and slope of outfall pipe.

(6)	Top of structure elevation and all associated inverts/sizes of weirs and orifices on same.





D-1
 
APPENDIX "D"


(7)	Inverts of all storm sewer pipes discharging into the basin.

(8)	As-built information on constructed swales which discharge into the basin shall be furnished upon request, as required by the Township.

3.	STORM SEWER.

A	Drafting Standards.

(1)	Plan size must be standard 24" x 36" plan sheets.

(2)	Plan shall be prepared utilizing standard plan and profile paper.

(3)	Horizontal scale must be 1" = 50 Ft. and vertical scale must be 1" = 5 Ft., or at design  plan scales  (if larger).

(4)	Plan view:

a.	Plan   view   shall   delineate	all   right-of-way	and   easement boundaries and all property corners that intersect same.

b.	Centerline stationing shall be included along all streets.

c.	All   roadways,   curbing,   and   sidewalk   shall   be   shown   and dimensioned.

d.	All lot numbers shall be labeled.

B.	Storm sewer as-built information shall include but not be limited to the following:

(1)	Grate and manhole rim elevations.

(2)	Pipe sizes, types, lengths, and slopes.

(3)	Inverts of all inlets, manholes, and endwalls.

(4)	Types of endwalls shall be identified (i.e. "FES", "OW', "D", etc.

(5)	Location of all sump pump/roof drain tie-ins.

(6)	Invert of storm sewer at sanitary sewer and utility crossings.

4.	SANITARY SEWER.

A	Drafting standards shall be the same as listed for storm sewer above.

B.	Sanitary sewer as-built information shall include but not be limited to: ( 1)	Manhole rim elevations and inverts (including drop inverts).
(2)	Pipes, sizes, lengths, slopes and types.

(3)	Location and stationing of all laterals.



D-2
 
APPENDIX "D"


(4) Location and inverts of all lateral  connections.  (Inverts  may  be interpolated from as-built manhole invert information. Lateral location shall be determined from video inspection log.)

(5) Location and as-built inverts of all cleanouts located at the right-of-way boundary.

(6)	Invert of sanitary sewer at storm sewer and utility crossings.

5.	WATER SYSTEM.

A	As-built information shall be prepared in accordance with prevailing standards and requirements of the applicable Authority.

B.	At a minimum, Township as-built drawings shall include the following on plan and profile views: location, size, and type of water mains, fire hydrants, water valve coxes, laterals, tees, bends, etc.

6.	STREETS.

A	Spot elevations shall be shown at each 0+50 station increment and at intersections of street centeriines.

B.	Offset distances from the design centerline to the constructed curbline or edge of road shall be indicated at each 0+50 station for both sides of the street.

7.	MISCELLANEOUS.

A		Location of all conduit crossings for underground utilities through easements and right-of-way must be shown.

B.		Set of design plans for gas service installation shall be submitted to the Township with as-built plans. Design plans shall be used for general reference only and shall not be referred to for purpose of as-built information.



























D-3
 
APPENDIX "E" - BASIN BERM CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS

1.	Site preparation - Areas under the embankment and any structural works shall be cleared, grubbed, and the topsoil stripped to remove the trees, vegetation, roots or other objectionable material. In order to facilitate clean-out and restoration, the pool area will be cleared of all brush and excess trees.

2.	Cut off trench - A cut-off trench will  be excavated along the centerline dam on earth fill embankments. The minimum depth shall be two feet. The cut-off trench shall extend up both abutments to the riser crest elevation. The minimum bottom width shall be eight feet but wide enough to permit operation of compaction equipment. The side slopes shall be no steeper than 1:1. Compaction  requirements shall be the same as those for the embankment. The trench shall be kept free from standing water during the backfilling operations.

3.	Embankment - The fill material shall be taken from selected borrow areas. It shall be free of roots, woody vegetation, oversized stones, rocks or other objectionable material. Areas on which fill is to be placed shall be scarified prior to placement of fill.

The fill material should contain sufficient moisture so that it can be formed by hand into a ball without crumbling. If water can be squeezed out of the ball, it is too wet for proper compaction.

Fill material will be placed in 6 to 8 inch layers and shall be continuous over the entire length of the fill. Fill material must be compacted to a minimum of 95% of Modified Proctor Density as established by ASTM D-1557. Compaction testing by a certified soils engineer/geologist mustbe completed as directed by the Township Engineer to verify adequate compaction has been achieved.




































E-1
 

APPENDIX  "F"

Bucks County Wetland Plant List

The following plant list represents common wetland species found in Bucks County. These species are reliable indicators of wetlands when found dominating a site (e.g., comprising more than 50% of the vegetation).

This list was derived from a larger regional list of wetland plants located in the northeastern United States compiled by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. The selections for this Bucks County list were made  with  the assistance of several regional experts: Dr. Ann Rhoads, Director of Botany, Morris Arboretum; Dr. Ernest Schuyler, Associate Curator, Academy of Natural Sciences; Dr. David BeMer, Professor of Botany, Delaware Valley College; and Edward  Perry, Assistant Supervisor, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service at State College.




I.	SCIENTIFIC NAME
· Acer negundo L.	COMMON NAME
Box Elder
2.	Acer saccharinum L.	Silver Maple
3.	Acorus calamus L.	Sweetflag
4.	Agrostis alba L.	Redtop
5.	Afzsma subcordatum Raf.	Subcordate  Waterplantain
6.	A/nus serrulata (Ait.) Willd.	Haze! Alder
7.	Amaranthus cannabinus (L.) Sauer	Tidemarsh Waterhemp
8.	Amorphafruticosa L.	Dull:Leaf Indigo
9.	Andropogon gerardii Vitman	Big Bluestem
10.	Andropogon glomeratus (Waft.) B.S.R	Bushybcard  Bluestem
11.	Andropogon virginicus L..	Broomsedge  Bluestem
12.	Arisaema triphyllum .) Schon	Indian  Jack-in-the-Pulpit
13.	Aronia arbutifolia (L.) Ell:	Red Chokecherry
14.	Aronia melanocarpa (Michx.) Ell.	Black Chokecherry
15.	Asclepias incarnata L.	Swamp Milkweed
16.	Aster umbe/latus Mill.	Flattop Aster
17.	Betula nigra L.	River Birch
18.	Bidens (all species)	Beggarticks
19.	Boehmeria cy/indrica (L.) SW.	Smallspike  False-Nettle
20.	Calamagrostis canadensis (Michx.) Beauv.	Bluejoint  Reedgrass
21.	Calamagrostis cinnoides (Muhl.) Barton	Hairyseed  Reedgrass
22.	Ca/tha palustris L.	Marsh Marigold
23.	Cardamine bulbosa (Schreb.) B.S.P.	Bulb Bittercress
24.	Cardamine pensylvanica  Muhl. ex Willd.	Pennsylvania Bittercress
25.	Carex (all species)	Sedge
26.	Cepha/anthus occidentalis L.	Common  Buttonbush
27.	Che/one glabra L.	White Turtlehead
28.	Chrysosplenium americanum Schweinitz	Golden  Saxifrage
29.	Cicuta bu/bifera L.	Poison  Waterhemlock
30.	Cicuta maculata L.	Common  Watcrhemlock
31.	Cinna arundinacea L.	Stout Wood.recd
32.	Clethra alnifolia L.	Summerswect Clethra
33.	Conium maculatum L.	Poison Hemlock
34.	Cornus amomum Mill.	Silky Dogwood
35.	Cyperus (all species)	Flatsedge
36.	Decodon vertici//atus (L.) Ell.	Water Willow
37.	Dulichium arundinaceum (L.) Britt.	Three-Way-Sedge
38.	Echinochloa walteri (Pursh) A. Helle	Walter Millet





F-1
 

 
39.	Eleocharis  (all species)
40.	Epilobium coloratum Bichler
41.	Equisetum jluviatile L.
42.	Equisetum hyemale L.
43.	Eragrostis hypnoide.s (Lam.) B.S-P
44.	Eragrostis pectinacea  (Michx.) J'. ees
45.	Eupatoriadelphus dubius (all species)
46.	Eupatorium perfoliatum  L.
47.	Eupatoriumpi/osum  Walter
48.	Euthamia graminifo/ia (L.) Nutt.
49.	Fraxinus nigra Marshall
50.	Fraxinus pennsylvcmica Marshall
51.	Galium obtusum Bigel.
52.	Galium parisiense L.
53.	Galium tin.ctoriuin L.
54.	. Glyceria  (all species)
55.	Helenium autumriale L.
56.	Heteranthera reniformis R. & P.
57.	Hibiscus mosocheutos L.
58.	Hydrophy//um virginianum L.
59.	Hypericum mutilum L.
60.	!Iex vertcil!ata (l_.) }-... Gray
61.	Impatiens capensis Meerb.
62.	Impatiens pa/Iida Nutt.
63.	Iris pseudacorus  L.
64.	Iris versico/orL
65.	Juncus (all species)
66.	Laportea canadensis (L.) Wedd.
67.	Leersia oryzoide.s (L) Swartz
68.	Leersia virginica Willd.
69.	Leucothoe racemosa (L.) Gray
70.	Lindera benzoin (L.) Blume
71.	Liquidambar sryraciflua L.
72.	Ludwigia (all species)
73.	Lycopus (all species)
74.	Lyonia ligustrina (L) DC.
75.	Lysimachia (all species)
76.	Lythrum salicaria L.
77.	Magnolia virginiana L.
78.	Mentha X piperita L.
79.	Mertensia virginica (L.) Pers.
.80.	Mimulus ringens L.
81.	Myosotis scorpioides L.
82.	Nasturtium officina/e R. Br.
83.	Nuphar /uteum (L) Sibth. & J.E. Smith
84.	Onoclea sensibillis L.
85.	Osmunda (all species)
86.	Panicum /ongifolium Torr.
87.	Panicum rigidulum Bose. ex Nees,
88.	Peltandra virginica (L.) Kunth.
89.	Phalaris arundinacea L.
90.	Phragmite.s australis (Cav.) Trin. ex Steud.
91.	Polygonum amphibium, L.
92.	Polygonum arifolium L.




F-2
 
Spikerush
Purple leaf Willowwced Water Horsetail Scouringrush  Horsetail Teal Lovegrass Carolina  Lovegrass
Joe-Pye Weed Bonesct
Hairy Thoroughwort Grass-Leaved  Goldenrod Black Ash
Green Ash Sluntlcaf Bedstraw Wall Bedstraw
Dye Bedstraw
Mannagrass
Common Sncezeweed Roundlcaf Mudp!antain Rose Mallow
Virginia Watcr!eaf Dwarf St. Johnswort Winterberry
Spotted Touch-Me-Not Pale Touch-Me-Not Yellow Iris
Blucflag Iris
Rush
Canada Woodnettle Rice Cutgrass Whitegrass
Swamp Leucothoe Spicebush Sweetgum
Seed-Box Buglewced Male-Berry Loosestrife
P-W	'ple Loosestrffe Sweetbay Peppermint Virginia Bluebells Monkey-Flower
True Forget-Me-Not Watercress
European Cowli!y Sensitive Fem Fem
Long-Leaved Panic-Grass Redtop Panicum
Arrow-Arum
Recd Canarygrass Giant Cane
Water Knotweed
Hal idleafTeanhumb
 
J

93.	Polygonum hydropiper L.
94.	Polygonum hydropiperoides Michx.
95.	?olygonum pensylvanicum L.	M shpcpper Knocweed Swamp Knocweed Pennsylvania Smamveed	
'!
96.	Polygonum punctatum Ell.
97.	Polygonum sagittatum L.	Dotted Smanweed
Arrow-Leaved Tea.rrJrnmb	
98.	Polygonum scandens L.
99.	Pontederia cordata L.
100.	Quercus bicolor Willd.	Hedge Combind
Pickerelweed Swamp White Oak	
101.	Quercus palustris Muench.
102.	Quercus phellos L.	Pin Oak
Willow Oak	
103.	Ranunculus sceleratus L.
104.	Ranuncu/us septentrionalis  Pair.	Celery leaf Buttercup
Swamp Buttercup	
105.   Rhododendron viscosum (L.) Torr.	Swamp Azalea	
106.    Rhynchospora  capitellata (Michx.) VAN	False Bog Rush	
107.   Rorippa palustris (L.) Besser	Marsh  Yellowgrass	
108.  .Rorippa sylvestris (L.) Besser	Creeping Yellowgiass	
109.  Rosa palustris M hall	Swamp Rose	
110.   Sagittaria (all species)	Arrowhead	
111.   Salix (all species)	Willow	
112.	Saururus cernuus L.
113.	Scirpus (all species)	Lizard's Tail
Bul.P\lsh	
114.  Scutellaria integrifolia L.	Rough Skullcap	
115. Scutellaria /ateriflora L.	Blue"Skullcap	
116.   Sium suave Waft.	Common Waterparsnip	
117.   Smila:r hispida Muhl.	Bristly Greenbriar	
118.	Sparganium (all species)
119.	Spiraea latifolia (Ait.) BC)rkh.	Burreed
BroadleafMeadowsweet   Spiraea.	
120.   Spiraea tomentosa L.	Hardhack	
121.	Symplocarpusfoetidus (L.) Nutt.
122.	The/ypteris thelypteroides (Michx.) J. Holub	Common Skunkcabbage
Marsh Fem.	
123.   Triadenum virginicum (L.) Raf.	Marsh St Johnswort	
124.   Typha angustifolia L.	Narrow-Leaved Cattail	
125.  Typha /atifolia L.	Common Cattail	
126.   Ulmus americana L.	American Elm	
127.   Ulmus rubra Muhl.	Slippery Elm	
128.	Vaccinium corymbosum L.	Highbush Blueberry	
129.	Vaccinium macrocarpon Ait.	Large Cranberry	
130.	Verbena hastata L.	Blue Verbena	
131.	Viburnum dentatum L.	Arrow-Wood	
132.	Viburnum recognitum  Fernald	Arrow-Wood	
133.   Woodwardia areolata (L.) T. Moore	Netted Chainfem	
134.   Zizania aquatica L.	Annual  Wildrice	

















F-3
 
APPENDIX "G"
 


RUNOFF COEFFICIENTS  FOR THE RATIONAL METHOD *
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP ANID SLOPE RANGE
 

	
A			
B			c			
D	

LAND USE	
0-2%	
2-6%	
6i%+	
0-2%	
2-6%	
6%+	
0-2%	
2-6%	
6%+	
o-; %	
2-6%	
6%+


CULTIVATED	
1	0.08 a	

0.13	

0.16	

0.11	

0.15	

0.21	

0.14	

0.19	

0.26	

0.18	

0.23	

0.31
	0.14 b	0.18	0.22	0.16	0.21	0.28	0.20	0.25	0.34	0.24	0.29	0.41

PASTURE  2	0.12	0.20	0..30	0.18	0.28	0.37		0.24	0.34	0.44	0.30	0.40	0.50
	0.15	0.25	0.37	0.23	0.34	0.45		0.30	0.42	0.52	0.3'7	0.50	I 0.62
							...						i
MEADOW, LAWN 3	. 0.10	0.16	0.25	"·      I•
0.14	0.22	0.30		0.20	0.28	0.36	0.24	0.30	,    o.4o
	0.14	0.22	0.30	0.20	0.28	0.37		0.26	0.35	0.44	0.30	0.40	i: A0

FOREST	0.05.	
0.08	
0.11	
0.08	
0.11	
0.14		
0.10	
0.13	
0.16	
0.12	
0.16	
0.20
	0.08	0.11	0.14	1.10	0.14	0.18		0.12	0.16	0.20	0.1S	0.20	0.25

PARKING, OTHER	0.85	0.86	O.B7	
0.85	0.86	0.87		
0.85	0.86	0.87	0.85i	
0.86	0.87
IMPERVIOUS	0.95	0.96	0.! 7	0.95	0.96	0.97		0.95	0.96	0.97	0.95i	0.96	0.97

RESIDENTIAL,	Runoff coefficients should be calculated based upon weighted average of impervious area coefficients and pervious area coefficients from COMMERCIAL,	above based upon soil type, slope, and the particular development proposal.
INDUSTRIAL, AND OTHER
•	DEVEL.OPED•
---------------------------------------------,----------------------------------------------------·---------------------------------------------------··-------------------------------.----'·
*Source: Rawls, W. J., S.L. Wong, and R.H. Mccuen, 1981. Comparison of urban flood frequency procedures.  Preliminary draft report preparedJor the
Soil Conservation Service, Beltsville, Maryland.

a - Runoff coefficients for storm recurrence intervals less than 25 years. b - Runoff coefficients for storm recurrence intervals of 25 years or more.
1	Cultivated lands include lands with vigorous crop growth with high interception.
2	Pasture lands are lands grazed by cattle with light or intermittent vegetation.
3	Meadow lands are undisturbed grass areas.

G-1
 
APPENDIX "H"


MANNING 'n' VALUES BY TYPICAL REACH DESCRIPTION



 
REACH  DESCRIPTION

1.	Natural stream, clean, straight, no rifts or pools

2.	Natural stream, clean, winding, some pool and shoals

3.	Natural stream, winding, pools, shoals, stony with some weeds.

4.	Natural stream, sluggish with deep pools and weeds

5.	Natural stream or swale, very weedy or with timber under brush



6.	Concrete pipe, culvert or channel

7.	Corrugated metal pipe



* Depending upon type and diameter.






































H-1
 
MANNING 'n' 0.030
0.040

0.050

0.070

0.100




0.012

0.012-0.027'*
 
APPENDIX "I"



 
,,,	DELAWARE RIVER
(NORTH)  WATERSHED
"'- ' ).
 







 



-WATERSHED BOUNDARY

!Wll@J I 00% RELEASE RATE DIRECT  DISCHARGE


































STORMWATER MA.NAGBMEITTREI.E/\SERATEMAP
HAYCOCK	TOWNSHIP
BUCKS  COUNTY	PENNSYLVANIA


 	T


...
 




Ordinance No. 91


HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE

































Haycock Township Bucks County, Pennsylvania



October 7, 2002
 
Table of Contents	Page

Article I.	General Provisions
Section 101  Statement of Findings 	1
Section 102   Purpose 	1
Section 103   Statutory Authority 	2
Section 104  Applicability 	2
Section 105  Exemptions 	2
Section 106  Repealer 	3
Section 107  Severability 	3
Section 108  Compatibility with Other Ordinance Requirements 	3
Article II	Definitions 	4
Article III	Stormwater Management
Section 301   General Requirements 	13
Section 302  Stormwater Management Districts 	14
Section 303  Stormwater Management District Implementation Provisions  ......... (Performance Standards) 	16
Section 304  Design Criteria for Stormwater Management Facilities 	18
Section 305   Calculation Methodology 	27
Section 306  Standards During Land Disturbance 	30
Article IV	Stormwater Management Plan Requirements
Section 401   General Requirement 	32
Section 402  Stormwater Management Plan Contents 	32
Section 403  Plan Submission 	36
Section 404  Stormwater Management Plan Review 	36
Section 405   Modification of Plans 	37
Section 406  Resubmission of Disapproved Stormwater Management Plans ..38
Article V	Inspections
Section 501   Schedule of Inspections 	39
Article VI	Fees and Expenses
Section 601  Municipality Stormwater Management Plan Review Fee 	40
Section 602   Expenses Covered by Fees 	40
Article VII	Maintenance Responsibilities
Section 701  Performance Guarantee 	41
Section 702  Maintenance Responsibilities 	41
Section 703  Maintenance Agreement for Privately Owned Stormwater ..............
Facilities 	41
Section 704  Municipal Stormwater Maintenance Fund 	42
 
Table of Contents (Cont’d)	Page
Article VIII	Enforcement and Penalties
Section 801   Right-of-Entry	43
Section 802  Notification	43
Section 803  Enforcement	43
Section 804  Public Nuisance	44
Section 805  Penalties	45
Section 806   Appeals	45

Appendix A	Stormwater Management Design Criteria Appendix B	Riparian Forested Buffer
Appendix C	Plant Lists for Wetland Management
Appendix D	Stormwater Management Plan Application and Fee Schedule Appendix E	Watershed Map
 
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section 101. Statement of Findings

The governing body of the municipality finds that:

A.	Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting from development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, degrades water quality, overtaxes the carrying capacity of existing streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the cost of public facilities to convey and manage stormwater, undermines floodplain management and flood reduction efforts in upstream and downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge, and threatens public health and safety.

B.	A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including reasonable regulation of development and activities causing accelerated erosion, is fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare, and the protection of the people of the municipality and all the people of the Commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.

Section 102. Purpose

The purpose of this comprehensive stormwater management ordinance is to promote health, safety, and welfare within Haycock Township by minimizing the damages described in Section
101.A of this Ordinance through provisions designed to:

A.	Manage accelerated runoff and erosion and sedimentation problems at their source by regulating activities that cause these problems.

B.	Utilize and preserve the existing natural drainage systems.

C.	Maintain the pre-development volume of groundwater recharge and  prevent degradation of groundwater quality.

D.	Maintain the pre-development peak and volume of stormwater runoff and prevent degradation of surface water quality.

E.	Minimize nonpoint source pollutant loadings to the ground and surface waters.

F.	Minimize impacts on stream temperatures.

G.	Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses in the municipality and the Commonwealth.

H.	Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams.

I.	Provide proper maintenance of all permanent stormwater management facilities that are constructed in the municipality.

J.	Provide   performance   standards   and  design  criteria   for   watershed-wide   stormwater management and planning.
 
Section 103. Statutory Authority

The municipality is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect runoff by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978 32 P.S., P.L. 864 (Act 167) Section 680.1 et seq., as amended, the 'Storm Water Management Act,"; and by the Authority of Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as amended by Act 170 of 1988, as further amended by Act 209 of 1990 and Act 131 of 1992, 53 P.S. Section 10101.

Section 104. Applicability

This Ordinance shall apply to all areas of the municipality that are located within the Tohickon Creek Watershed or Delaware River (North) Watershed as delineated in Appendix D which is hereby adopted as part of this Ordinance.

This Ordinance shall apply to temporary and permanent stormwater management facilities constructed as part of any of the regulated activities listed in this section. Stormwater management and erosion and sedimentation control during construction activities which are specifically not regulated by this Ordinance, shall continue to be regulated under existing laws and ordinances.

This Ordinance contains only the stormwater management performance standards and design criteria that are necessary or desirable from a watershed-wide perspective. Stormwater management design criteria (e.g. inlet spacing, inlet type, collection system design and details, outlet structure design, etc.) shall continue to be regulated by applicable ordinances.

The following activities are defined as 'Regulated Activities' and shall be regulated by this Ordinance except as exempted by Section 105 of this Ordinance:

A.	Land development.
B.	Subdivision.
C.	Construction of new or additional impervious surfaces (driveways, parking lots, etc.) which exceed 1,000 square feet in area.
D.	Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings which exceed 1,000 square feet in area.
E.	Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.
F.	Installation of stormwater management facilities or appurtenances thereto.
G.	Temporary storage of impervious or pervious material (rock, soil, etc.) where ground contact exceeds 5 percent of the lot area or 5,000 square feet (whichever is less), and where the material is placed on slopes exceeding 8 percent.

Section 105. Exemptions

A.	Any Regulated Activity that meets the following exception criteria may be exempt from the requirements of Section 303.A of this Ordinance. This exemption shall not relieve the landowner and/or developer from complying with water quality and groundwater rechar ge standards under Section 303.C and the special requirements under Section 304.R for areas within Exceptional Value and High Quality sub-watersheds. Further, this exemption shall not relieve the applicant from implementing such measures as are necessary to protect health, safety, and property. These criteria shall apply to the total development even if development is to take place in phases. The date of adoption of this Ordinance shall be the starting point from which to consider tracts as “parent tracts” in which future subdivisions   and   respective   impervious   area   computations   shall   be   cumulatively
 
considered.  Exemption shall not relieve the applicant from implementing such measures as are necessary to protect health, safety, and property.

Stormwater Management Exemption Criteria

Total Parcel Size	Minimum Distance (ft.)*	Impervious Area Exemption (sq. ft.)
 	(Maximum) 	





 	> 5 acres	500 ft.	7,500 sq. ft. 	

*		The minimum setback distance is measured between the proposed impervious area (excluding driveway access) and/or stormwater control/structure discharge point to the downslope property boundary. In lieu of meeting the minimum distance criteria, the applicant may provide documentation from a Registered Professional Engineer in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania that the increased flows from the site leaves the site in the same manner as the pre-development condition, and that there will be no adverse affects to properties along the path of flow(s), or that the increased flow(s) will reach a natural watercourse or an existing stormwater management structure before adver sely affecting any property along the path of the flow(s).

B.	The municipality, upon request by the applicant, may grant an exemption from the provisions of this Ordinance for a project qualifying under Section 105.A. If an exemption is granted, the municipality may require the developer to pay a fee in an amount established by separate Resolution of the Board of Supervisors to the Municipal Stormwater Management Capital Fund.

Section 106. Repealer

Any ordinance or ordinance provision of the municipality inconsistent with any of the provisions of this ordinance is hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.

Section 107. Severability

Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of this ordinance.

Section 108. Compatibility with Other Ordinance Requirements

Approvals issued pursuant to this ordinance do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance.
 
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS

For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:

A.	Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.

B.	The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances of like kind and character.

C.	The word "person' includes an individual, firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, or any other similar entity.

D.	The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and "should" are permissive.

E.	The words "used” or “occupied" include the words "intended”, “designed”, “maintained”, or “arranged to be used”, “occupied” or “maintained”.

Accelerated erosion The removal of the surface of the land through the combined action of man's activity and the natural processes of a rate greater than would occur because of the natural process alone.

Agricultural activities The work of producing crops and raising livestock including tillage, plowing, disking, harrowing, pasturing and installation of conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious area is not considered an agricultural activity.

Alluvial soils (floodplain soils) Areas subject to periodic flooding and listed in the Soil Survey of Bucks and Philadelphia Counties, Pennsylvania, U.S. Department of Agricultural Soil Conservation Service as being “on, or in, the floodplain” or subject to flooding. The following soil types are alluvial and/or floodplain soils:

Alluvial land
Alton gravely load, flooded Bowmansville silt loam Hatboro silt loam
Marsh Pope loam
Rowland silt loam

Alteration As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another; also the changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less impervious; land disturbance.

Applicant A landowner or developer who has filed an application for approval to engage in any Regulated Activities as defined in Section 104 of this Ordinance.

BMP (Best Management Practice) Stormwater structures, facilities and techniques to maintain or improve the water quality of surface runoff.
 
Channel erosion The widening, deepening, and headward cutting of channels and waterways, due to erosion caused by moderate to large floods.

Cistern An underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.

Conservation District Bucks Conservation District.

County Bucks County

Culvert A pipe, conduit, or similar structure including appurtenant works which conveys surface water under or through an embankment or fill.

Dam An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works, constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another fluid or semifluid, or a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad, or other purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or semifluid.

Design storm The magnitude and temporal distribution of precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence (e.g. 50-year storm) and duration (e.g. 24-hours), used in the design and evaluation of stormwater management systems.

Designee The agent of the governing body involved with the administration, review, or enforcement of any provisions of this ordinance by contract or memorandum of understanding.

Detention basin An impoundment structure designed to manage stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a predetermined rate.

Detention district Those subareas in which some type of detention is required to meet the plan requirements and goals of Act 167.

Developer A person, partnership, association, corporation, or other entity, or any responsible person therein or agent thereof, that undertakes any regulated activity of this Ordinance.

Development Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, the construction or placement of buildings or other structures, mobile homes, streets and other paving, utilities, mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or drilling operations, and the subdivision of land.

Development plan  The provisions for development including a planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities, common open space and public facilities. The phrase “provisions of development plan” when used in this Ordinance shall mean the written and graphic materials referred to in this definition.

Development site The specific tract of land for which a regulated activity is proposed.

Downslope property line That portion of the property line of the lot, tract, or parcels of land being developed located such that all overland or pipe flow from the site would be directed toward it.
 
Downstream hydraulic capacity analysis Any downstream  capacity hydraulic analysis conducted in accordance with this ordinance shall use the following criteria for determining adequacy for accepting increased peak flow rates:

1.	Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey the increased rate of runoff associated with a 2-year return period event within their banks at velocities consistent with protection of the channels from erosion. Acceptable velocities shall be based upon criteria included in the DEP Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual.

2.	Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey the increased 25-year return period rate of runoff without creating any hazard to persons or property.

3.	Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must pass or convey flows from the tributary area must be designed in accordance with DEP, Chapter 105 regulations (if applicable) and, at a minimum, pass the increased 25-year return period rate of runoff.

4.	No new channels or conveyance facilities shall be authorized by this language.

Drainage Conveyance facility A stormwater management facility designed to transmit stormwater runoff which shall include streams, channels, swales, pipes, conduits, culverts, storm sewers, etc.

Drainage easement A right granted by a landowner to a grantee, allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.

Earth disturbance Any activity including, but not limited to, construction, mining, timber harvesting, and grubbing which alters, disturbs, and exposes the existing land surface.

Engineer A licensed professional civil engineer registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

Erosion The movement of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice, or other natural forces.

Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Plan A plan which is designed to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.

Existing conditions The initial condition of a project site prior to the proposed construction. Farm field, disturbed earth, or undeveloped cover conditions of a site or portions of a site used for modeling purposes, shall be considered “meadow” unless the natural groundcover generates lower curve numbers or Rational “C” value, such as forested land. Existing man-made impervious surfaces shall be considered as “meadow” when developing “cover complex” calculations.

Flood A general but temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams, rivers, and other waters of this commonwealth.

Floodplain Those areas of Haycock Township which are subject to the one hundred year flood, as identified in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated May 18, 1999, and the accompanying maps prepared for the Township by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), or most
 
recent revision thereof; and also those areas along streams, ponds, or lakes not identified within the Flood Insurance Study which are inundated by the 100 year reoccurrence internal flood.

Floodway The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and discharge the 100-year frequency flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the boundary of the 100-year frequency floodway, it is assumed-absent evidence to the contrary-that the floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream.

Forest Management/Timber Operations Planning and activities necessary for the management of forest land. These include timber inventory and preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and construction, timber harvesting, site preparation, and reforestation.

Freeboard A vertical distance between the elevation of the design high-water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, or diversion ridge. The space is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.

Grade The slope of a street, other public way, land area, drainage facility or pipe specified in percent.

Grassed waterway A natural or constructed waterway, usually broad and shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, used to conduct surface water from cropland.

Groundwater recharge Replenishment of natural underground water supplies.

Hydric soils Soils that are categorized as poorly drained that can support hydrophytic plants, but may not do so in many cases. For the purpose of this Ordinance, hydric soils are general wetland indicator soils. (Refer Wetlands) The following soils, classified in the Soil Survey of Bucks and Philadelphia Counties, Pennsylvania, U.S. Department of Agricultural, Soil Conservation Service, July 1975, are hydric soils:



Bowmansville silt loam Doylestown silt loam Fallsington silt loam Hatboro silt loam Towhee silt loam
Towhee extremely stony silt loam

Impervious surface Impervious surfaces are those surfaces which do not absorb precipitation and surface water. All buildings, parking areas, driveways, roads, sidewalks, swimming pools, and any areas containing concrete, asphalt, packed stone (not including clean stone used for decorative purposes), compacted soils, or other equivalent surfaces shall be considered impervious within this definition. In addition, other areas determined by the Township Engineer to be impervious within the meaning of this definition will be classified as impervious surfaces.

Impoundment A retention or detention basin designed to retain stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
 
Infiltration structures A structure designed to direct runoff into the ground (e.g. french drains, seepage pits, seepage trench, biofiltration swale).

Inlet A surface connection to a closed drain. A structure at the diversion end of a conduit. The upstream end of any structure through which water may flow.

Land development - Any of the following activities:

1.	The improvement of one (1) or two (2) or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for any purpose involving:

A.	A group of two (2) or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether purposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or

B.	The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between or among two (2) or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other features.

2.	A subdivision of land.

3.	"Land development" does not include development which involves:

A.	The conversion of an existing single family detached dwelling or single family semi-detached dwelling into not more than three (3) residential units, unless such units are intended to be a condominium;

B.	The addition of a residential accessory building, including farm building, on a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building; or

C.	The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines of an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park. For the purposes of this subsection, an amusement park is defined as a tract or area used principally as a location for permanent amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall not apply to newly acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial plans for the expanded area have been approved by the proper authorities.

Land/earth disturbance Any activity involving grading, tilling, digging, or filling of ground or stripping of vegetation or any other activity that causes an alteration to the natural condition of the land.

Main Stem (Main channel) Any stream segment or other runoff conveyance facility used as a reach in the watershed hydrologic model.

Manning Equation (Manning formula) A method for calculation of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g., cubic feet per second) in open channels based upon channel shape, roughness, depth of flow and slope. "Open channels" may include closed conduits so long as the flow is not under pressure.

Municipal Engineer A professional engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and appointed by the Township pursuant to Article V of the Second Class Township Code.
 
Municipality  Haycock Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.

Nonpoint source pollution Pollution that enters a watery body from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from discernible, confined, or discrete conveyances.

NRCS Natural Resource Conservation Service (previously SCS).

Open channel A drainage element in which stormwater flows with an open surface. Open channels include, but shall not be limited to, natural and man-made drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals, and pipes flowing partly full.

Outfall Point where water flows from a conduit, stream, or drain.

Outlet Points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake, tidewater or artificial drain.

Parking lot storage Involves the use of impervious parking areas as temporary impoundments with controlled release rates during rainstorms.

Peak discharge The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a specific storm event.

Penn State runoff model (calibrated) The computer-based hydrologic modeling technique adapted to the watershed for the Act 167 Plan. The model has been "calibrated" to reflect actual recorded flow values by adjoining key model input parameters.

Pipe A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.

Planning Commission The Planning Commission of Haycock Township.

PMF (Probable Maximum Flood) The flood that may be expected from the most severe combination of critical meteorologic and hydrologic conditions that are reasonably possible in any area. The PMF is derived from the probable maximum precipitation (PMP) as determined on the basis of data obtained from the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).

Rational formula A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate peak flow.

Recharge volume A calculated volume of stormwater runoff from impervious areas which is required to be infiltrated at a site and may be achieved through use of structural or non-structural BMPs.

Regulated activities Any activity to which this Ordinance is applicable pursuant to Section 104 of this Ordinance.

Release rate The percentage of predevelopment peak rate of runoff from a site or subarea to which the post development peak rate of runoff must be reduced to protect downstream areas.

Retention basin A basin designed to retain stormwater runoff so that a permanent pool is established.
 
Return period The average interval, in years, within which a storm event of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For example, the 25-year return period rainfall would be expected to recur on the average once every 25 years.

Riser A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that is used to control the discharge rate from the pond for a specified design storm.

Rooftop detention Temporary ponding and gradual release of stormwater falling directly onto flat roof surfaces by incorporating controlled-flow roof drains into building designs.

Runoff Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.

Sediment basin A barrier, dam, or retention or detention basin located and designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other material transported by water.

Sediment pollution The placement, discharge or any other introduction of sediment into the waters of the commonwealth occurring from the failure to design, construct, implement or maintain control measures and control facilities in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance.

Sedimentation The process by which mineral or organic matter is accumulated or deposited by the movement of water.

Seepage pit/seepage trench An area of excavated earth filled with loose stone or similar coarse material, into which surface water is directed for infiltration into the ground.

Sheet flow Runoff that flows over the ground surface as a thin, even layer, not concentrated in a channel.

Soil-cover complex method A method of runoff computation developed by the NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/cover to a runoff parameter called a Curve Number (CN).

Soil group, hydrologic A classification of soils by the NRCS into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from A soils, which are very permeable and produce little runoff, to D soils, which are not very permeable and produce much more runoff.

Spillway A depression in the embankment of a pond or basin which is used to pass peak discharge greater than the maximum design storm controlled by the pond.

Storage indication method A reservoir routing procedure based on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow equals the change in storage) with outflow defined as a function of storage volume and depth.

Storm frequency The number of times that a given storm event occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years. See "Return Period."

Storm sewer A system of pipes and/or open channels that convey intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources, but excludes domestic sewage and industrial wastes.

Stormwater The total amount of precipitation reaching the ground surface.
 
Stormwater management facility Any structure, natural or man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater management facilities include, but are not limited to, detention and retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes, and infiltration structures.

Stormwater management permit A permit issued by the township governing body after the drainage plan has been approved. Said permit is issued prior to or with the final township approval.

Stormwater management plan The plan for managing stormwater runoff within the Township adopted as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, (Act 167).

Stormwater management site plan The plan prepared by the Developer or his engineer indicating how stormwater runoff will be managed at the particular site of interest according to this Ordinance.

Stream enclosure A bridge, culvert or other structure in excess of 100 feet in length upstream to downstream which encloses a regulated water of this commonwealth.

Subarea The smallest drainage unit of a watershed for which stormwater mana gement criteria have been established in the stormwater management plan.

Subdivision The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development, provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than ten acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential dwellings, shall be exempt.

Swale A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water runoff.

Timber operations See Forest Management.

Time of concentration (Tc) The time for surface runoff to travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a point of interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total of overland flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.

Volumetric Runoff Coefficient A variable indicative of stormwater runoff volume and dependent on the impervious coverage for a site.

Water Quality BMP Water quality improvements pertain primarily to suspended sediment and sediment-bound contaminants, although some BMPs also will be effective in reducing pollution caused by dissolved nutrients, biological oxygen demand, and oil and grease.

Water Quality Volume A calculated volume of stormwater runoff from impervious areas which is required to be captured and treated at a site and may be achieved through use of structural or non-structural BMPs. Numerically, the water quality volume is a product of the volumetric runoff coefficient, the site area, and a depth of rainfall of 1”.

Watercourse An intermittent or perennial stream of water, river, brook, creek, or swale identified on USGS or SCS mapping; and/or delineated Waters of the Commonwealth.
 

Waters of the Commonwealth Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this Commonwealth.

Wetland Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs, ferns, and similar areas.

Wetland Delineation The process by which wetland limits are determined. Wetlands must be delineated by a qualified specialist according to the 1989 Federal Manuals (as amended) for the Delineation of Jurisdictional Wetlands (whichever is greater) or according to any subsequent Federal or State regulation. Qualified specialist shall include those persons being Certified Professional Soil Scientists as registered with Registry of Certified Professionals in Agronomy Crops and Soils (ARCPACS); or as contained on consultant’s list of Pennsylvania Association of Professional Soil Scientists (PAPSS); or as registered with National Society of Consulting Soil Scientists (NSCSS), or as certified by State and/or Federal certification programs; or by a qualified Biologist/Ecologist.
 
ARTICLE III. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT

Section 301. General Requirements

A.	All regulated activities in the municipality which do not fall under the exemption criteria shown in Section 105 of this Ordinance shall submit a stormwater management plan consistent with this Ordinance to the municipality for review. These criteria shall apply to the total proposed development even if development is to take place in stages. Impervious surface shall include, but not be limited to, any roof, parking or driveway areas and any new streets and sidewalks. Any areas designed to be gravel or crushed stone shall be assumed to be impervious.

B.	Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided in order to permit unimpeded flow along natural watercourses, except as modified by stormwater management facilities designed to encourage infiltration, groundwater recharge, and improved water quality.

C.	Existing points of concentrated drainage that discharge onto adjacent property shall not be altered without written approval of the affected property owner(s) and shall be subject to any applicable discharge criteria specified in this ordinance.

D.	Areas of existing sheet flow discharge shall be maintained wherever possible. If sheet flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto adjacent property, the developer must document that adequate downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the concentrated discharge, or otherwise prove that no erosion, sedimentation, flooding or other harm will result from the concentrated discharge; and submit written approval from the affected adjacent property owner(s).

E.	Where a development site is traversed by watercourses, drainage easements shall be provided conforming to the line of such waterco urses. The width of the easement shall be adequate to provide for the unimpeded flow of stormwater runoff from the 100 year storm event. Terms of the easement shall prohibit excavation, the placing of fill or structures, and any alterations that may adversely affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of the easement. Periodic maintenance of the easement shall be required by the landowner to ensure proper runoff conveyance.

F.	When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural drainageways on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage, open channels may be constructed conforming substantially to the line and grade of such natural drainageways. Work within natural drainageways shall be subject to approval by PA DEP through the Joint Permit Application process, or, where deemed appropriate by PA DEP, through the General Permit process.

G.	Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this Ordinance that will be located in or adjacent to waters of the commonwealth or wetlands shall be subject to approval by PA DEP through the Joint Permit Application process, or, where deemed appropriate by PA DEP, the General Permit process. When there is a question whether wetlands may be involved, it is the responsibility of the Developer or his agent to show that the land in question cannot be classified as wetlands, otherwise approval to work in the area must be obtained from PA DEP.
 
H.	Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this Ordinance that would be located on state highway rights-of-way, or discharge stormwater to facilities located within a state highway right-of-way, shall be subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PADOT).

I.	Minimizing site disturbance and impervious surface, and infiltrating stormwater runoff through seepage beds, infiltration trenches, etc. are encouraged, where soil conditions permit, to reduce the size or eliminate the need for retention/detention facilities.

J.	Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to a natural watercourse, drainage swale, or stormwater easement. Roof drains and sump pumps shall not be connected to a storm sewer or street drainage structure unless designed as part of a stormwater management facility. In no case shall roof drains or sump pumps be connected to a sanitary sewer.

K.	Whenever a watercourse is located within a development site, it shall remain open in the natural state and location and shall not be piped, impeded, or altered  (except for road crossings). It is the responsibility of the developer to stabilize existing eroded stream/channel banks.

Section 302. Stormwater Management Districts – Peak Rate Control

A.	Mapping of Stormwater Runoff Peak Rate Districts - In order to implement the provisions of this Ordinance, the Tohickon Creek Watershed Stormwater Management Plan and Delaware River (North) Watershed Stormwater Management Plan, Haycock Township is hereby divided into Stormwater Runoff Peak Rate Districts consistent with the plan. The boundaries of the districts are indicated on the runoff peak rate district map that is available for inspection at the municipal building. A large -scale boundary map is included as Appendix D for reference.

B.	The exact location of the Stormwater Runoff Peak Rate District boundary as it a pplies to a given development site shall be determined by mapping the boundaries using the 2-feet or 5- feet topographic contours provided as part of the stormwater management plan developed for the site in accordance with the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. The District boundaries as originally drawn coincide with topographic divides or, in certain instances, are drawn from the intersection of the watercourse or a potential flow obstruction to the topographic divide consistent with topography. The locations determined on the stormwater management plan shall be reviewed and verified by the municipal engineer.

C.	Description of Tohickon Creek Watershed Stormwater Runoff Hydrologic Peak Rate Districts

1.	Conditional No Detention Districts (Direct Discharge).  Subareas identified on the official Sub-Basin Map available for inspection at the Township Office. Included in this district are 2, 3, 8-10, 18, 20, 21, 42, 43, 52, 54, 56, 57, 59, 61, 62, 67, 70-73, 76, 77,
81-83. These sub-areas may discharge post-development runoff without detention facilities without adversely affecting the total watershed peak flow. These areas are located adjacent to the Delaware River. However, where the conveyance capabilities of the local receiving facilities are not adequate to safely transport the increased peak flows from undetained runoff a 100% release rate control is applied.
 
2.	100 Percent Release Rate District.  Subareas included in this district are 4-7, 1-17, 19,
22-28, 31-34, 41, 44-51, 53, 55, 58, 60, 63, 64, 66, 68, 69, 74, 75, 84-98, 101, 109,
111 - 114, 116, 118, 119, 121-126. These subareas are not expected to incur a great deal of development growth due to location, topography, soils, or a combination of all three factors. Also, the location in the watershed of these sub-areas is of minor importance in supporting the overall watershed level runoff control. Therefore, these areas are allowed to release development runoff at a rate that does not exceed the existing rates of runoff.

3.	90 Percent Release Rate District.  Subareas included in this district are 30, 35 -40, 226.
These areas are located in developing areas that have adequate drainage capacity in the receiving waterways. A slight amount of reduction is necessary to preserve this integrity of the receiving waterways and increase water quality of the receiving waterways, at the request of the local municipality.

4.	75 Percent Release Rate District.  Subareas included in this district are 78-80, 99, 100,
102-108, 110, 115, 117, 120. Certain subareas require the control of stormwater runoff to a portion of the existing runoff equal to 75 percent. These areas are located in upper reaches of the watershed, specifically, areas around Quakertown Borough and Richlandtown Township which are projected to incur significant development impacts and have existing inadequate storm conveyance facilities. Some of these areas are expected to incur a relatively major increase in development pressure, while some areas may not see much development at all. In order to assure uniform watershed-level runoff control; however, the assignment of this release rate on a widespread basis will uniformly restrict the future runoff in a fashion that favors no particular sub-watershed.

D.	Description of Delaware River (North) Watershed Stormwater Runoff Hydrologic Peak Rate Districts

1.	Conditional No Detention Districts. Subareas included in this district are 1, 2, 6-11, 20, 61-68, 70-72, 89-91, 93. These subareas may discharge post-development runoff without detention facilities without adversely affecting the total watershed peak flow. These areas are located adjacent to the Delaware River, which is capable of absorbing undetained runoff without affecting the watershed level control. In certain instances, the conveyance capabilities of the local receiving facilities may not be adequate to safely transport the increased peak flows from undetained runoff. In these cases, the developer shall ensure that 100 percent release rate control is applied to the particular receiving stream(s), and/or the developer may provide increased capacity of those receiving facilities in order to insure safe passage of any undetained runoff.

2.	100 Percent Release Rate District. Subareas included in this district are 3-5, 12-19, 21-60, 69, 73-88, 92, 94-103, 112-130. These subareas are not expected to incur a great deal of development growth due to location, topography, soils or a combination of all three factors. Also, the location in the watershed of these subareas is of minor importance in supporting the overall watershed level runoff control. Therefore, these areas are allowed to release development runoff at a rate that does not exceed the existing rates of runoff.

3.	75 Percent Release Rate District.   Subareas included in this district are 104-111.
Certain subareas require the control of stormwater runoff to a portion of the existing runoff  equal  to  75  percent.	These  areas  are  located in upper  reaches  of  the
 
watershed, specifically, areas around Springfield and Lower Saucon Townships. In order to ensure uniform watershed-level runoff control, the assignment of this release rate on a widespread basis will uniformly restrict the future runoff in a fashion that favors no particular sub-watershed. (Not applicable within Haycock Township).

Section 303.	Stormwater	Management	Implementation	Provisions	(Performance Standards and Best Management Practices)

A.	General Standards.

Post-development rates of runoff from any regulated activity shall not exceed the peak release rates of runoff prior to development for the design storms specified in Watershed Stormwater Management Plan, Section 302 of the Ordinance and using rainfall depths given in Table 3-1 below and Figure A-2, Appendix A of this Ordinance.

Table 3-1. Rainfall Depths

Frequency of Storm Event	Rainfall Depth
 	(years)	(inches) 	

1	2.4
2	3.1
5	3.7
10	4.5
25	5.5
50	7.0
100	7.5
(Source PennDOT, Intensity-Duration-Frequency Tables for Region 4)

B.	Groundwater Recharge. Developed areas shall maintain groundwater recharge consistent with pre-development conditions, dependent on hydrologic soil groups and impervious cover. A minimum of one inch (1”) of runoff shall be infiltrated unless the developer can prove the inability of the site to achieve this specific volume based on existing site conditions. The maximum available recharge shall be calculated based on utilizing the most capable recharge areas of the site. This volume of runoff is termed the “Recharge Volume” and is calculated in accordance with Section 305.K.

Design of the stormwater management facilities shall provide for groundwater recharge to compensate for the reduction in the percolation that occurs when the ground surface runoff characteristics have been altered. A detailed geologic evaluation of the project site shall be performed to determine the suitability of recharge facilities. The evaluation of the project site shall be performed by a qualified geologist and/or soil scientist, and shall at a minimum, address soil permeability, depth to bedrock, susceptibility to sinkhole formation, and subgrade stability. Where pervious pavement is proposed for parking lots, recreational facilities, nondedicated streets, or other areas, pavement construction specifications shall be noted on the plan.

Whenever a stormwater facility will be located in an area underlain by limestone, a geological evaluation of the proposed location shall be conducted to determine susceptibility to sinkhole formations. The design of all facilities over limestone formations shall include measures to prevent groundwater contamination and, where necessary, sinkhole formation. Soils used for construction of basins shall have low-erodibility factors (“K” factors). The municipality may require the installation of an impermeable liner in detention basins.  If the
 
developer can prove through analysis that the site is in an area underlain by limestone, and such geologic conditions may result in sinkhole formations, then the site is exempt from recharge requirements. However, the site shall still be required to meet all other hydrologic and water quality management standards as found in this ordinance.

It shall be the developer’s responsibility to verify if the site is underlain by limestone. The following note shall be attached to all Stormwater Management Site plans and signed by the developer’s engineer/surveyor/landscape architect/architect “I,	certify that the proposed detention basin (circle one) is/is not underlain by limestone.”

C.	Water Quality. Developed areas will provide adequate storage and treatment facilities necessary to capture and treat the Water Quality Volume (WQv) consistent with Articles 3 and 4 of this ordinance. The “Water Quality Volume” is calculated in accordance with Section 305.J. The Recharge Volume may be a component of the Wa ter Quality Volume. If the Recharge Volume is less than the Water Quality Volume, the remaining Water Quality Volume may be captured and treated by methods other than recharge/infiltration BMPs.

D.	District Boundaries - The boundaries of the Stormwater Management Districts are shown on an official map, which is available for inspection at the municipal office. A copy of the official map at a reduced scale is included in the Appendix D of this Ordinance. The exact location of Stormwater Management Distric t boundaries as they apply to a given development site shall be determined by mapping the boundaries using topographic contours at an appropriate level of detail, but in no case less than 2 feet intervals (or 5 feet intervals as applicable). This information shall be provided as part of the Stormwater Management Plan.

E.	Sites Located in More Than One District - For a proposed development site located within two or more release category subareas, the peak discharge rate from any subarea shall be the pre-development peak discharge for that subarea multiplied by the applicable release rate. The calculated peak discharges shall apply regardless of whether the grading plan changes the drainage area by subarea.

F.	Off-Site Areas - Off-site areas that drain through a proposed development site are not subject to release rate criteria when determining allowable peak runoff rates or volume reduction. However, on-site drainage facilities shall be designed to safely convey off-site flows through the development site.

G.	Site Areas - Where the site area to be impacted by a proposed development activity differs significantly from the total site area as determined by the municipality, the municipality may, but is not required to, permit only the proposed impact area to be subject to the release rate criteria.

H.	Stormwater Conveyance Corridor Protection (Riparian Corridor Preservation and Vegetation) – Runoff from developed areas of the site, including but not limited to areas of impervious surface, shall be managed through a series of riparian corridor vegetation facilities whenever possible. This will be accomplished in a manner satisfactory to the municipality, utilizing the “Pennsylvania Handbook of Best Management Practices for Developing Areas”, 1998, Riparian Forested Buffer, and the priority goal of the riparian vegetation will be the reduction of thermal impacts on stormwater runoff associated with impervious areas, with a secondary goal being the protection of capacity of existing stormwater conveyance channels.  These goals will be achieved through the use of design
 
criteria in Section 304.P of this Ordinance, and shall be in addition to any other municipal ordinance provisions.

I.	Regional Detention Alternatives – For certain areas within the study area, it may be more cost-effective to provide one control facility for more than one development site than to provide an individual control facility for each development site. The initiative and funding for any regional runoff control alternatives are the responsibility of prospective developers. The design of any regional control basins must incorporate reasonable development of the entire upstream watershed. The peak outflow of a regional basin would be determined on a case - by-case basis using the hydrologic model of the watershed consistent with protection of the downstream watershed areas. “Hydrologic model” refers to the calibrated model as developed for the stormwater management plan.

J.	"Downstream Hydraulic Capacity Analysis"-Any downstream capacity hydraulic analysis conducted in accordance with this ordinance shall use the following criteria for determining adequacy for accepting increased peak flow rates:

1.	Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey the increased runoff associated with a 2-year return period event within their banks at velocities consistent with protection of the channels from erosion. Acceptable velocities shall be based upon criteria included in the DEP Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual.

2.	Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey the increased 25- year return period runoff without creating any hazard to persons or property.

3 . Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must pass or convey flows from the tributary area must be designed in accordance with DEP, Chapter 105 regulations (if applicable) and, at a minimum, pass the increased 25-year return period runoff.

Section 304.	Design	Criteria	for   Stormwater	Management	Facilities	and	Best Management Practices

A.	Increased stormwater runoff which may result from Regulated Activities listed in Section 104 shall be controlled by permanent stormwater runoff control measures that will provide the required standards within Article III. The methods of stormwater control or Best Management Practices (BMPs) which may be used to meet the required standards are described in this Ordinance and are the preferred methods of controlling stormwater runoff. Additional design criteria are included in these descriptions. The choice of BMPs is not limited to the ones appearing in this Ordinance, however, any selected BMP must meet or exceed the runoff peak rate requirements of this Ordinance for the applicable Hydrologic District.

B.	Any stormwater facility located on state highway rights-of-way shall be subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.

C.	Any stormwater management facility designed to store runoff and requiring a berm or earthen embankment required or regulated by this Ordinance shall be designed to provide an emergency spillway to handle flow up to and including the 100-year post-development conditions.   The height of embankment must be set as to provide a minimum 1.0 foot of
 
freeboard above the maximum pool elevation computed when the facility functions for the 100-year post-development inflow.

D.	Emergency spillways discharging over embankment fill shall be constructed of reinforced concrete checker blocks to protect the berm against erosion. The checker block lining shall extend to the toe of the fill slope on the outside of the berm, and shall extend to an elevation three (3) feet below the spillway crest on the inside of the berm.

E.	Vegetated spillways may be utilized for spillways constructed entirely on undisturbed ground
(i.e. not discharging over fill) if the designer can demonstrate that flow velocities through the spillways will not cause erosion of the spillway. A dense cover of vegetation shall be rapidly established in such spillways by sodding or seeding with a geotextile anchor. Such a vegetated spillway must be stabilized before runoff is directed to the basin.

F.	Should any stormwater management facility require a dam safety permit under PA DEP Chapter 105, the facility shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of Chapter 105 concerning dam safety which may be required to pass storms larger than 100-year event.

G.	Stormwater management facility outlet piping shall be Class III reinforced O-ring concrete pipe.   A minimum of one (1) concrete anti-seep collar shall be required. Pre-cast collars shall have  a minimum thickness of eight (8) inches; field poured collars shall have a minimum thickness of twelve (12) inches. Collars may not be installed within two (2) feet of pipe joints.   Collars must be designed to project a minimum of two (2) feet around the perimeter of the pipe.  Maximum collar spacing is fourteen (14) times the design projection around the perimeter.

H.	Berms shall be constructed in accordance with requirements specified in Appendix “A”.

I.	No stone gabion baskets may be used in the construction of stormwater management facilities.

J.	Retention/detention basins:

1.	Pipe outlet shall permit complete drainage of all detained water, unless the stormwater management facility is designed as a retention basin/pond or provides for stormwater renovation with constructed wetlands.

2.	When a detention basin is not designed as a stormwater management constructed wetland, the stormwater management facility shall be planted with low maintenance grass or substitute satisfactory to the Township.

3.	All detention basin bottoms intended to be maintained as lawn (i.e. recreational fields) shall be designed with a minimum grade of 2%. As an alternative, the detention basin may be designed with a minimum grade of 1% with underdrains to ensure complete drainage.

4.	To minimize the visual impact of detention basins, the detention basin shall be designed to avoid the need for safety fencing. To meet this requirement, basins shall be designed to the following specifications:
 
a.	Maximum depth of detained runoff shall be 24 inches for a 2 year or 10 year storm event.

b.	Maximum depth of detained runoff shall be 36 inches for a 100 year storm event.

c.	Interior slopes shall not be steeper than a ratio of 4:1 horizontal to vertical.
d.	Ponded water shall never exceed a depth of 24 inches for more than four hours. Depths and slopes may be exceeded by permission of the Township on a case-by-
case basis if lot runoff, topography and/or existing downsteam systems make the required pond area unreasonably large. In such case, fence and landscape screens will be required.

5.	An access ramp of 10:1, 10 feet wide, shall be provided to allow maintenance equipment to reach the basin floor. The ramp shall coincide with the required gate if fencing is needed.

6.	When required by the Township, fencing shall provide a suitable barrier at least four
(4) feet in height of material approved by the Township, such as split rail fencing with wire backing. Access to the basin shall be provided by a gate or gates having a total opening of at least ten (10) feet at such location(s) as to permit ready access to the detention basin with maintenance equipment.

7.	Landscaping:

a.	The perimeter berms and embankments of retention/detention basins including wet ponds, and artificial wetland stormwater management facilities shall be designed to create a natural appearance and reduce future maintenance requirements. Landscaping shall include a mixture of native tall grasses and perennial plants, ground cover, shrubs, and trees to eliminate the necessity of periodic mowing.

b.	Artificial wetland basins shall be designed pursuant to requirements of the Pennsylvania Handbook of Best Management Practices for developing areas. Plant material and arrangement shall be subject to approval of the Township. (Refer Appendix C – Plant lists for Wetland Management)

c.	The perimeter of the retention/detention basin shall be landscaped with a mixture of deciduous trees, evergreens, and shrubs arranged in an informal manner. Retention basin (wet ponds) and artificial wetland basin landscaping shall be designed to create a “natural” appearance. Minimum plant material shall include the following per 100 linear feet of basin perimeter measured at the 100 year reoccurrence stormwater elevation:

(1)	Three (3) evergreen trees (minimum height 4 feet)

(2)	Two (2) deciduous trees (minimum caliper 2½ inches)

(3)	Five (5) shrubs (minimum height 3 feet)
 
Retention/detention  basin  landscaping  design  is  subject  to  approval  by the municipality.

8.	Retaining walls shall not be specified for use within the 100 year water surface elevation area of any detention/retention facility or as part of any embankment or cut slope that is appurtenant to the construction of a detention/retention facility.

9.	The Developer shall provide written assurance, satisfactory to the Township, that the retention/detention basin will be properly maintained. Such assurances shall be in a form to act as a covenant that will run with the land, and shall provide Township maintenance at the cost of the landowner in case of default, and further provide for assessment of costs and penalties in case of default.

10.	As an alternate to the above paragraph, the Township may, at their own option, assume responsibility of the basin and may accept dedication of the basin by the Developer. If the retention/detention basin is dedicated or offered to the Township for long term maintenance, the following regulations shall apply:

a.	The dedicated area shall include the entire ponded area for the 100 year storm event and the outside slope at the berm.

b.	The dedicated area shall not be considered part of the Open Space and Recreation Land required elsewhere in the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance and Zoning Ordinance.

c.	If fencing is necessary, the basin design shall provide a level area (2% slope) eight feet in width on both the inside and outside of the fence, along the entire length of the fence for proper access by Township maintenance equipment. The total width of this generally level area shall be at least 16 feet.

d.	The Developer shall provide for the special financial burden the Township will be accepting if the Township accepts the detention basin maintenance. To help mitigate this future financial burden, the Developer shall contribute to the Township a cash payment in the amount of fifteen thousand ($15,000.00) dollars per acre, on a pro rata basis, for any detention/retention basin site or area dedicated to the Township and being accepted by the Township. The detention/retention basin site area is measured to the outside limit of grading necessary to construct the basin and basin berm. The minimum contribution for any basin, regardless of size, shall be $7,500.00. This requirement may be modified by a Resolution of the Township, from time to time, to reflect actual long term costs of detention basin maintenance in the Township.

K.	Any facilities that constitute water obstructions (e.g., culverts, bridges, outfalls, or stream enclosures), and any work involving wetlands as directed  in  PA  DEP  Chapter  105 regulations (as amended or replaced from time to time by PA DEP), shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 105 and will require a permit from PA DEP. Any other drainage conveyance facility that doesn't fall under Chapter 105 regulations must be able to convey, without damage to the drainage structure or roadway, runoff from the 25-year design storm with a minimum 1.0 foot of freeboard measured below the lowest point along the top of the roadway.   Roadway crossings located within designated floodplain areas must be able to convey runoff  from  a  100-year  design  storm with  a  minimum  1.0-foot  of  freeboard
 
measured below the lowest point along surface of the roadway.  Any facility that constitutes a dam as defined in PA DEP chapter 105 regulations may require a permit under dam safety regulations. Any facility located within a PA DOT right of way must meet PA DOT minimum design standards and permit submission requirements.

L.	Any drainage conveyance facility and/or channel that doesn't fall  under  Chapter  105 regulations, must be able to convey, without damage to the drainage structure or roadway, runoff from the 25-year design storm. Conveyance facilities to or exiting from stormwater management facilities shall be designed to convey the design flow to or from that structure. Roadway crossings located within designated floodplain areas must be able to convey runoff from a 100-year design storm. Any facility located within a PA DOT right-of-way must meet PA DOT minimum design standards and permit submission requirements.

M.	Adequate erosion protection shall be provided along all open channels, and at all points of discharge.

N.	Except for drainage at roadway stream crossings, pipe or artificial swale discharge shall be set back 75 feet from a receiving waterway, and the pipe discharge shall be diffused or spread out to reduce and eliminate high-velocity discharges to the impacted ground surface. The conveyance mechanism shall minimize disturbance and velocity of discharge.

O.	All infiltration devices and groundwater recharge facilities shall be designed to completely drain all water in three days subsequent to any storm event.

P.	Riparian Corridor Preservation – The area up to seventy-five feet from top of streambank on either side of a stream shall be planted in accordance with Zone 1 and Zone 2 buffer planting requirements as depicted in “Pennsylvania Handbook of Best Management Practices for Developing Areas”, 1998, Riparian Forested Buffer. (Refer Appendix B) Zone 1 will comprise, at a minimum, the first 15 feet from top of bank, with Zone 2 comprising the remaining 60 feet. This replanting is not required along streambank areas which receive overland or shallow flow from upstream, undisturbed, meadow or other existing pervious surfaces.

Q.	All developments which create impervious surface shall provide capacity for and treatment of the “Water Quality Volume” and “Recharge Volume”, unless exempt from applicability under Section 104.

R.	Special requirements for areas falling within defined Exceptional Value and High-Quality Sub-Watersheds: The temperature and quality of water and streams that have been declared as exceptional value or high quality is to be maintained as defined in Chapter 93 Water Quality standards, Title 25 of Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection Rules and Regulations. Temperature sensitive BMPs and stormwater conveyance systems are to be used and designed with storage pool areas and supply outflow channels, and shaded with trees. This will require the modification of berms for permanent ponds . At a minimum, the southern half of pond shor elines shall be planted with shade or canopy trees within ten feet of the pond shoreline. In conjunction with this requirement, the maximum slope allowed on the berm area to be planted is 10 to 1 to lessen the de-stabilization of berm soils due to root growth.
 
S.	Developers shall utilize BMPs to provide for additional water quality improvement and groundwater recharge. In evaluating potential stormwater BMPs, the order of preference is as follows:

1.	infiltration BMPs
2.	flow attenuation methods (e.g. vegetated open swales and natural depressions)
3.	artificial wetlands, bioretention structures, and wetponds
4.	minimum first flush detention or dual purpose detention (where appropriate)

Infiltration BMPs shall be utilized unless the applicant can demonstrate use of infiltration techniques is not feasible due to site conditions based upon site specific soil testing. Vegetated swales, wetlands or artificial wetlands and bioretention structures shall be utilized wherever possible if infiltration BMPs are deemed unfeasible. BMP techniques can and should be used in conjunction with each other (e.g. vegetated swales with infiltration or retention facilities).

1.	Infiltration Best Management Practices (BMPs) – Infiltration devices shall be selected based upon suitability of soils and site conditions. Soil infiltration tests shall be performed on all sites to determine suitability of the site for infiltration BMPs. Testing shall include evaluation of selected soil horizons by soil probes, deep pits and/or percolation measurements. The soil infiltration rate of discharge from the infiltration area being used in the proposed design shall be based on these measurements. Infiltration BMPs shall be designed in accordance with the design criteria and specifications in Section 5 of the Pennsylvania Handbook o[ Best Management Practices for Developing Areas (I998) and shall meet the following minimum requirements:

a.	Infiltration BMPs intended to receive runoff from residential uses shall be constructed on soils which have the following characteristics:

(1)	A minimum depth of 48 inches between the intended bottom of the facility and the seasonal high water table and/or bedrock (limiting zones). The 48-inch minimum depth to a limiting zone requirement may be reduced to 24 inches as long as the soil has a cation exchange capacity (CEC) of greater than ten and/or does not have a sandy loam or loam sand texture.

(2)	Infiltration rate and percolation rate of greater than 0.2 inches/hour.

b.	Infiltration BMPs intended to receive runoff from non-residential uses shall be constructed on soils that have the following characteristics:

(1)	A minimum depth of 48 inches between the intended bottom of the facility and the seasonal high water table and/or bedrock (limiting zones),

(2)	Infiltration rate and percolation rate of greater than 0.2 inches/hour.

c.	Infiltration BMPs intended to receive rooftop runoff shall be constructed on soils that have a minimum depth of 24 inches between the intended bottom of the facility and the seasonal high water table and/or bedrock (limiting zones) and have an infiltration rate and percolation rate of greater than 0.2 inches/hour.  Appropriate
 
measures such as leaf traps and cleanouts shall be required to prevent clogging by vegetation.

d.	Where direct discharge is permitted under the requirements of Section 302, infiltration BMPs shall be designed to provide adequate storage to accommodate the post-development first flush design storm (1 year 24 storm) volume with outlet and overflow controls to convey runoff larger than the first flush design storm volume safely to a natural outfall.

e.	In areas where runoff release rates are specified under the requirements of Section 302, regardless of the specified release rate percentage, if infiltration BMPs are intended, they shall be designed to, as a minimum:

(1)	Provide adequate storage to accommodate the volume of runoff calculated as the difference between the  pre-development runoff volume  and post- development runoff volume based on the 100 year design storm.

(2)	Control the post-development peak rate of runoff to the pre-development peak rate of runoff for all design storms identified in Section 303.A.2. of this Ordinance.

(3)	Provide an overflow or spillway that safely permits the passing of runoff greater than that occurring during the 100 year design storm.

2.	Non-infiltration Facilities used as Best Management Practices (BMPs)

All facilities shall be designed in accordance to the design criteria and specifications in the PennsyIvania Handbook of Best Management Practices for Developing Areas (1998). This design shall be in particular coordination with Section 8, Descriptions of Selected Best Management Practices.

3.	Artificial wetlands, wet ponds, and bioretention structures

a.	Wet Pond BMPs shall meet the following requirements:

(1)	Wet ponds shall be constructed on hydric or wet soils and/or soils which have an infiltration rate of less than 0.2 inches/hour.

(2)	A minimum drainage area of five (5) acres shall be directed to the pond unless a source of recharge is utilized such as a natural spring or well.

(3)	The length of the pond between the inflow and outlet points shall be maximized. In addition, an irregular shoreline shall be provided.  By maximizing the flow length through the pond and providing an irregular shoreline, the greatest water quality benefit will be achieved by minimizing “short circuiting” of runoff flowing through the pond.

(4)	A shallow forebay shall be provided adjacent to all inflow areas. The forebay shall be planted as a marsh with emergent wetland vegetation. The forebay serves to enhance sediment trapping and pollutant removal, as well
 
as concentrating accumulated sediment in an area where it can be readily removed.

(5)	All wet ponds shall be designed with public safety as a primary concern -An aquatic safety bench shall be provided around the perimeter of the permanent pool. The depth of the bench shall be a maximum of one (1) foot for a width of at least three (3) feet. A 3:1 slope shall lead from the edge of the safety bench toward the deep water portion of the pond. At least 15 feet of 3:1 slope shall be provided from the edge of the safety bench. Slopes in the remainder of the pond below the permanent pool elevation shall be a maximum of 2:1.

(6)	The perimeter slope above the permanent pool shall have a maximum slope of 4:1 for a distance of at least 20 feet. The remaining areas above the permanent pool shall have a maximum slope of 3:1.

(7)	Wet ponds shall have a deep water zone to encourage gravity settling of suspended fines, and prevent stagnation and possible eutrophication.

(8)	Wet ponds shall be capable of being substantially drained by gravity flow.
Where possible, wet ponds shall be equipped with a manually operated – drain that can be secured against unauthorized operation.

(9)	A planting plan shall be developed for the wet pond, showing all proposed aquatic, emergent, and upland plantings.

(10)	Wet  ponds  shall  be  designed  to  discourage  use  by  Canada  geese.
Techniques employed shall include the following:

(a)	Elimination of straight shorelines, islands, and peninsulas;

(b)	Placement of walking paths (where applicable) along the shoreline;

(c)	Plac ement of grassed areas (i.e. playing fields) at least 450 feet from the water surface;

(d)	Vegetative barriers;

(e)	Rock barriers;

(f)	Installation of tall trees within 10 feet of the water surface;

(g)	Use of ground covers not palatable to Canada geese.

b.	Artificial Wetland BMPs shall meet the following requirements:

(1)	Artificial wetlands shall be constructed on hydric or wet soils and/or soils which have an infiltration rate of less than 0.2 inches/hour.

(2)	Runoff entering artificial wetlands shall be filtered through a sediment removal device before entering the wetland.
 

(3)	A planting plan shall be developed for the artificial wetland showing all proposed aquatic, emergent, and upland plantings. The planting plan shall be developed to provide a diversity of species resulting in a dense stand of wetland vegetation.

(4)	At least 75% of the surface area of the wetland shall be developed as a shallow water emergent wetland, with a water depth of less than 12”. The reminder shall be constructed as open water with depths between 2 feet and 4 feet.

4.	Minimum first flush detention/dual purpose BMPs

a.	Minimum  first  flush  detention/dual  purpose  detention  basin  BMPs  shall  be designed to meet the following requirements:

(1)	Post-development runoff from a “water quality storm” (a 1-year, 24-hour event) shall be released over a minimum period of 24 hours.

(2)	Two stage basins shall be utilized where first flush detention will be employed for water quality and conventional detention used for peak rate control of storms exceeding the 1-year, 24-hour event.

(3)	Two stage basins shall be constructed so that the lower part of the basin is graded to detain stormwater from the “water quality storm”, and the remainder of the basin graded as a flat overbank area to provide storage only for the larger, less frequent storm events. The overbank area is encouraged to be developed as an active or passive recreational area.

(4)	The area inundated by the “water quality storm” is encourage to be maintained as a wetland environment, which will increase the water quality benefits of the first flush/dual purpose detention basin, and will prevent the need for mowing of a frequently saturated area.

T.	All  stormwater  control  facility  designs  shall  conform to  the  applicable  standards  and specifications of the following governmental and institutional agencies:

1.	American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM)
2.	Asphalt Institute (AI)
3.	Bucks Conservation District (BCD)
4.	Federal Highway Administration (FHWA)
5.	National Crushed Stone Association (NCSA)
6.	National Sand and Gravel Association (NSGA)
7.	Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP)
8.	Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PADOT)
9.	U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service, Pennsylvania (USDA, NRCS, PA)

U.	If  special geological hazards  or  soil conditions, such as  carbonate derived soiIs, are identified on the site, the developer's professional engineer shall consider the effect of
 
proposed stormwater management measures on these conditions.	In such cases, the municipality shall require an in-depth report by a registered professional geologist.

V.	The design of all stormwater management facilities shall incorporate sound engineering principles and practices. Guidelines established by the Pennsylvania Handbook of Best Management Practices for Developing Areas (1998) shall be utilized in determining stormwater management facility design except where specifically modified by this or other Municipal Ordinance. The Municipality shall reserve the right to disapprove any design that would result in the occupancy or continuation of an adverse hydrologic or hydraulic condition within the watershed.

Section 305 . Calculation Methodology

Stormwater runoff from all development sites shall be calculated using either the rational method or a soil-cover-complex methodology.

A.	Any stormwater runoff calculations involving  drainage  areas  greater  than  200  acres, including on- and off-site areas, shall use generally accepted calculation technique that is based on the NRCS soil cover complex method.  Table 3-2 summarizes acceptable computation methods. It is assumed that all methods will be selected by the design professional based on the individual  limitations  and  suitability  of  each  method  for  a particular site.

The municipality may approve the use of the Rational Method to estimate peak discharges from drainage areas that contain less than 200 acres.
 
Table 3-2. Acceptable Computation Methodologies For Stormwater Management Plans

METHOD	METHOD	APPLICABILITY
 	DEVELOPED BY 	
TR-20 or commercial package	USDA - NRCS	When use of full model is
  based on TR-20		desirable or necessary 	 TR-55 or commercial package	USDA - NRCS	Applicable for plans within the
  based on TR-55		models limitations 	 HEC - 1	U.S. Army Corps of	When full model is desirable
 	Engineers	or necessary 	
PSRM	Penn state Univ.	When full model is desirable
 	or, necessary 	
 
Rational Method or commercial package based on Rational
 
Emil Kuiching (1889)	For sites less than 200 acres
When approved by the
 
  Method		municipality 	 Other methods	Various	As approved by the municipal
 	engineer 	

B.	All calculations consistent with this Ordinance using the soil cover complex method shall use the appropriate design rainfall depths for the various return period storms presented in Table 3-1 of this ordinance. If a hydrologic computer model such as PSRM or HEC-1 is used for stormwater runoff calculations, then the duration of rainfall shall be 24 hours. The NRCS 'S' curve shown in Figure A-1, Appendix A of this Ordinance shall be used for the rainfall distribution.

C.	For the purposes of predevelopment flow rate determination, farm field or disturbed earth pre-development cover conditions of a site or portions of a site, and existing man-made impervious surface shall be considered as “meadow” when developing “cover complex” calculations.

D.	All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall intensities consistent with appropriate times of concentration for overland flow and return periods from the Design Storm Curves from PA Department of Transportation Design Rainfall Curves (1986) (Figure A-2). Times of concentration for overland flow shall be calculated using the methodology presented in Chapter 3 of Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, NRCS, TR-55 (as amended or replaced from time to time by NRCS). Times of concentration for channel and pipe flow shall be computed using Manning's equation.

E.	Runoff Curve Numbers (CN) for both existing and proposed conditions to be used in the soil cover complex method shall be obtained from Table A-2 in Appendix A of this Ordinance.

F.	Runoff coefficients (c) for both existing and proposed conditions for use in the Rational method shall be obtained from Table A-3 in Appendix A of this Ordinance.

G.	Where uniform flow is anticipated, the Manning equation shall be used for hydraulic computations, and to determine the capacity of open channels, pipes, and storm sewers. Values for Manning's roughness coefficient (n) shall be consistent with Table A-4 in Appendix A of this Ordinance.
 
Outlet structures for stormwater management facilities shall be designed to meet the performance standards of this Ordinance using any generally accepted hydraulic analysis technique or method.

H.	The design of any stormwater management facilities intended to meet the performance standards of this Ordinance shall be verified by routing the design storm hydrograph through these facilities using the Storage Indication Method. For drainage areas greater than 20 acres in size, the design storm hydrograph shall be computed using a calculation method that produces a full hydrograph. The municipality may approve the use of any generally accepted f ull hydrograph approximation technique that shall use a total runoff volume that is consistent with the volume from a method that produces a full hydrograph.

I.	The municipality has the authority to require that computed existing runoff rates be reconciled with field observations and conditions. If the design professional engineer can substantiate through actual physical calibration that more appropriate runoff and time-of- concentration values should be utilized at a particular site, then appropriate variations may be made upon review and recommendations of the Municipal Engineer. Calibration shall require detailed gauge and rainfall data for the particular site in question.

J.	Calculations of Water Quality Volume: The Water Quality Volume (WQv) is the storage capacity needed to treat 90 percent of the average annual stormwater rainfall from the developed areas of the site. The following calculation is used to determine the storage volume, WQv, in acre-feet of storage:

WQv = (1.95) (Rv) (A)
12

WQv = Water Quality Volume
A = Area in acres (developed area)
Rv = 0.05 + 0.009(I) where I is the percent impervious cover (example: I = 50 for 50 percent impervious cover)
1.95 = is a coefficient representing the 90 percent annual rainfall (PA Handbook of Best Management Practices for Developing Areas)

WQv shall be designed as part of a stormwater management facility which incorporates water quality BMPs as a primary benefit of using that facility, in accordance with design specifications contained in “Pennsylvania Handbook of Best Management Practices for Developing Areas”, 1998.

K.	Calculation of Recharge Volume: The Recharge Volume (Rev) is the volume of stormwater runoff from a developed site which shall be r equired to maintain existing pre-development groundwater recharge at development sites. It may be part of the Water Quality volume, and is calculated on the basis of treatment and recharge by structural stormwater management practices, as follows:
 

Rev = (S) (Rv) (A)
12
Rev = Recharge Volume
A = Area in acres (developed area)
Rv = 0.05 + 0.009(I) is the percent of impervious cover (example: I
= 50 for 50 percent impervious cover)

S is the Soil Specific Recharge factor and varies according to soil type, as follows:

Hydrologic Soil Group	Soil Specific Recharge Factor (S)
A	0.38
B	0.26
C	0.14
D	0.07

Structural stormwater management facilities which provide treatment and recharge of the required Recharge Volume will be designed as part of stormwater management facility which incorporates groundwater recharge BMP’s as a primary benefit of using that facility, in accordance with design specifications contained in “Pennsylvania Handbook of Best Management Practices for Developing Areas”, 1998.

L.	All stormwater runoff calculations/reports and design of stormwater management facilities shall be prepared by a registered Professional Engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

Section 306. Standards During Land Disturbance

A.	Whenever vegetation and topography are to be disturbed, such activity must be in conformance with Chapter 102, Title 25, Rules and Regulations, Part 1, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental Protection, Subpart C, protection of Natural Resources, Article II, Water Resources, Chapter 102, "Erosion Control," and in accordance with the Bucks Conservation District and the standards and specifications of the Municipality.

B.	Additional erosion and sedimentation control design standards and criteria that must be applied where infiltration BMPs are proposed include the following:

1.	Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase, so as to maintain their maximum infiltration capacity.

2.	Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff until the entire contributory drainage area to the infiltration BMP has received final stabilization.

C.	Peak discharges and discharge volumes from the site shall comply with the appropriate sections above, with the following additions:

1.	For purposes of calculating required detention storage during land disturbance, peak discharges and discharge volumes shall be calculated based upon the runoff coefficients for bare soils during the maximum period and extent of disturbance which shall be clearing, indicated on the development plan.   Controls shall insure that the
 
difference in volume and rate of peak discharges before disturbance and during shall not exceed those peak discharges and discharge volumes required in Section 303 of this Ordinance. Detention storage during the period of land disturbance and prior to establishment of permanent cover may require additional facilities on a temporary basis. Such measures shall be located so as to preserve the natural soil infiltration capacities of the planned infiltration bed areas.

2.	Wherever soils, topography, cut and fill or grading requirements, or other conditions suggest substantial erosion potential during land disturbance, the Township may require that the entire volume of all storms up to a 2-year storm from the disturbed areas be retained on site and that special sediment trapping facilities (such as check dams, etc.) be installed.

D.	Areas of the site to remain undisturbed shall be protected from encroachment by construction equipment/vehicles to maintain the existing infiltration characteristics of the soil.
 
ARTICLE IV. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS

Section 401. General Requirements

For any of the activities regulated by this Ordinance, the final approval of subdivision and/or land development plans, the issuance of any building or occupancy permit, or the commencement of any land disturbance activity may not proceed until the property owner or developer or his/her agent has received written approval of a stormwater management plan from the municipality.

Section 402. Stormwater Management Plan Contents

The stormwater management plan shall consist of all applicable calculations, maps, and plans. A note on the maps shall refer to the associated computations and erosion and sedimentation control plan by title and date. The cover sheet of the computations and erosion and sedimentation control plan shall refer to the associated maps by title and date. All stormwater management plan materials shall be submitted to the municipality in a format that is clear, concise, legible, neat, and well organized; otherwise, the stormwater management plan shall be disapproved and returned to the applicant.

The following items shall be included in the stormwater management plan:

A.	A feasibility analysis that evaluates the potential application of infiltration, flow attenuation, bioretention, wetland, or wet pond BMPs must be submitted with the stormwater management plans required in Article IV for those developments not intending the use of such facilities. This analysis shall provide:

1.	A general assessment of the anticipated additional runoff based on the design storm and post-development condition and utilizing the calculation procedures required in Section 305;

2.	indication of drainage areas on the development site resulting in impervious, pervious, and rooftop runoff;

3.	indication of type of land use (residential, non-residential) generating the impervious surface runoff;

4.	delineation of soils on the site from the SCS, Soil Survey of Bucks and Philadelphia Counties and onsite soil study. Soil study shall be conducted by a soil scientist and shall include sufficient probes/deep holes to evaluate application of BMPs;

5.	indication of soils generally suitable for infiltration and/or wet pond/artificial wetland BMPs as shown in the table entitled: "General Soil Suitability for Infiltration, Wet Pond and Artificial Wetland Best Management Practices With Consideration to Runoff Point of Origin and Land Use Type", including specification of those soils requiring modifications;

6.	calculated acreage of suitable soils for infiltration BMPs and wet pond or artificial wetland BMPs and percentage of suitable soils based on total site acreage;

7.	calculated acreage of suitable soils for infiltration BMPs and wet pond or artificial wetland BMPs made unavailable due to proposed development layout and justification
 
that  alternative  development  layout  which  would  reduce  impact  on  suitable  soil availability is unfeasible;

8.	analysis of potential infiltration or wet pond or artificial wetland BMPs which could be implemented to manage the projected post-development runoff with consideration of suitable soil availability runoff point of and type of land use (items 2. and 3. above) and the general design standards and maintenance issues included in this Ordinance including an indication of how most post-development runoff can be managed by these BMPs (e.g. the entire post-development runoff or partial amount of runoff expressed as a percentage); and

9.	rationale for the decision to not proceed with implementation of infiltration BMPs or wet pond or artificial wetland BMPs such as excessive cost of implementation, insufficient soil suitability, and development constraints.

The feasibility analysis must allow the municipality to review the general soil characteristics of a site and the proposed development for that site and determine if infiltration BMPs or wet pond or artificial wetland BMPs could have been more thoroughly pursued for use by the developer. The information required in the analysis is detailed enough to determine the potential applicability of these BMPs for a proposed development, but general enough not to force a developer into incurring excessive cost associated with conducting laborious field and/or laboratory soil testing for a site which ultimately may not be suitable for infiltration or wet pond or artificial wetland BMP implementation. However, with the requirements for conducting a feasibility analysis, developers will be aware that they are expected to use these BMPs wherever possible and are required to provide adequate justification if these BMPs are not to be implemented. Essentially, all developers will be conducting feasibility analysis since such analysis would become the preliminary step in evaluating the potential for implementation of these mandatory BMPs where possible. Developers for those sites that are determined to be generally suitable from these analysis (taking into consideration the areal extent of suitable soils necessary to accommodate an infiltration or wet pond or wetland BMP for the type and size of development proposed) are required to conduct the detailed soil testing and other feasibility testing required in other sections of this Ordinance which contain the description and additional design criteria of these BMPs.

B.	A detailed geologic evaluation of the project site shall be performed to determine the suitability of recharge facilities. The evaluation shall be performed by a qualified geologist and/or soil scientist, and a minimum, address soil permeability, depth to bedrock, susceptibility to sinkhole formation, and subgrade stability.

C.	Whenever a stormwater management facility will be located in an area underlain by limestone, a geological evaluation of the proposed location shall be conducted to determine susceptibility to sinkhole formations. The design of all facilities over limestone formations shall include measures to prevent ground water contamination and, where necessary, sinkhole formation. Soils used for the construction of basins shall have low-erodibility factors ("K" factors). Installation of an impermeable liner shall be required in detention basins.

It shall be the developer's responsibility to verify if the site is underlain by limestone. The following note shall be attached to all stormwater management plans and signed and sealed by  the  developer's  professional  engineer  “I,	, certify that the proposed detention basin (circle one) is/is not underlain by limestone.”
 

D.	General

1.	General description of project.

2.	General description of permanent stormwater management techniques, including construction specifications of the materials to be used for stormwater management facilities.

3.	Complete  hydrologic,  hydraulic,  and  structural  computations  for  all  stormwater management facilities.

E.	Map(s) of the project area shall be submitted on 24-inch x 36-inch sheets and shall be prepared in a form that meets the requirements for recording at the offices of the Recorder of Deeds of Bucks County. The contents of the maps(s) shall include, but not be limited to:

1.	The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities, or other identifiable landmarks.

2.	Existing contours at intervals of 2 feet. In areas of steep slopes (greater than 25 percent), 5 feet contours may be used.

3.	Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other bodies of water within the project area.

4.	Other physical features including flood hazard boundaries, sinkholes, streams, existing drainage courses, wetlands, areas of natural vegetation to be preserved, and the total extent of the upstream area draining through the site.

5.	The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary sewers, and water lines located on the site and/or within 50 feet of property lines.

6.	An overlay showing soil names and boundaries. This overlay shall include a table on the map showing the recharge capabilities of each soil represented onsite in inches per hour and describe their recharge or infiltration capabilities.

7.	Proposed changes to the land surface and vegetative cover, including the type and amount of impervious area that would be added.

8.	Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings. Where pervious pavement is proposed for parking lots, recreational facilities, non-dedicated streets, or other areas, pavement construction specifications shall be noted on the plan.

9.	Final contours at intervals at 2 feet. In areas of steep slopes (greater than 25 percent), 5-feet contour intervals may be used.

10.	The name of the development, the name and address of the owner of the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing the plan.

11.	The date of submission.

12.	A graphic and written scale of one (1) inch equals no more than fifty (50) feet. For tracts of twenty (20) acres or more, the scale may be one (1) inch equals no more than one hundred (100) feet.

13.	A North arrow.

14.	The total tract boundary and size with distances marked to the nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.

15.	Existing and proposed land use(s).
 

16.	A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the property boundary that may be affected by the project.

17.	Horizontal and vertical profiles of all open channels, including hydraulic capacity.

18.	Overland drainage paths.

19.	A twenty-feet wide access easement around all stormwater management facilities that would provide ingress to and egress from a public right-of-way.

20.	A note on the plan indicating the location and responsibility for maintenance of stormwater management facilities that would be located off-site. All off-site facilities shall meet the performance standards and design criteria specified in this Ordinance.

21.	A construction detail of any improvements made to sinkholes and the location of all notes to be posted, as specified in this Ordinance.

22.	An agreement executed between the landowner, and municipality acknowledging the stormwater management system to be a permanent fixture that can be altered or removed only after approval of a revised plan by the municipality.

23.	The location of all erosion and sedimentation control facilities.

F.	Supplemental Information

1.	A written description of the following information shall be submitted.

a)	The overall stormwater management concept for the project.

b)	Stormwater runoff computations as specified in this Ordinance.

c)	Stormwater   management  techniques   to   be   applied  both  during  and  after development.

d)	Expected project time schedule.

2.	A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, where applicable, including all reviews and approvals, as required by PADEP and/or Bucks Conservation District.

3.	A geologic assessment of the effects of runoff on sinkholes as specified in this ordinance.

4.	The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volume and peak flow) on adjacent properties and on any existing municipal stormwater collection system that may receive runoff from the project site.

5.	A Declaration of Adequacy and Highway Occupancy Permit from the PADOT District Office when utilization of a PADOT storm drainage system is proposed.

G.	Stormwater Management Facilities

1.	All stormwater management facilities must be located on a plan and described in detail.

2.	When groundwater recharge methods such as seepage pits, beds, or trenches are proposed, the locations of existing and proposed septic tank infiltration areas, and wells must be shown. A separation distance of no less than 20 feet shall be provided between any septic system and any facility used for stormwater management.
 
3.	All calculations, assumptions, and criteria used in the design of the stormwater management facilities must be shown. If multiple facilities are proposed in conjunction with each other, such as infiltration Best Management Practices with vegetation based management practices , a summary narrative, shall be included describing any sequence and how the facilities are meant to function with each other to manage stormwater runoff.

Section 403. Plan Submission

For all activities regulated by this ordinance, the steps below shall be followed for submission. For any activities that require a PADEP joint permit application and regulated under Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and Waterway Management) or Chapter 106 (Floodplain Management) of PADEP's Rules and Regulations, require a PADOT highway occupancy permit, or require any other permit under applicable local, state, or federal regulations, the permit(s) shall be part of the plan.

A.	The stormwater management plan shall be submitted by the developer as part of the Preliminary plan submission for the regulated activity.

B.	A minimum of three (3) copies of the stormwater management plan shall be submitted.

C.	Distribution of the stormwater management plan will be as follows:

1.	One (1) copy to the municipality accompanied by the requisite municipal review fee, as specified in this Ordinance.

2.	Two (2) copies to the Municipal Engineer.

Section 404. Stormwater Management Plan Review

A.	The Municipal Engineer shall review the stormwater management plan for consistency with the adopted Watershed Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan and applicable municipal ordinances. The municipality shall require receipt of a complete plan, as specified in this Ordinance.

B.	The Municipal Engineer shall review the stormwater management plan for any subdivision or land development against the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance provisions not superseded by this Ordinance.

C.	For activities regulated by this Ordinance, the Municipal Engineer shall notify the municipality in writing, within 45 calendar days of receipt, whether the stormwater management plan is consistent with the adopted Watershed Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan. A copy of the Municipal Engineer’s review letter shall be forwarded to the developer.

D.	Any disapproved stormwater management plans may be revised by the developer and resubmitted consistent with this Ordinance.

E.	For regulated activities specified in Sections 104.C and 104.D of this Ordinance, the Municipal Engineer shall notify the Municipal Building Permit Officer in writing, within a time frame consistent with the Building Code and/or Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, whether the stormwater management plan is consistent with the adopted Watershed Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan and forward a copy of the review letter
 
to the developer.   Any disapproved stormwater management plan may be revised by the developer and resubmitted consistent with this ordinance.

F.	The municipality shall not approve any subdivision or land development for regulated activities specified in Sections 104.A and 104.B of this Ordinance if the stormwater management plan has been found to be inconsistent with the adopted Watershed Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan. All required permits from PADEP must be obtained prior to, or as a requirement of, final approval.

G.	The Municipal Building Permit Office shall not issue a building permit for any regulated activity specified in Section 104 of this Ordinance if the stormwater management plan has been found to be inconsistent with the adopted Watershed Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan, as determined by the Municipal Engineer, or without considering the comments of the Municipal Engineer. All required permits from PADEP must be obtained prior to issuance of a building permit.

H.	The developer shall be responsible for completing an "as-built survey" of all stormwater management facilities included in the approved stormwater management plan. The as -built survey and an explanation of any discrepancies with the des ign plans shall be submitted to the Municipal Engineer for review. In no case shall the municipality approve the as -built survey until the municipality receives a copy of an approved Declaration of Adequacy, Highway Occupancy Permit from the PADOT District Office, and any applicable permits from PADEP.

I.	The municipality's approval of a stormwater management plan shall be valid for a period not to exceed two (2) years. If stormwater management facilities included in the approved stormwater management plan have not been constructed, or if an as-built survey of these facilities has not been approved within this 2 -year time period, then the municipality may consider the stormwater management plan disapproved and may revoke any and all permits. Stormwater management plans that are considered disapproved by the municipality shall be resubmitted in accordance with Section 407 of this Ordinance.

Section 405. Modification of Plans

A modification to a submitted stormwater management plan for a development site that involves a change in stormwater management facilities or techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of stormwater management facilities, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the stormwater management plan as determined by the Municipal Engineer, shall require a resubmission of the modified stormwater management plan consistent with Section 403 of this Ordinance and be subject to review as specified in Section 404 of this Ordinance.

A modification to an already approved or disapproved stormwater management plan shall be submitted to the Municipality, accompanied by the applicable review. A modification to a stormwater management plan for which a formal action has not been taken by the municipality shall be submitted to the municipality, accompanied by the applicable municipal review fee.

Section 406. Resubmission of Disapproved Stormwater Management Plans

A disapproved stormwater management plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions addressing the  Municipal  Engineer's  concerns  documented  in  writing,  to  the  Municipal  Engineer  in
 
accordance with Section 404 of this Ordinance and be subject to review as specified in Section 405 of this Ordinance. The applicable municipal review fee must accompany a resubmission of a disapproved stormwater management plan.
 
ARTICLE V. INSPECTIONS

Section 501. Schedule of Inspections

A.	The Municipal Engineer or his assignee shall inspect all phases of the installation of the permanent stormwater management facilities.

B.	During any stage of the work, if the Municipal Engineer determines that temporary or permanent erosion and sedimentation control or stormwater management facilities are not being installed in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan, the municipality shall revoke any existing permits until a revised stormwater management plan is submitted and approved, as specified in this Ordinance.
 
ARTICLE VI. FEES AND EXPENSES

Section 601. Stormwater Management Plan Review Fee

The Municipality shall establish a review fee schedule by Resolution of the governing body to defray review costs incurred by the municipality, any outside review agencies or entities necessary to review submitted plans, and the municipal engineer. The municipality shall periodically update the review fee schedule to ensure that review costs are adequately reimbursed. The applicant shall pay all fees.

Section 602. Expenses Covered by Fees

The fees required by this Ordinance shall, at a minimum, cover the following:

A.	Administrative costs.

B.	Review  of  the  stormwater  management  plan  by  the  municipality  and  the  Municipal Engineer.

C.	Site inspections by the municipal staff and/or Municipal Engineer.

D.	Inspection	of	stormwater	management	facilities	and	stormwater	management improvements during construction.

E.	Final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management facilities and stormwater management improvements presented in the stormwater management plan.

F.	Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions regulated by this Ordinance, correct violations, and ensure proper completion of stipulated remedial actions.
 
ARTICLE VII. MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY

Section 701. Performance Guarantee

The applicant shall provide a financial guarantee to the municipality for the timely installation and proper construction of all stormwater management controls as required by the approved stormwater management plan and this Ordinance equal to the full construction cost of the required controls plus construction contingency and construction inspection costs.

Section 702. Maintenance Responsibilities

A.	The stormwater management plan for the development site shall contain an operation and maintenance plan prepared by the design engineer. The operation and maintenance plan shall outline required routine maintenance actions and schedules necessary to insure proper operation of the facility(ies).

B.	The stormwater management plan for the development site shall establish responsibilities for the continuing operation and maintenance of all proposed stormwater control facilities, consistent with the following principles:

1.	If a development consists of structures or lots that are to be separately owned and in which streets, sewers, and other public improvements are to be dedicated to the municipality, stormwater control facilities may also be dedicated to and maintained by the municipality, if accepted by the municipality.

2.	If a development site is to be maintained in a single ownership or if sewers and other public improvements are to be privately owned and maintained, then the ownership and maintenance of stormwater control facilities shall be the responsibility of the owner or private management entity.

C.	The governing body, upon recommendation of the Municipal Engineer, shall make the final determination on the continuing maintenance responsibilities prior to final approval of the stormwater management plan. The governing body reserves the right to accept the ownership and operating responsibility for any or all of the stormwater management controls.

Section 703. Maintenance Agreement for Privately Owned Stormwater Facilities

A.	Prior to final approval of the stormwater management plan, the property owner shall sign and record a maintenance agreement covering all stormwater control facilities that are to be privately owned. Said agreement, designated as Appendix C, is attached and made part hereto.

B.	Other items may be included in the agreement where determined necessary to guarantee the satisfactory maintenance of all facilities. The maintenance agreement shall be subject to the review and approval of the Municipal Solicitor and governing body.
 
Section 704. Municipal Stormwater Maintenance Fund

A.	If stormwater facilities are accepted by the municipality for dedication, persons installing stormwater storage facilities shall be required to pay a specified amount to the Municipal Stormwater Maintenance Fund to defray costs of periodic inspections and maintenance expenses. The amount of the deposit shall be determined by Resolution of the Board of Supervisors and as follows:

1.	If the storage facility is to be owned and maintained by the municipality, the deposit shall cover the estimated costs for maintenance and inspections for ten (10) years. The municipal engineer will establish the estimated costs utilizing information submitted by the applicant.

2.	The amount of the deposit to the fund shall be converted to present worth of the annual series values. The municipal engineer shall determine the present worth equivalents, which shall be subject to the approval of the municipal governing body.

B.	If a storage facility is proposed that also serves as a recreation facility (e.g., ball field, pond), the municipality may, but is not required to, reduce or waive the amount of the maintenance fund deposit based upon the value of the land for public recreation purpose.
 
ARTICLE VIII. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES

Section 801. Right-of-Entry

Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized representatives of the municipality may enter at reasonable times upon any property within the municipality to inspect the condition of the stormwater structures and facilities in regard to any aspect regulated by this Ordinance.

Section 802. Notification

In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this Ordinance, or fails to conform to the requirements of any permit issued hereunder, the municipality shall provide written notification of the violation. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and establish a time limit for correction of these violations(s). Failure to comply within the time specified shall subject such person to the penalty provision of this Ordinance. All such penalties shall be deemed cumulative.  In addition the municipality may pursue any and all other remedies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the real property on which any regulated activity is proposed to occur, is occurring, or has occurred, to comply with the terms and conditions of this Ordinance.

Section 803. Enforcement

The governing body is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this Ordinance. All inspections regarding compliance with the stormwater management plan shall be the responsibility of the Municipal Engineer or other qualified persons designated by the municipality as directed by the Board of Supervisors.

A.	A set of design plans approved by the municipality shall be on file at the site throughout the duration of the construction activity. Periodic inspections may be made by the municipality or designee during construction.

B.	Adherence to approved plan

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to undertake any regulated activity under Section 104 on any property except as provided for in the approved stormwater management plan and pursuant to the requirements of this Ordinance. It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any control structure required by the stormwater management plan pursuant to this Ordinance or to allow the property to remain in a condition which does not conform to the approved stormwater management plan.

C.	At the completion of the project, and as a prerequisite for the release of the performance guarantee, the owner or his representatives shall:

1.	Provide a certification of completion from a professional engineer verifying that all permanent facilities have been constructed according to the plans and specifications and approved revisions thereto.

2.	Provide one reproducible and two paper prints of as-built drawings.
 

D.	After receipt of the certification by the municipality, a final inspection shall be conducted by the governing body or its designee to certify compliance with this Ordinance.

E.	Prior to revocation or suspension of a permit, the governing body will schedule a hearing to discuss the non-compliance if there is no immediate danger to life, public health or property.

F.	Suspension and revocation of permits

1.	Any  permit  issued  under  this  Ordinance  may  be  suspended  or  revoked by the governing body for:

a)	Noncompliance with, or failure to, implement any provision of the permit.

b)	A violation of any provision of this Ordinance or any other applicable law, Ordinance, rule, or regulation relating to the project.

c)	The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during construction or development which constitutes or creates a hazard or nuisance, pollution or which endangers the life or property of others, or as outlined in Article IX of this Ordinance.

2.	A suspended permit shall be reinstated by the governing body when:

a)	The Municipal Engineer or his designee has inspected and approved the corrections to the stormwater management and erosion and sediment pollution control measure(s), or the elimination of the hazard or nuisance, and/or;

b)	The governing body is satisfied that the violation of the Ordinance, law, or rule and regulation has been corrected.

c)	A permit that has been revoked by the governing body cannot be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit under the procedures outlined in this Ordinance.

G.	Occupancy Permit

An occupancy permit shall not be issued unless the certification of compliance pursuant to Section 803.D has been secured. The occupancy per mit shall be required for each lot owner and/or developer for all subdivisions and land developments in the municipality.

Section 804. Public Nuisance

A.	The violation of any provision of this Ordinance is hereby deemed a public nuisance.

B.	Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation
 

Section 805. Penalties

A.	Anyone violating the provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 for each violation, recoverable with costs, or imprisonment of not more than 10 days, or both. Each day that the violation continues shall be a separate offense.

B.	In addition, the municipality, through its solicitor, may institute injunctive, mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the enforcement of this Ordinance. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.

Section 806. Appeals

A.	Any person aggrieved by any action of the municipality or its designee, relevant the provisions of this Ordinance, may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board within thirty (30) days of that action.

B.	Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board, relevant to the provisions of this Ordinance, may appeal to the County Court of Common Pleas in the county where the activity has taken place within thirty (30) days of the Zoning Hearing Board's decision.
 


ENACTED  and ORDAINED  at a  regular meeting of the  Haycock Township Board of Supervisors on the 7 th day of October, 2002. This Ordinance shall take effect immediately.




Chairperson




Vice Chairperson



Supervisor


ATTEST:


Manager



I hereby certify that the foregoing Ordinance was advertised in The Intelligencer on September 23 and 30, 2002, a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality and was duly enacted and approved as set forth at a regular meeting of the Haycock Township Board of Supervisors held on October 7, 2002.




Manager
 

APPENDIX A STORMWA TER MANAGEMENT DESIGN CRITERIA
 
FIG A-1.
NRCS (SCS) TYPE II RAINFALL DISTRIBUTION

Sealed  SCS  Type  II  Design  Storm by  Gert  Aron
Penn  State  University

The  SCS Type  II  storm distribution
·	is  widely  accepted  for  the  construction of  a design storm.	A problem in the
practical  application  of  the distribution,
however, i S the .Steepness Of the SCS curve, shown in Figure 1,.which makes it difficult to read  relative  rainfall  amounts  at  short time  intervals.
 

For  the  purpose  of  developing  a
 
0

Fie. l.
 
6	12	18	24
Time. hours
 
systematic  procedure  to  generate  design
 
SCS Storm Distributio
 
storms of any desired time· interval, equations were fitted to the SCS Type II storm distribution. A method for constructing a center peak storm is · described below.   To develop a useful  equation, the storm distribution was
rearranged  to an  early  peaking  pattern,  starting with  the  steepest  portion  of
the scs·curve and progressively  decreasing  in slope with  time.   The
rearranged distribution  is also shown  in Figure 1, and can be expressed by the equations.	·

 
Pt  • 2.25  P24  (t/24)0,46 Pt  • P24  (t/24)0.25
 
for t < 1/2 hour for t > 1/2 hour
 
(1)
!
"'. (2)
 
where P • total  precipitation  in  duration  t t • storm duration in hours

Design  Storm  Construction.

The.design ·storm construction .procedure is best described by an example, as follows:

·A 25:-year design storm of 2 hours duration, expressed in 15-minute­ intervals,  is  needed.	From an appropriate  source,  like TP-40 or similar maps, the corresponding 24-hour rainfall  amount  is 4.0 inches.	A  table  with  five columns is required •.

1)	Col. 1 is time  t  iri minutes or hours.	In  .column  2  the  relative rainfall  P  /P24  is shown. as computed  by  eq. •·s 1 or 2  for .durations t.
2)	In  column  3, the  relative.amounts  from  column  2  are·multiplied  by
4.0,  the  24-hr  rainfall.	These values represent the storm amounts from the steepest portions  of the SCS curve, ·of duration t.	. .
3)	The rainfall increments between successive durations are computed
from column 3 and listed in column 4.	These  values  would  constitute  the successive  rainfall   increments,   and  thus  the  hyetograph   for  an  early-pe!!king storm.	·
4)	To generate a  center-peaking,  roughly  synmetr1cal.storm,  the increments  in colurm  4  are rearranged  in column  5, placing  the largest increment,  of  1..10 ;inches  in the 5th .time  interval,  the  second .1argest  in the 4th  time  interval,  the  third-largest   in  the  6th  time  interval,  the
fourth-largest  in  the 3rd  time  interval,  and  so  forth  until   a  rainfall increment  is assigned to each  time  interval.

Tohickon Creek Watershed StolDlwaterManagement Plan-Volume Il
 
FIGUREA-2.
PENNDOT STORM INTENSITY-DURATION-FREQUENCY   CURVE, REGION 4

REGION 4
 

8	•	I, I'••

.....::::--.:::  ..._--......._
 
. .	.	.
 

I	'	'  .
 
--...:................	!--.... 'r-....	.
 
-.............
 
:.:::::
 
!"-...	I	.
 
,..._	.....	.................. "' .... .....	. .	I
 

::;	2
...,..
 
....."-- J'-.,_-..... '-
 
!::"	I
 
.c
...
 
........... ""-. f'... "-...	0
....;	r-....	!."-..'8S::
 
..	Return  /Period,    :
 
ti	...	l"
·	I
 
yeors·	.	·
 
.a ...		"'-...  " ,:---- 1'.........-............. '-100	.
u;	"-
 
.c, .6
£	'-
.4
 
'	.....
 
.I"  ,,...   ',,	25
" !". ........  "'-t-.....	.
 
c0
·c;
 
...	10 \-.........." ....""-....""'
.3	s	......	.....	..................
 
.o:
.2

t
 
2 )-... ' ................
• I ...., "'""-............._
 
.I - ' I  I o	...	'	' '	'	'	.	'	.	.	'
 
5	10	15  20	ao
 
60	1.5  2
 
6	12	24
 






4...

.,
.c	2 g


.
.
. .
I	.
.
 
.4	I
3 ·	'""	'
. 5	10	15 .20	30
 

' I	. I
60	1.5  2
 
I
.	'	I
6
 

.	'	I	.	'
12	24
 
minutes
 

Storm   Duration
 
hours
 
Rainfall intensity-duration-f:...,';::ency curves for Region 4.


Tohickon Creek Watershed Stonnwater Management Plan-'-Volume Il
 
TABLEA-2.
RUNOFF CURVE NUMBERS (FROM NRCS (SCS) TR-55)


Runoff  curve  numbers  for ui-ban  areasl  ·

 


Cover descrip\ion
 
Curve numbers for hydrologic soil group-
 

 

Cover type and hydrologic  condition
 
Average .percent
impervious area2	A	B	c	D
 

Ftdly developed urban anas lvegttation established)

Open space Oawns, parks, golf courses, cemeteries.
eic.)':



 
Impervious ai:eas;
Paved parking lots, roofs, driveways, etc.
(excluding right-<>f·way ......................... .
Streets and roads:
Paved: cum. and stonn sewers (e. cluding
 


98	98	98	98
 



Western desert urban areas:



 
Urban districts:
Commercial and business ......................... .
Industrial ....................................... .
Residential cfmtricts ·by averag1! lot size:
118 a.re or les$ (town houses) ..................... .
U4 acre   ........................................ .
.113. acre   ......................................   •••
·112 ·acre      ..............................·...........
lacre ................................. ••·••• ..••
2 acres  ........................................ ··
 

85	89	92	94	95
72	81	88	91	93

65	77	85	90	92
38	61	75	s:i	87
30	57	72	81	86
25	54	70	80	85
20	51	68	79	84
12	46	65	77	82
 

·	11g urban areas

Newly graded areas Cpei:vious areas only,
no vegetation)I .................................. .
Idle lands (CN's are determined using cover types
similar to thooe in table 2·2c).
 




77	86	91
 

 
•Avenge runoff' condition, and 1
 
• 0.25.	·    ·	·	-	·	.	·
 
Z1'he -ave_rage pe nt imperviouic area "hoY.-_n WU ude<I to -d,evelop. the-.eompmite. CN't..Other a1&1umptions are &21 follo\\>tt: irilpeniuUte area.ol ""' directly  c:unntc.-te<I   to lhe dn1in.g. •Yl'tem, impervi..., areas have a CN of98, and penioua ..,.... are co1U1idered     ui\..lent iii open "JJll<e in RUod h.vdroklj(ic condition. CN'• lur other c:umbinatio"" of condition. may be computed using llgw-e·2-3 or 2-l.
'CN'ac ichuy.·n are equivalent to th uf f)lt'Wre. Cumpu2'ite CN'• may be compute.d for·other oombinations of ope!I =ipace cover t -pe.
4ComJIO"ite CN'• for natural rleoott lanc4""pinjr •hould be computed 1111ing figures 2-3 or 2-l blll!ed on the impervlo1111 ""'" percentage IC:\
•	981 ilnd the pervio"" ...... CN. Th• pervio"" ....,. CN-. are '"""""1!d · uivaJent to deaett oh111b In poor hydrologic condition.
"'CumrH itt' C J°l'I to U:cto fur the d 4.'11 or tempunuy meai.ti11ure:c  during grading and COJliiltruction  1Chuuld be computed ming rlj[Ure 2..1ur·2 .
ha. d un the d of Je\•el111>men1 <im1>e?"\'iuu1C area Percentage) and the C 'tC for the ne\\i)' gncled peon·ious wreu.



(210-VI-TR·55, Second Ed., June 1986) Tohickon Creek Wateished Stonnwater ManagementPlan-Volwne Il
 
TABLE A-2. CONTINUED
 


Runoff curve nuinbers for cultivated agricultural lands'
 

Curve numbers for
Cover description	hydrologic soil' group-

Hyclrologic
Cover type	Treatment:z	condition:a	A	B	c	D


Fallow	
Bare :ioil		
i7	
86	
91	
94
	· Crop residue cover (CR)	Poor	·i6	85	.90	93
		Good	74	83	88	90
Row crops	
Straight row CSR)	
Poor	
i2	
SI	
88	
91
		·Good	6i	i8	85	89
	SR+CR	Poor	71	80	87	90
		Good	.64	75	82	85
	Contoured  (C)	Poor	70	i9	84	88
		Good	65	;5	82	86
	C +CR	Poor	69	78	83	Bi
		Good	64	74	81	85
	Contoured & temiced (C&T)	Poor	66	74	80	82
		Good	62	ii	78	81
	C&T+ CR	Poor	65	73	79.	81
		Good	61	70	'ii	80
Small grain  .	
SR	
Poor	
65	7.6	
84	88!
		Good	63	i5	83	87
	SR +CR	Poor	64.	75	83	86
Good	60	'i2	80	84
c	Poor	63	74	82	85
Good	61	73	81	84
C +CR	Poor	62	73	81	84
Good	60	·72	so·	83
C&T	Poor	61	72	79	82
Good	59	70	78	81
C&T+ CR	Poor	60	71	78	81
Good	58	69	'ii	80
Close-seeded	SR	Poor	66	'ii	85	89
. or  broadeast	Good	58	72	81	85
legumes  or	c	Poor	64	75	83	85
rotation	Good	55	69	78	83
meadow	C&T	Poor	63	73	80	83
Good	51	67	76	80

'Avenige l'WHllr <oncUtiun, and I, • U.:!S..	·	.	.	.
Z("ITl/I  rt!lfif/1t1'  Ml rH(>i>l .(Hil\" if midlit'· Hn Ul llf:m."¢  5'J urthe i.CUi'f&ce  throughout the )'eal'.
=-Hydn1l0Kic: t'l_1nditiun· be. bu..cecl on ct1mbinaitiun ur fRC:to'rt' thu ull'ect infiltne.tiun arid runoff. ineluding (a) derw:ity und oanOJ>Y of \"ejCetath·e
1U\"1U1. (hJ amuunl or ,\•ea,r.111und tt1\•er. ((:).amount nfJ.'TW'."" or clt led l me:c in rvt.ation . <clJ J>en:ent of rffidue c.'U\"f'r on thti l1111d z=ur:
 
r.,,.,, !Jfl••I·;;., 211'"' ), •nd M cl"JllW ur """"'.. niughn...._
 
_	·	·
 
1' 1111: Jo'uc:tonc ·i1n11nir infiltration und 1.t!'nd· to inen. runufl'.
tit11HI: t"uc.-tunc nc.,1u H\"C.'Mll. and better than.11\•e111ge in ntiun and tend tu decreauqp runoff.




(210-VI-TR-55, SeCJ>nd Ed., June 1986)

; .	Tohickon Creek Watershed StolDlwater Management Plan-"-Volume ll
 
TABLE A-2. CONTINUED
·Runoff curve numben for other agricultural 11\nds'

Curve numbers for
 
Cover dtiscrlption
 
hydTologic soil .gropp-
 

 

Cover type


· Pasture, grassland.  or ran  ntinuous
·	forage for grazing.•


'Meadow-continuous grass, protected from
·	grazing and generally mtiwed for hay.

:Bnish-brush·weed:gra.ss mixture With brush
·	the  najor  element.• ·


:woocls-gTass combination (orchard
or tree farm).1
 
Hydrologic
condition.


Poor Fair Good




Poor Fair Good

Poor
.Fair
Good
 

A	B	c	o·


68	·79	86	89
49	69	i9	84  .
.  39	61	i4	80
80	58	il	i8
4B	67	. ii	83
35	. 56	70	i7
"30	4B	65	i3
Si	73	82	86
43	65	i6	82
32	58	72	i9
 

Woods.•	Poor
Fair
Good

.   Fannite1ds-buildinp,   lanes,  driveways,
and 8WTOWlding IOts,

.•Av...... runa4' condldon..ond I••OJ!S.
•/'<1<11"	<50'.l: RlUWla cvver or h..v!ly pzed ,.ith no mulc:h.
Fair:	so to m gniund eo.-.r and not hea'ilY .gnized.  ·	.
Good:	>Toll' sround co\ier and llghtl,\• or only	anized.
 

45	66	77	83
86	. 60	73	i9
"30.	55	70	i7

59	14	82•	86
 
•/twr:	<	gruund 00\-er.
Fair:	00. to 76\f irruund 00\-er.
.Gaud:	>Toll' ground CV\'er,
'Actual CllJ'\-e number II JN. than llO: """ CN • 30 for runoft"·cumpllbltlo1111.

"<. '• ohu.in  """' c:umputed  fur.,...,. \\ith  ii1Y.1 wuud• and iOli g,,... (J>M"tureJ  c:o•'er.  Other cunibinv.tluno of condltlu"" may  b.. <'Ump•l•d frum tho CN"• fur """"" aml """'""''	·	·   .	.	.	.	.

' · •HJ<Jr:  Fu""'1. Utter. 1'1111111 i....., and bruoh .,.. destruyed by hea\')' gn&Zlne ur regular burning.
!''ail"    W00<ll are l(nl1A!d but nut burned. and ""me fu,...t Utter eoven the.110U.  ·   .	·
·	<l<xMI:   W00<h! are ·pn>tected fivm l(nlZing, and litter and bru"'1 adequately cover the ..u.














(210-VI·TR-55,   Second  Ed., June   1986) .

Tohickon Creek Watershed Stonnwater Management Plan-Volmne II
 
TABLE A-2. CONTINUED
 


·	Runoff curve numbers for arid and semiarid rangelands'

Curve numbers for
 
. Cover description
 
hydrologic soil group-
 

 

Cov r type


Herba(!e()us-mi.'Cture  of grass. weeds,  and low-groWing bn!Sh, with  brush  the
mirior element.	·

Oak-aspen-mountain brush mi'Cture of oak brush, aspen; mountain mahopny, bitter brush, maple, and other brush.

Pinyon-jwiiper-pinyon, juniper. or both;
grass understory.
 
Hy-'urologfo
condition%


Poor Fair Good

Poor Fair Good

Poor Fair Good
 

B	c	D


80	87	93
71	81	89
62	74	135
oo·	14	79
48	57	63
80	41	48

75	85	89
58	78	. 80
. 41	61	il
 

 
S:lgebrush with gi-ass understory.                                                 Poor Fair Good
 
67	80	85
51	63	70
35	47	55
 

Desert •hrub-nutjor plants  include  saltbush, greasewood,  creosotebush,  blackbrush,  bursage, palo verde, mesquite, and cactus.
 

Poor Fair Good
 

63	j'j	85	B8
55	72	81	B6
49	68	79	84!
 

1Avenige runoft' concti.don, and I••o.l!S. For range in humid regjons. u.e blbki 2"2c•.

1/'tH1,.. Wl ground coVel". (litter. l!J1L.'4.tC. amd bnn.i;h uve tory).


"Cun·• numben<  Cur group  A  ha"• t>...n  developed  unly  for deoert  shrub•

























. (210-VI-TR-55,  Second  Ed., June  1986)

. Tohlck911 Creek Watershed Stmmwater MaoagementPJan-Volmne iI
 

 
TABLEA-3.
RATIONAL RUNOFF COEFFICIENTS
 

n.,.,rr enorr.Lctenls ror the Rntlmol F.OtnO.lln
(ly llylko.log1c Soll CroJP and O.orlond Slopo  (%)

A .	a	C·	0
 

L.nd Use
 
o:ii-----2:5 ---- 8$.
 
11-2	2-6%	6%•	.0-2%	2-6i	6 +	0--2-%------2---6-i------6--•-
 

CUlUvated LMd
 

o.oo	o.u
0.14	.  0.10
 

0.10
0.22
 

0.11
D.16
 

0.15
0.21
 

0.21
0.28
 

o.u 0.20
 

0.19	0.26
0.25	o.Jh
 

0.10
0.24
 

0.2J
0.29
 
O.JI
O.hl
 

PaStura

"""'"""'
Forest

Re!lldentlol
lot Slz• 1/B Acre
lot Slza t /4  Rcra  · Lot Size 1/J Acre Lot Size 1/2-Acra lot She 1 Acre lnduotrlal
C""""'rclal

Streets
 
0.12	0.20	a.Jo	0.10	0.20	o.J7	0.24	o.J4	o.4•	a.Jo	o.r.o	o.50
a.is	o.2s	o,J7	o.2J	o·.J4	o.45	o.JO	o.42	0.52	a.J7	a •.50	o.r;2
0.10	0.16	0.25	0.14.	0.22	a.JO	0.20	0.20	o.JS	0.24	O.JO 	0.40
0.1.4	0.22 ·	o,Jo	0.20	o.w	o.J7	0,26	o:Js	o.4•	a.Jo	o.4o	a.so
o.os	o.ao	0.11	o.ao	0•.11	o.14	o.rn·	o.1J	0.15	0.12	o.1s	o.w o.oa.·	0.11	o.u	0.10	o.14	0.10	0.12	o.16	0.20	0.15	0.20 		0.25

o.2s·	0.20	O.Jf	o_.27.	a.JO	o.:is	a.JO	O.JJ.	a.JO	O.JJ	a.JG	O.h2
a.J3	0.37	0.40	1J.3S	0.39	0.44	a.JO ·	0.42	0,49	O.h1	0.4S	0,51,

a.22	0.26	0.29	0.24	0,29	a,33	0.27	a.J1	O.J6	O.JO	a,J4	0.1•0 a.JO	O.J4	O.J7	. O.JJ	0.37	a.42	a.JS	0.4a	O.h1	.  0,39	-a,h2	a.52
o.19	0.23	o.2s	0.22	o.2s	o.Jo	o.2s	0.29	o.J4	0.20	o.J2	o.J9
0.20	0.32	o.JS	a.JO.	U.JS	Q,J9	O.JJ	O.JB	0.4S	a.JS	0.40	a.so
o.1s	o.:m	a;24	0.19	0.23	a.20	a.22	0.21	o.32	o.2s	a.Jo	o.37 0.25	0.29	o.J2	0.20	-0,32	a.JG	o.J1	01.:!5	o.42	o.J4	a.JO·	a.ho

a.14	0.19	a.22	a.17	0.21	0.26	0.2a	0.25	· 0;31	0.24	0.29	O.JS
0.22	0.26	a.29	0.24	a.2B	a.J4	0.20	O.J2 .	a.4a	a.JI	a.JS	a.•G

a.G7	a.Go	a.so	0.60	a.so	o.69	a.so	o.s9	a.69	a.69	a.69	a.10 o.Bs		a.es	ii.its .	a.es	a.0s	a.0s	a.as	a.BS	a.01	a.ea	a.BG	o.oe
a.11	0.11	a.12	0.11	0.12	a.n	a.n	0.12
a.aB	a.au-.	o.a9	. a,B9	a,09	a.a	o.a9	0.09
a.1a	a.11	o.72	0.11	0.12	o.74	0.12	0.13	0.10	o.7J	o.75	a.10
0.76	0;77	a.79	o.oa	0.02.	o.e4	_   0.84	o.os	0.09	a,09	o.91	o.95
 
Open  Space	0.05
0.11
 
a.10	0.14	a.oo.	0,1J
a.1e	·o.2a·	o.u	a.19
 
o.19
0.20
 
0.12
0.10
 
0.17 a.2J
 
0.24 a.J2
 
o. 16
0.22
 
0.21	a.20
0.21	o.J9
 
Parking
--
 
O.	L	L .	L	a.oo
0,95	0.9B	a.97	0,95	0.96
.	'
 
0.87
Q,97
 
o.o5.
o.ss
 
0.86
O,!IB
 
·0.07 0.97
 
a.as 0.95
 
a.e	a	0.01
0.96 .	0.97
 
• R-u-n-o-f-f--c-o--e-f-H-c-i-e-n--l:-!-.-f-o-r--o-t-o-f-ll-l--re--c-u-r-re-n--c-e--l-n-ta1:11:1l• lao• than 25 yaau;· b l'luroff  eaefficlents  For otorm rac. urrence  lntorvolil o.f. 25.  ye1u or mora.
SOllrcet   nawl!i,  11.J., S.l. WoliQ   8t1d   R.H•  .,_,cu,;,,  1981;  0Comparbon  or  Urban  Flood  FreCf.IO!lcy    Procedure•,"  Preliminary  Ornrt,  U.S.  Oopnrbm1n>.
if"'ll9rieullure,  Soll C<inservaElon Snrvlce, Oaltsvllle, I'll.	.

 	., 	
Tohickon Creek Watershed Storm.water Management Plan-Volume II
 
TABLEA-4.
V'.aA riJN"G  ROUGfil.m!SS  COEFFICIEN""TS


Values of n to Ile Used with the Manning Equation
Surface	I		Best	I Good  I Fair		Bad Uncoated   c&st-iron   pipe ...............		0.012	0.013	0.014	0.015
Coated  c&at-iron  pipe ...·..·; ....•.., ...	0.011	0.012• 0.013•
Commercial  wrought-iron  pipe;  black ... ·	0.012	0.013	0.014	0.015
Commercial  wrought-iron  pipe, ·galva-
 
nize<l . . . . . . . .  .  · . .	.	.....·
 
0.013
 
0.014
 
0.015
 
0.017
 
Smooth brass  and  gla.'IS pipe ...........	0.009	0.010	0.011	0.013 Smooth  Jockbar  ancl  welded  "OD" pipe	0.010	0.011.  0.013• Riveted and spiral stoel pipe ...........	0.013	0.015• 0.017•
Vitrified sewer pipe ....•......••.....·. .{0.001110.} 0.013• 0.015 O.Ol't Common clay drainage tile ............ O;Oll 0.012• 0.014• 0.017 Glazed brickwork .•..................  0.011 0.012 0.013* 0.015
Brick  in  cement  mortar;  brick  sewers..·.	0.012	0.013	0.015• 0.017
Neat  cement  surfaces .................	0.010	0.011	0.012	0.013
Cement  mortar  surfaces ..............·	0.011	0.012	0.013• 0.015
Concrete  pipe •.•...•................	0.012	0.013	0.015•0.016
WoQC!  stave  pipe•...•.....•..........	0.010	0.011	0.012	0.013 .
!."lank Flumes:
·    Planed  ..•.•..................•....	0.010	0.012• 0.013	0.014
Unplaned      .•••..................•...	0.011	0.013• 0.014	0.015
With  battens ......................	0.012	0.015° 0.016
Concrete-lined  channels ...•.........•.	0.012	0.014• 0.016• 0.018
Cement-r11bble  surface.•...••..•......	0.017	0.020	0.025	0.030
Dry-rubble  surface••...•..•.... , ....·•	0.025	0.030	0.033	0.035
Dress.ed-&shlar  surface .••••.•••••.....	0.013	0.014	0.015	0.017
Semicircular metal fiumes, smooth •••.•	0.012	0.013	0.015
Semicircular metal fiumes, corrugated .. .o.0225 0.025	0.0275 0.030
Canals and Ditches:
Earth,  straight  and   uniform •••••...•	0.017.	0.020	0.0225• 0.025
Rack  cuts,  smooth  and  uniform •.....	0.025	0.030	0.033•0.035
·	Rock cuts! jagged  and irregular .....•	0.035	0.040	0.045
Whidi  s  uggish    canals...••........	0.0225 0.025• 0.02'15 0.030
Dred	earth    channels  ..•....••...•	0.025	0.0275• 0.030 . 0.033
Cana	with rough stony beds, weeds
 
on  earth  banks •.••••••....••...•	0.025 . 0.030
 
1.35	• 0.040
 
Earth  bottom,  rubble sides.·.........	0.028	0.030• 0.033• 0.035
Natliral Stream Channels:
(l) Clean, straight bank, full stage, no
rifts  or deep pools .•.•..••....•..	0.025	0.0275 0.030	0.0.33 (2)Same as (1),but some weeds and
 
stones..•..•......••.....•......	0.030	0.033 .0.035
(3)	Winding, some pools and shoals,
clean . ..........................	0.033	0.035	0.040
(4)	Same as	3), lower stages, more
·	ineffective s ope and sections.......	0.040	0.045	0.050
(5)	Same  as  (3), some  weeds  and
 
o•.040

0.045

0.055
 
atones. ............................	0.035	0.040
 
0.045	0.050
 
(6) Same &s  (4),stony sections.......	0.045	0.050	0.055	0.060
(7)  Sluggish	river	reaches,	rather
 
weedy or with ver deep pools......	0.050	0.060 - 0.070 -
 
0.080
 
(8)  Very weedy reac  es.............	0.075	0.100	0.125	0.150
'
•Values commonly used in designing.



To!rlckon Creek Watershed Stomwater Management Plan-Volume Il
 
i
•


·1
'



TABLE A-5	1: Hydrologic soil groups for United States soils
,,
 

AA BAB
A.&SEOG
.1.A.qON
AASTAD
.lAZ  AH ABAC A8AJ0" •
Al!IALOSAO_JA.M 'l:tARCA 481!.AYE· A88JE
A880TT
 

0    I I.DAVEN
0	I ADDJCX.S
i:	I      AOOIELOU
e.      I. &!>C
e    I At'l"::K
0    I AOll!'L
c	I     lOIEL.     •ET"
9     I   •DELA !OE
e     I    AtiELANTO
&	I AOELIN'J
f!       J    Atil!:LPIO•
0     f	SALINE    ALICALI
 
c   I AMR'!N
o    I A ...RNll:LI ..
e   I AHR'S
'I AHTAHU14
I •t.o'TA"-U ...o  OqAJNf'D
!'!   I A..,.WAl-IKEE o   I 4H:D"'I TO o     I AICO
e  I • Jl(E"'
e   I AIKMAN
c   I Alll:MAN.   Sf•)...Y
I J. JL1 V
 
e	I ALDING.
c	I  ALtqNO
. ' I ALEDO
o   I ALf'GROS·
c	I ALE'KNAGllC
'-	I AL!lo'EOA
c	I  ALEX
c	I ALEXAHOE.q·
·a.  I .&L!lt.&NOR IA
o    I Al.FIR'
c	I •LFLACll:
e	I AL""OPO
 

0	Al.Sf'A
c	ALSPAUGH
c	ALST40
c	AL STONY
c	ALSUP
"'- T 4aoQN.T
ALTllDEAIC
c	ALTAR
ALTAVISTA
.U.TDORf'
c	Al Tl:IDUSE
•	ALIJCREST
 
•c
•c
0
'•·
0
•
 

A980TTSTOWN
 
.C      I    .&bl:LCJHIA
 
S/C I
 
4	J"'fL I I"'
 
P	I      ALGANSEE
 
AL Tl TA	c
•
 

.&8CAL 48F.<OG
A8!LA
 
l.l        I      ADEN
3·   I ADENA
J       ADGEA
 
c	I 41NA'C:EA
c    I A l"'SLCY
0  .1 A INS:Wl;RTM
 
P.	I ALCiAIHfC'leO
e	I ALGl!!qlTA
' I £LGJER!
 


C/0
 
ALTMAR ALTO
AL TOGA
 
'i:
c
 

.lfl LL
 
S      I    ADIEUX
 
•	I AIAlo'CNT
 
c   I Al GOA
 
c   I ALTON	4
 

48£.:iOf'!"" A6ERO"'E' Al'llERSJ10 A  !'QT
A!ES
AB GE SE
 

C        I     .&OfLIS
·fl   I AOIN
c   I J.OIOS·
"  I J.OJUNTAS
0      I   A['ll(JNS
! I J.OIC INS. ALKALI
 
•	I A JPP[:.. T
o   I AJTS
o. I 4.IC
c   I 4.J!'IL ITO
'I •r.•tr
I Al(Al(A
 
t	I llLGOMA
e	I
c	I ALH.t.RIC
c	I ALICE
c	I ALIC!L
' I ALICIA
 
0/0

•
'
.•,
 
ALTOONA	c
J.LTUDJ.	0
ALTUJ;AS	c
ALTUS AL TV.AN
ALUll'	4
 
A8JL!Nf'
 
C	I      AOltlNSo    loET
 
c   I Al(AN
 
&/DI
 
.1.t.;JOJ.
 
ALUfrif	'
 
ASJ!lUA
.l81QUA•  FL.OOD!..:::i
UITTA
AOO Al!IOQ
 
!.!!	I       •DLEll
C      I iti..A
·	·c    I Ac:>aE
c  I A:>OL?l-f
0   I AOOS
 
c   I Al(A51CA
c   I Al(.fL4
c   I ..11tl!OCJ.N
!!/DI Al'EFUF.
c   I
 
e·  I ALIKCHI
.o   I ALINE
e	I  ALltlPIOGE
r	I •L!CO
E	I     ALLAGASH
 
ALU SA	0
4	ALllAR•OO
c	ALlll·N	a
0	J.LV.J.tl'J.	c
e	ALlllSO	.0
 
A&O;;>HilNIE
 
0      I    AO IAN
 
J./DI
 
J.	ICL !I"
 
0	I ALLAMC'IRE
 
0	ALllODEST	0
 
A90TIEN
 
o·    I Ac o A'I' '3.   I AECET.
 
o    I ALACDJ'\I
c  I ..ILACSHI
 
! I .&l.LANTDH
f	IALLA"'TDN•
 
19/D I
D	I
 
Al.-YOD	0
AL \IC'O •   ORA E Nl;:D	c
 

A8AAlC
A8RAZ0o (,OAVELLY
.l.6R'.:.U
 
IAENEAS
o·    1 · •'"""C·l'
.c   I ""L'l'
£\	I ..,..TA.Dl::N.
 
" I &LJof.
c  I 4L4ELC'A
fl  .1 ALAGA
>   I ALAIC..1 I
 
A	I CEP ESSIONAL
E	f  ALL·ARD
A	I ALLOO•N
c	I ALLf(ij.lfNY
 
I J.LllOA o   l=IAOTFCTEO	c
e	I J.LWILOll  '	'
e	I £L't.t.N	c
e   I i.LZAOA	0
 

:&8AtGO
 
S	j   ..fl'.TC"I
 
C/DI
 
.ALA ..A
 
E	I      ALL!"'ANDS
 
o    I 11LZOLJ.	c
 

A65A00'1C:fE ACSC.:lTA 405 ...EK
A8STEO
 
C	I     AG"
·A.    ·I  At;A. IPAM
0      I   •GAN.
C	I·   •G•M
 
o   I At.-,t.loAO ITJ.';.
o	I .t.LA ..ANCE
o	I ALAl"Bl'JUF..
a   I AL41"C
 
C	I     •LL!k
e  . I ALL!NOJ.L!"
!! .  I ALL!ND F.
e   I •LLE"IS   •RIC
 
e    I J.J1AOOR	0
e   I AMAGON.	0
e    I .I.MALI II
e.  I Al"ALU	0
 
A8STE0o   Fl,CiJOEO
 
"   I JG&SSI z
 
o  I ALA,..CGOP'J'J
 
P	I     •LLEN   l:J4RICo
 
STONY    C	I
 
.4	MAl\'l	'
 

ACS TON
aCAClC
. ACi.Cl"'lo'V
&CAOJA
AClllllA
.I.Cl.NCO
icASCO
.&.CC LEAATOR
-'Cf JT\.1111:..s
.t.CO!L
 
C	I    •GA 10::
e	I      •GATM•
C	I      AGA llAN
.,   I ,.GENCY
O       I     •G!"P
C	I      AGFAYAN
0      I   •GN.&L
a	I       •G"IE:iT'JN
6	I AGNESTON• COB9LY
c   I  suesT -"TUM
 
C	I
•	I ALA.,CSA• ONAINEr.
•	I ALA.,;L,CJ.tf:E
c   I Al.ANC.S
O     I   •LAPAjol,4 ·
o	I At.J.P.1.J
o	I ALA ZAN
' I 6Lf-Ah
C       I    ALfiANO
I Al.f-.1.NY
 
C	/       ALLEhTIN!
. f-	f   ALL!NWOOO
r  I ALLEY.
:"	I •LLHANOS
o·     f    ALLIANCE
A	I ·ALL JGATbR
e	I ALLIS
I At.LJSO"'
0     I •t.LKl!'P
c   I All.CR
 
o    I Ar..ANVA	c
e   I AMAPILl.0
P	I    AM.ASA	'
c   I llMASA•   1400EA.ATf'L.Y     <
e   I  WET•   SANDY	.
o	I    SUI'S TR A TU""
. o   I A"'°'EQ
e	I ... J	0
e	I l!MeOAT	c
e    I  A'l90'1'	c
 
ACHl .. JN
 
. C	I    .IGNESTONo     COABLY
 
c    I A Lei& TC1'1
 
C	I      ALLOUf'Z
 
0.    I
 
A"'9RANT	•
 
.:.CKEF
 
A	I      .&GtlC.S TON•
 
c   I ALE EE
 
C     1  ALM.AC
 
'e   I ""''!f;IAW
 
B/C
 

.\C(J:PVILLE
 

C	I       AGNEW
 

c   I AL ERTON
 

S	I    "L"'AY ILLE
 
D	I    ""'fNE	"0
 
AC!':i!qjolAf..

.t.Ck.i;;'TT ACKLEY A(ll""'Et.:
-'Cll:MCrtE
 
A,fOI	!lNGllAVELLY

:>      ·f . .IGNO
9      I    AGON
fo    . I· AGO!:IT
e   I •G ·•
 
I •t.SE,IA:'/LE

c  I ALf-fl"TYILLE AL£.-lh'-S
c  ·I' AL( l"CN
c   I ,tlff:' iGMTS
 
e	I •L"'ANOR
c	I AL,,.!NA
e   I •LMF.RJA
fll	I AL.l'tl<ANTE
c	I •l""D
 
I AMELIA
c	I AlllENJA
o    I •MENSON.	0
e   I Afllff;llCANOS	E
. o   I AMERICUS	4
 
.t.Cl'C'<tA TE11
...
 
D	I      AGU•
0:      I AGUA   OULCE
 
P	I    •L• ui; l
ALeURZ.   oq•JNE!:I
 
C	/     ALMONT
e	I      AL...OTA
 
c	I ll"'f'RY
c   I AH.ES
 
.•
C/D
 
4Cu
.l(OMA
4COAC'
 
f!      I AGUA   FQ fA
C	I JGUJ   FlllAo  HIGH
·	C	I         HAINFALL
 
•	I
c   I 111.eus
•	I •LC-'N
I I.LC ES Ti;;;>
 
9	I ALMY
c   I Al.NIT·!
I."	I  ..1L:J
 
e	I ......es,.....	•c
o   I A"'ES.,ONT
c   I AMHl!'AS T	0
 
.1,(0Yf
 
C	I AGUA   F=<I••   STO-.iY	c
 
Al.CCII
 
!'	I •Lt::l"IA
 
c   I ll"'ISTAO	0
 
ACF::DALE ACl1-!::E' ACOE'L ANE
ACT•)N
 
D.    I     .IGU.1.0 ILLA C	1. AGUAL T
C	I  .c.r.UED•
'! I lGUILAllfS
 
.A	I  •t.CO"-'
13        I     Al.CC' 1
I?      I ALCO YA
e     f    ALC':.
 
e	I ALO>l.&X
I Al ONA
. f'	f    ALON5(1
C	I ALOY.AR
 
o	I A"'ITY	0
e    I  A"'MON	e
e    I AMCOllC	c
c	I AWhLE	4
 
4.CUF.F'
ACL:lllA
 
I AGIJILITA
c   I JGUJRQ!
 
!\      I   ALO"•     .AL tNE
C	I     J.L:'' lC
 
:O/Cj  ALPfP.,.&
C'	I     • L Pl-'A
 
"e   .I
 
A  MOD.US
 
0',
 
"AU.I'.
AOAJFl
&QA.N'S
A0A ..SC"4
 
::   I AGl'ST IN
C	I        """"lllT
C	I     AHL
I AHt.SfRQM
a	I    ....·,,.e:Eoe:
 
E'       I Alt' N
C	I     ALtlf  P
C    .,  ALC'E'F=Cl ..l.L:
0  · f. •LCEt."'AND
c   I .IL(•Ef:'wr.i,;o
 
0	I ALP IN
C	I.  ALPON
C	I      ALPO'loA
I."	I    Al.'1 0.
C	I ALR'OS
 
•	I Alo'O	c
o	I J.WOS TOWN	c
' I AMP AD.	c
e   I ....Pl-flON
c	I  A ..SO!!'t..'
'
 
.1,C.lo,.SVILLC:
 
c	I . ,&HOLT  .
 
C	I      ALt'I
 
c	I  .t.t.S
 
A"'5 t
e  . I
 
EPDA"'
 
o\OATON
 
.,    t    JI-='•"+
 
A	I       ,&L:'.ilNf'.
 
('   I •LSCO
 
-'"'TOFT	0
 

..OTES!	Two  "+VO'llOLOtilC    OIL   GRO"JPS   SUC>-+   AS   !l/C   INDICATES   T·if   DRAl"IE'O/'Jp..()RAINED   SITUATION.
JolDOIFIERS   51-'0•N.  f'.t •• ':lEOROCI:   SUS<;TS:-•TU"'·  i:iereR   r:>'  ..  S:)ECJf'JC  SOIL  SEtiJES  PJ.t.4SE"   FOUND   IN  .!:OIL	LEGEND.

(210-Vl-TR-55,  Second Ed., June  1986)
1
 




TABLE A-5 CONTINUED   Hydrologic  soil groups for United  States soils


A"4Wl!LL	c	.lNSELHOo  BEOROCIC	' I ARCH	•	AA1'1YOAAJN	c   I ASSUMPTION	'
AN.\CAPA.	0	ANSGAR	B/DI ARCHBOLD	•	ARNE SS	0	I ASTA TULA	•
 
ANA.COCd	D	ANSPtNG	0	I Afi'CH.f'A	c	AANHflM	0	I ASTOR
ANACONDA	•	ANT   FLAT	c	I AACJ-IEPOAL	c	ARNO	0	I A.STOP. FLOODED
 
0/0
0
 
ANAHf  I.M	c	ANl'l!'L
 
•	I AACH!'S	0	AfONDLD
 
I ASTORIA	0
.loTAAOUE	0
 
ANAHUAC	0	ANTELOPE   SPRINGS	c   I ·A.ACHIN	0	AA"IOT	C/OI
ANAMITI!'	0	ANT ERO	0    I AACHINo COOL
ANA.PAA	0	ANT'10	0     I ARCHULETA	D	AAOL	0	I Ar ASCOS.l
AfU;SAZi	c	AN THO LOP	0     I ARCIA	<	A ROSA	"'"re
ANA TONE	0	ANTHONY	• I AACL ...Y	0
0
ANAUO	0	ANT J GO	•  I ARCO	c	AAA ADA	0	I ATCO
 
ANAVEAOI!'	'	ANTILON	c   I AACOo  ORAINl!'['I	'	AAAA5TRf
 
•	I ATENCIO	•
 
ANAWALT	0	!<NTIOCH	D   I ARCOLA
 
c	ARR DONDO	' I A TEP IC	0
 
c    I ARO	c	AA tJnA	c	...THELllCll.D	0•
 
ANCHO
 
0	ANT LEA
 
•	..,
 
•	AARiHGTD ..
.,
 
•	A.THl!!NA
 

0/0
 
ANCHO•    SALI'll!!:	c	ANTOINE.
ANCHOR  POINf	0	ANTONITO
 
I AADl!h,..ONT
c  I AACl!!NYOIA
 
•	AARICLA
 
0	A THE.ATON
 
ANCHOPAGI!'	'	ANTOS A	0     r AROl!P	0	I APAJTOLA	0	ATHOl.
 
ANCt.DTI!	0/0    ..t.NTRoeus	• I AAOl!P•
 
c	AqAQLIMI!	c
 
A TIC INS	0
 
.,	c   I .I AD ILLA	c   I APRON	0	An:: IN SON	•
 
ANCLOT!! •	0     I ANT-.il!AD	•
 
•	I AAROWHl!AO
 
c	ATLAS	0
0	ATLEE	c
 
DEPAl!SSIONAL
ANCLOTI! 1
 
&NTV
0	I NUNOI!
ANYJll;
 
I·  .\ROI Vl!V
I ARC'tNA5
I
 
I ARRO\"AOA
I ARROYO Sl!CO
AA5JTI!
 
•	ATLQW
 
0.,.
 
fl'Al!OUl!!:NTL't
 
I
I ANWAY
 
AAOTC!O
I ARl!CISO
 
D	ATllllOFll!
I tiATA	c	;.TCKA	c
 
ll"LODDl!O
 
•	APA CHI!	0   '· Af<l!NA	• I ARTE.SIA	•
 
ANCO	c	A0W4	0     I AFll!DALI!
ANOl!AGl!ORGI!
 
0	A TONIC
 
ANOl!ALV	c	APAKUIE	' I AA!NA•   OA.&IINl!O	c   I ART!!'SIAN	0	A JR AC
ANDERSON	•	•PAt.o	•  I APl!NCTSYILLI!	0	I AATCIS	c	ATAING	•
 
ANOOVl!A	0	APELDDAN	D• I AReNZVILL!	•  I ARUNOl!:L	c	ATS ION
 
0
C/O
TtDF.	0
 
ANDRADA	D	APl!X
 
APGALT	D     I APVA	0	ATSIONP ll"LQOOl!D
 
ANDRl!:fSON	c	APISHAPA	0    I ARGl!:NT	D    I ARVADA	0
 
ANDREGG
 
•,	APISON
 
•	I APG!'NT ..	c   I ARYAN A	c	&TTELLA	0
,
 
A.NORl!S
 
AP!'tA1'	• I ARGONAUT	0	I ARYeSON	O/D     ATTEP	'
 
ANORE'WS	c	AP AY	0     I Ai: GO AA	•	A.R.V.ILLA	'	A·TTEPeEARV	•
 
ANORUSIA	•  I .t.PQLLO	• I ARGYLE
 
•	ARYtN
 
&TTE'WAN	0
0
 
ANOl:rY	D    I APOPICA	'	ARll!L	c	APZD	0	ATTE'WAN•
 
ANOYS	•  I APPANrJOse	0	ARI flt' Af;A	•
 
ATTICA	0
ATTOVAC
 
A.Nl!C>	0	I APPl!:RSON	c	.ARIMO	•	.t.5A81!'AN	•
ANE\..A	• I APPIAN
 
A TVA TEA
0
 
A HETH	0	I APPIAN•	c	AAIP fNE	•	A SI;ALON	•	AT l!LL
ANETHt   ORY	' I  S4L lNE.•ALICALI	ARIS
ANGE'L ICA	8/0f   APPIAN•   v£-T	c	AAISPI!	c	.15CH01"1"	•	AU   GRES	•
ANGEL INA	0	APPIAN•  l;ECLAIMEO     c	APIZO	'	'"'
 
ANGELO
 
c	APP1.EBUSH
 
•	ARICA1'VTLA	c	AS..ART	0
 
.1.ueARCUf:	0
 
ANGELUS
 
0	APPLEDELLIA	c	APKANA	c	ASHISON	0•	AIJ8!1EENAU86EE	•
 
ANGii!:	0	PPL.EGA T!.

,
 
c	ARKAQUA	•c	ASHCROl"T
 
AU8EPR'I'	0
AU!!IAEV	c
 
'	APPLETON	c I AAl(CNA
 
I ASHDALI!:
 
•	AUBUPN
 
ANGLE
ANGLEN	c	APPLING	0    I Ai;KPOAT
 
•	I ASHOOVN
 
0
•	AUBUPNOALE	'"
 
0    I AA'l".!!iON	0	I ASHI!'
I ARK TON	c• I ASH!:R
 
c	AUFCO	0
D	AUGGlf	0
0/0
 
ANHALT	0	APTDS
 
c	I ASHl"ORIC	0
 
AUGSBUf;G
c
 
.&.!'flAIC	0	AQUILLA	' I ARLINGTON
 
c	I ASHGAOVE	0	AUGUSTA
0
 
ANllotAS	c    I AQUINAS	c   I ARLINGTON.   THI.CK	• I ASHHUAST	c	Al' GUST 11"1!:
.ANITA	0     I AAAOA	•  I ARLO	• I i.SHKU!if	Bl'DI   AURA
 
.0 ,.
 

ANKENY
 
I AAA ON	c    I A ALO VAL	' I ASHLA A	•  I AUAl!'L fE	0
 
A.Nl(LAM	0     I APAMl!IUqU	.c  I AR,..AGH
 
0	I AS..Ll!:Y
c   I ASHLO
 
I A.UAl!:LIUS
I	c
 
ANKONA	0	I .ARANSAS	0     I APM(Q
ANNABl!LLA	0	I AAAPAHOI!	!/DI APMl!LLS	I
 
AURORA
I AUS,.US	0
c
 
...NNANOALI!	c    I AAAF I EN	c• I AAl<rl!NOAA IS	c	ASHMUN	0    I AUSTIN
 
AN,..AW	• I ARAAA T
 
I AP,..l!:Nl.l.	0	A SHOLLER	0	AUSTlfolVILLE
 
AN,..EMA INI!'	c	I AAA T	0     I AR ...!SA	•	.ASNPOPT	•	AUSTWl!ll.	c
 
ANNIS	c  ., AAAYAIOA
 
c   I ARfl'!SPAN	·•
 

ASHTON ASHUI!
 
•	A'"UT'OM8.A
 
•	I AIUYI!'	0     I
 
AA ..IE'SBURG
c
 
0
0	AUTRYVILLE	•
 
ANNIS1  SALIN!!'
ANNIS•  oR.&J l!O	I
 
,I.PAV! T:IN
 
•	I AR"'I JO
 
ASHUf'LOT
.&SHVOOO
 
c	A.U.X.VASSE	0
 
ANN.ISQUAM
 
c   I ARBELA	c   I ARMINGTON	c	0
 
aNNtSJON	•
 
I AAS IDGE
 
c   1  AR!lotl STCAO
 
c	ASKl!'W
c
 
AUZQUI
'
 
A.N	NONA	0      I AP80LES	c	I ARMI TAG!
•	I ARBOR	• I ARMCJNI!
 
A,;QLT	D
c
D	ASP.I.RAS
 
A YANT	0
 
...	•
 
A  YALON

ASPl!RMONT	•	AYA'WA J Z	'
 
.I.NOCON	c   I
 
&P!IONE
 
I ARMO
 
ASOTffrli
 
.&.NOit.A
c   I AR9UCKLE"	I AR,..ONA	ASPl!N
c
 
AYAR	0
•
 
•NO'WElL
 
0	I AR!UCltLEo
 
I .lR,.OUP	8
c
 
c	AV!NAL
 
...NSAA  I	0	I ..t.RBUAUA	c
 
I AP.MPl!P
 
ASPl!PSON
 
AY lLLA	0
 
ANSEL	•  I ARB US	•  I  AF)MSJER	c	ASSATl!'AGUI!	•
 
4NSELMO	0	I ARCATA	0   I ARlolSTr:tONG
I
 
c	ASSlNINS
 
•	AVIS	•
'
 
ARCETTE	• I AA!o!UCHl!I!	c	ASSINNll!IOIN!	0	AVOCA
JrtOTEs:	TWO  HVOAOLOGIC   SOIL  GROUPS  SUCH.AS  Bl'C  JNO lCA f!S  TH! DqAIN!C NOAAINl!D  SJTUAJtON.
MDOtl'1EAS  SHOWN•   E .G. •  Bl!'OAOClt   suaSTRATUM.  Al!'l"l!'R   ra  A  SPl!CIFIC  SOIL  Sl!'Rlt!:S  PHASe:  FOUND   IN  SOIL  MAP  LEGEND.

(210-VI-TR-55,  Second  Ed., June  1986)
2
 
j
'






•i·	TABLE A-5 CONTINUED	Hydrologic  soil groups for United  States soils.


i	•VONeURG	•	9ALOHJLL	I l!IAA!LA	c	I l!!IAT!SY lLLE	c	1. 81!'CK!A	•
 
AVONDALE	•	'BALDOCK	• I .e.1.A,.USS	• I. l!IATTERSDN	• I
 
B!CltLl!Y.	•
 
AYONV JLLf	•	eAi..oocx. GAAYl!LLY	c    I 8AAG!	c	I l!IATTL!  CAl!'.!IC	c     I l!l!CIC/ifAN	•
Aill'SAIG	•	DRAINED	I SARIO	•  I· l!IAiZA.	•  I Bl!CltTON	•
 
AXIS	•	l!IALDDCK•      SALJNI!
 
c  I l!IAAJSliNAN
 
c    I 1!!1.iUOETT!	•
 
.I	efcic.toN.  WELL	c
 
AXTll!:LL	•
 
lliM.DOCK•  SALIN!	c  I SARK CA NP
 
•	SAU'fA·
 
c    I  OAAlNED	•
 
AYAR	•	l!IALD0CK,;     QRA
 

0
JN!D
 
c   r l!IAAKl!L!V	•	BAUMAN	c•  I
 
BECKVILLE
 

AYCOCK
 
•	BALDWIN...	•  I 1t.6AJCl!AYILLI!	c	e.t.U"IGAAO
 
I
·1

I t!l!Dl!LL	e
 
.t.Y.Dl!.LDTTI!
 
•	llALD'Y.	• I l!IAliKLl!Y
 
c	9AUSCHE-A
SAUX
 
!!"Cll:;WJTH
l!l!CkWOUATH
I 8f'CAAl"T	•
 
A'(!AS\llLL!
 
.,.
 
II.ALI!
 
I SAPKtiP'
 
•c	·BAXl!NOAL!
 
IU!'.CAl!'EK:
 
AYLMER
AYNOR
 
•	llAL!•
•
 
0    I l!IAALEYf' ll!LD
0  I llAALJNG
 
eAUXSON
•c
 
I
I el!Ol"OAO	c
 
AYON
'	.t.YDUS
 
llALLAR.O
c	1!1:..a..Ll!'llt
 
I &AALOW
8.t.ANA91!:
 
llAXTl!'A
9AXTl!'AV1LLI!
c	8AYAMO".f
 
.•.
 
lllEDl!'N

I l!IEOINGT.Pf't	---·-J!_
91!'01(1!'
 
,,	•••	•	8AL.LlNGl!A
 
I 8AAN.t.iltD
 
•	lllAYAAO	.I	•
 
;;,
 
•	841.L TOlltN	0    I 8AANELLCA!EJC	•
 
c
c   I 8!:DSTEAD	c
 
AYAlitS
•
 
•	BAANe.s.
 
l!IAYl!tOAO
 
I Bl!ONEA
 
.t.YASHIAI!'	c	!IALLVAA	I
 
•	8AY!ATON	..	0
 
AYSl!l!S
 
!IALLY	c.  I llAANl!STON
 
AZAAA	·c	llALN	•.	llARNl!STON•	•	11.t.Yl!ll!'LO	c    I llE'OVYA
 
•	19.M..Milt.N
 
•	NONGAAVl!:LL Y	6AYP' Il!'LO •  •<T
 
I •••	9
 
AZl!'LTINI!
 
11!eee:
I 81!'!-CHl!A:	c·
 
. .	AZTALAN	c	BALM.AN•   SALINl!'o	c	8  ANl!Y
AZTEC	FLOODED	8.t.ANHAAOT
 
8AYHOASI!
ll·AYLIS
 
I
I 81!'!CMGAOVI!
 
AAJNl"ALL	BALMOAHl!·A
 
•c	BAAH'SDALL
 
•	•
l!IAYOU	0    I
 
.,z.1e:c.  "'""	c	BAL.ML.UC.-!:
 
l!IAANNOT
 
BAYMEADe:
 
6EECMlllOQD
c
 
AZULI!
 
c	BALON	•	8.(ANST"AIU,.E
 
•·	e.avOuDAN	• I 81!"!1C	.c
 
.t. 'lfl!LL	c	8ALS0RA	a	8.t.ANU-M	a   I 19.t.YSHOJH!:
 
I BEl!KM'AN	•
 
8AAHISH	•	a.M.rrc	•	l!IAROOA	•  I SAVSHOAE•	• I 8E!L!M
8AIHI	•	llALTINOAE	·.•. 'BAROID ..
llAlllllNGTON	•	!IAlllJA	•	8AA0 ID•  •<T	• I l!IAYS roe:	0  . I flE?lillDNT	c
 
llAC4	.•,. 8ANSl!A
 
e.AAAE	0    I 8AYUCOS
!IA.AA IEA	0    I l!JAYYI!•	•
 
I 8!!SKDV!	.a .
 
BACA•  l"t.O_DDED	'·	8.\NOS	c	BARRETT.	0      I 8AYVI
 
0     I l!.E!TVILLE	•
 
8ACH
 
!IANTUSH
 
•	l!'iYWDDO
 
I ll!!ZE!
I
c
 
8ACHELOR	•	8ANAD!itAU
 
BAAR INGTON
 
I

8AZ?L!
 
ISEl"Alt
 
.•.
 
B MAT.
 
I 8AAJl'ON	a	I eA"zl!TTI!
 
I BEGAY	•
 
9ACH0
9ACHUS
. 1!1ACIC8AT
 
c	llAN8UAV
1!14NCAS
 
I ·8AAAONETT	l!/DI
<   I 8A AT	8.1"01 BEACH.
 
I 9i!folAHJN
I l!llEMEMOTOSl1 .	·c
 
•	8AHi:Kl!:A.	• I SAAS.AC	c	. 8EAO	c   I el!:HAING
..	I BEIAMA"'	0
8ACL.Jf'f'	•	8ANCAOP'T	• I 19AASH&AD	•	!EAGLE	c    1· eEJGLE	a
 
BACOlll	c	19ANCT
 
I e.r.RT	•	8!ALAND	•	•
 
•	8ANOAG
 
BAATtffi	c	!!ALES
l!l!AN	D     I 8!.JE
 
,.	c	81!".ANTON	c	I 8!.JUCOS	•
 
llACONA
BA.DAX!
!ADEN.A
 
llAND!AA
8ANDID
 
IBARTL!
8ARTLEV
 
l!lll!:JSJGL

a	I BELA IN	c
 
•	BANDON	c   I .\ATO
 
BEANBLOSSOM
 
8ADENAUGH
8ADGI!:
 
BANE	I l!IAATOlllJE
 
·8EA"Nf'LAT	c    I l!!LA·T!
a    I
 
l!IADG!ATON
BADIN
 
·aaNGO
 
I 8AATON	a	-8!ANL.AKE
l!IEANO
 
8ELC>4EA
c
 
c	BANGOR	• . I 8.AATONl"LAT	•
 
l!llELD!N
 
8ANGSTQN	• I llAA'rON
 
8!LOING
CRl!;l!K	'	8Et:.l!:N ·	0
 
19.lOITO
BADO
 
•	Il!IANIOA
 
•	I.l!IAAX
 
l!ll!AR   l!IAS JJll
BE.AA
BEAR  L.AKE
 
BADUS	t/01  SANKAAO	• ·1 8.t.S·CAL
 
B!:Ll"AST
c
8ELl"OAf
 
•	•	c
 
PRAIA
81!AADALL
 
JI!:
 
BPt.FlELO
 
8.AOW.AT!A
 
I l!IANKH!:AO
 
I 8ASCO
 
eE.AA
c
 
SAGA.AD	• I BANKS
 
I l!IA.5(0"'	c
 
8AGD40
 
a    I l!IANLIC	c•  I 8ASCOYY	•.	8!.t:·AOEN	c
 
Bl!L'GAPRA
 
l!IAGGiOTT	•
 
l!llELGAADE
c	8!ARDSTOWN	c	'BELHAVEN	•
 
I BANNl!:L ·
 
I IS AS!: HOA
 
l!ll!AROSLl!V	·C	•·
 
9AGL!Y
 
I l!IANN!A	c
c   I 8.ASH.AW	D     I l!'l!APGULCH	•
 
9AH!l'4
 
I BANNING
 
I BASH
c
 
•	I 8E.AAMOi.JTH
 
l!IELINOA
•	BEL.JI CA
 
BAHi.A.
 
I BANN ION
c
 
·I  BASHER
I
 
I 81!"'APAW
I l!l! ASKIN
 
BELK	D
I
 
l!IAHL
BAIL.I!
 
I 8ANNOCK
•
 
BASILE
BASIN
 
c·
e.1ot
 
l!IELKNAP	c
' I B!LLAYIS1:A
 
I .BANTAY	A.IOI	c
l!IAILING	c	8AAAGA	c   I   Ol!:PAl!SS IONAL ·	I el!APVll.LE	c	I EL.LECHl!:STl!I:	•..
 
ea ILl!:YCA!!!K	c	BARABOO	•  I BASING!A •	• I l!ll!AATAAP
 
I !!LLf.:	•
 
8AIL!GAI'
 
8APOS
 
I l!IASJNGEq

•
 
8!AASi;tA1NG

•
 
c     J    BfLLEHELEN
c
 
.,.
 
B JNVILLI!:	c	81.AAAHA
 
I BASINGER• FLOODED
 
I l!IEAAWAILLOW
!EA.SI.EV
!'l!ASON
 
I l!ll!:LLfN"'INI!:	0
 
8AJAD  HOLLOW	c	B"'AAT A I	A.IOI  BASll:;E.T
BA  AO  HOLLOW•	8.lABAAOSA	0	BASSEL
 
c   I
I !E""LL! VILLE• PONDED
 
!XTAl!NELY   CD88LY	BAAl!llAAY	•	BASSETT	•	BfATAICE
 
BELLl!VILLE
 
l!IAIAD  HOLLOW•	•	BAAl!l!qT	•	8AS5,.1!LD	•	BEAUCOUP	e•....01  !'ELLE VUE	•
GAAYl!LLY	8A l!IOUA	'	!IASTlAN	c	Bl!AU,.OPO
BAll:;EOV!N	•	BARCA VE	•	BASTROP	•	!!.AU ONT	• I BELLINGHAM•	c
8AK!RSV ILLE	•	BARCLAY	c	BATA	•	BIEAUSJTE	c     I !ELLPASS	.c
BALCOM.	•	i!'ARCUS	•	!IATAVIA	'	8EAVl!"AC l!"EIC	' I eELLWOOD	•
BALOl!A	•	8.&RD!N	c	BATf"S	•	Bl!AVl!R!LL	•  I !ELlotlLL	a
MODIFIERS  SHOWN•   E.G.•  BEOAOCir::  SUBSTAATU"'•  AEFl!A   TD A·SPl!"CIFIC   SOIL  Sl':Ail!S  PHAS!:  FQUp.10  !N SOIL  ••• LEGl!,..0•

(210-VI-TR-55,  Second  Ed., June  1986)
3
 




TABLE A-5 CONTINUED   Hydrologic soil groups for United States soils


!ll!LMQNT	I 81!ATAAM	• I BILLINGS•	I !SLACKNOLL	c	!ILUI!:  LAICI!	•
81!LHOAI!	•
l!ll!LSAC	•  I el!AllOLfl'	• I SILLYCAl!l!K	c    I BLACKPRINCI!	'•	l!LUl!CHIEf'	c
!ll!L TON	c    '·81!AZATIC	a   I ISIL_TMi;JAE	• . f     BLACK SAN	•	!ILUl!OOMI!	c
. I	D
Sl!LTSYILLI!	c	!U!SH!A!'4	c   I flllNCD	D     I 8LACICSPOT	D	81.Ul!GAOVI!	c
81!1..UG.ti	D	8!5Nl!A	• I 81NDLI!	I	c
BELUGA• DAAINl!O•	c	Bl!:SSl!Ml!'.A	c    I IS INl"ORD	•  I  BLACKTHORN	•	BLUl!HILL	c
!LOPI-NG	Sl!!Sll!	D    I BiNCiER	' I !ILACkTOP	D	l!LUl!:HON
81!!:LYOIA	c	ISl!STAOM	c    I BINGHAM	•  I BLACKVATl!R	D	BLUl!JOINT	'
81!MID.11	•	"l!THl!L	•	"INGHAfllV ILL;I!	D      I l!ILADl!N	D	BLUEPOINT	•	.,
. 91!NCHLl!Y	c	el!THE5DA	c	11 INNSYll..LI!	•  I eL.AGO	a	!LUl!SLIDI!:	a
91!NCLAA!;	.c	BCTHLl!::Hl!M	'
Bl!NDl!R	'	e!:TOHNll!	'	91NTON•   Rl!CL...IMl!O     •  I !!LA IATON	c	!!LUl!:WJNG	•a
el!Nl!Vt;JLA	c	eierT!!:RAYIA	c	8 JPPtlS	' I eLAICI!	•	19LUl""P"l)ALt:	c
 
Bl!N!!:l!fAH	D	Bli!TTS	•	ltlRCHl!IAY	c    I 6'UIC!!:LAN0	•	BLUFl""fON
 
C/D
c
 
l!IENl""IELO
 
c	Bl!ULAN
 
I eLAICl!:l-!l!Y	·c	BLUl""ORO
•	l!llRCHWOOO	c	I BLAtcEWELL	c	9LUM	c
 
BENGAL	c	el!VENT
81!NGI!	l!lf!;fC:RIDG	D	Bllll:DOW	I
 
a	BL'	'
 
81!NNAM	•	a"e'Vli!RLY	•	Blf DS	Cl"DI   •t..&Ml!R	c
 
., BLYISUAG	'
 
...	c	l!l      IRDS80A0
 
I 8LANCHAAD	A	I SOAADMAN	D
 
81!NIN
 
a	Bl!YERLY•    GRAVELLY
 
•	ISJRD5ALL	a	I 8LANCA	•
 
Bt."VTHE	a
 
BEH!TD	D
D	lll!'lfLl!YYILLI!
 
l!llROSLl!Y	D•  I !ILAN CHI!	• I SQAJIDTR:L!!!	c
c
 
"BEH.IAHIN
81!NICLIN	c	l!IDAR	81RDSVIE'lll
 
I 8LANCH!;STl!A
 
e.101
 
80A5H	D
 
Bl!NNAN	c	l!U!!Za	a	!IJRK!IECIC	' I 8LANCOT	' I 90.lZ
81!:NNINGTON	c	811•	c	antNfY	• I 8L-A·NDING	• I IBOBILLO	•c
 

Bl!NRIDGE
 
•	.,lllLl!:SPAINGS	•	8·1Ad ..I!	c   I BLANl!Y	' I
 
801!1N801!1
 
81!NSLE'Y'
 
l!llC:I	•	e rsel!!"
 
•	I 8LANICl!:T	c   I aoes	•.,.
 
a	11ICICl!:ADYICE	D	8i5CAA0	a    I l!ILANTON	•  I 808TAtL	c•
•	1!1 ICICNORI!	c   I JllOOl!AATl!l,.Y  Wl!T	I l!ILANYON	c    I 8DCA.   Dl!PRl!SS iDHAL, a
 
Bl!:N50N
Bl!Nfl!I!:
 
c	BICKETT	D	IStSCAY	e.101 ISLANTON•
 
' I 8Dl!ITOWN
 
151!NW1'
 
•	lllOl:Ll!TON
 
•	l!IJSGANI •	' I  MODl!RATl!LY   •<T	I eocA
c   I 8LAPP!RT	a   I ISOCA•   TIDAL	a
 
9e;oR	a	SICQNDOA	D   I I ISGAN_I • tl"LOODl!O
a   I 8JSMAACIC	D·    I SLASOtLL.	• I BDCICl!R	D
 
Bl!QTIA
 
81DD P"ORD
l!tlDOLl!:MAH
 
I 8150001	D     I BLASI!	c   I · SOCICSTON	'
•·..,I 19LASINGAMt	I
 
e"l!OWAWI!
ae:auJNN Bl!ACUM8
 
l!llDNAN	c   I lilSPING
•	a10Wlit.L	I SJ$Sl!!!LL·
 
•	I !ILAYDl!N .
•
 
a   I i!JODl!CKl!JI	'
a   .,	a
 
Bl!ADA
 
a1!ae:A	D   I 81SSONNl!T
 
19LAZ81AD
 
aooe:L·L
 
81!Rl!A	c	8 ll!·Dl!LL·	D    I· OIT	c   I 8LAZON	0   I BODl!N
 
Bl!:Rl!!!NICl!TON	•	ft ll!OSAW	c    I 81TTl!R	• I 8L!AICWOOD	c
 
800EN8UAG	•
 
c	8001Nt
SEAGLAND	a	81G  8LUI!	0    I ltlTTEAAOOT	c   I 8Lf 18Ll!:A'I ILLI!	D	8000AUMPI!"	c
!ll!:AGOUIST	•	It Iii HOJIN	• I 8 ITTl!AW.\ re:"	' I
81!!!AGSYllC	0	llGAAN	•	81Y4NS	a    I t!ILl!NODH	9	.aoe:L. OVl!AWASH	c
l!ll!RIT	0	l!llG!ll!ND	•	l!llXLl!A	c   I l!ILl!YINS	•	901!'.ANI!	'
Bl!AKS
a	eo'e:TTCHI!	c
l!ll!RLIN	c  . I81GPLAT	D	l!IUCK  CA"fYQH	a	I !ILJCkl!NSTAt'I""	'	!IDGAN	c
H"ANUOJ.i.N	'	lllGP"OA.:	c	DAAINl!O	I !ILlMSTl!A	c	llOGGS	c
l!ltGtflLto	'	BLACXA	c   I l!ILISS	c   I·eoGAAP	•
c   I e·oau!	0
Bl!-ANAAOJNd	i:	ISIGMl!AQQlll	c	8LACKOAAW	a    I SLOCICl-IOUSE	a    I lt(!GUS	c
9!ANAADS TON	c	l!llGN!LL	c	·tLACXl!fT	'
•	lllGAIYl!A	'	IBLACXl""OOT	c    I l!llOOllf	D      I BOHEMIAN	•
 
er:RHM ILL
1!11!'.ANICI!	8lGSHl!l!:P	'	8LACXl"ODT•  DAAIN!D
 
I l!LOOMl"ll!LO
 
I llDHl.CICl!T	ci
 
ar:ANING	c	19l f$PRING	D	l!ILACXHALL	0    I llLOQMING	' I l!IOHNA
 

!IEANOW
 
•	llG•IN	c	8LACICH.&LL•  WARN	c   I !ILOONSDALI!
 
' I l!IOHNL Y	D
 
S!RRYLANl>	!J'O(  ar.G"WINOl!R	D	8LAc;ICHAMM A	•.  I !LODA	c    I ·l!IOHN'SACIC	•
l!EAAVM'4K	c    I 1!11./D .,IA	c	!ILACXHAlllC	•
B!ATAG.	c   I !llLl!IO	c	!ILACKHOASI!	c   I ISLOUNT	c   I l!ID.10	0
BtAT!:LSON	1 l!l ILGl!lll	D	!LACICLl!l!D	I	'
&l!AT11!	•  I l!llLLIHGS	c	BLACKLOCK	D    I 191..UE   l!AATH	11.101  BOLD	•
&e;'.JITCLOTT I	•  I	8LA(:XMOUtrfT	•  I  SLOPING	I BOLfS	c
NOTe;S:	TWO  HYDA-OLDGIC   50tk GROUPS   SUCH   AS  11!1.IC   INDiCA TfS   THI!  DAAINl!D.IUMOJIAIN!;U   SITUATION•
MODll""l!AS  SHOWN•   E.G.•  Bl!:OAOCIC   SU9$TPATUI'•  'Q!l"!R  TO   • SPECIFIC  !!OIL  Sf"Arfs  PHASE  fl"OUNO   lN  SOIL  NAP  LEG!:MO.

(210•VI-TR-55, Second Ed., .June 1986)
4
 
·-·
,·:
 




TABLE A-5 CONTINUED	Hydrologic soil groups for United States S()ils


BDLFAR	c	BORGE AU	• I BRACEY ILL!"	c	I BF:!"W	c	I BRCKENHORN
 

BOLIClr.!R
 
•	BORGl!!S	0     I BRACKl!N	•	I !!REW EA	C·    I BF;>OLLJAR	0
 
l!IORtANA	0    I BRACKETT
BORKY	c	I !PAD	0	I SA!VSTEA	0     I
BDLl.lNG	c	BOANSTEDT	c	I BRADDOCK	•	I BREWTON	c	I BROJolO	•
 
•	c	•
 
BRICKEL
 
I BAONCi-10	"
 
BOLSA
 
c	BORD	0    I l!UfADEN
 
I ORl!!UTT!"	0     I
c
 
6RDNAUGH
 
8DL TO·N
 
eOROl!l!"Y
 
I ISAAOENJON	l!'/DI
 
SOL·TliS	0	BDAA!"GO	0     I llliAOENTON•   FLOODED  0	I l!IAICKMILL	c   I· BRONCHO•  LOAMY	•
 
BOMAR	c	BOAAEGUl!!AD	c    I BRADER
 
0	I BfflCKTON	c	I ·sueSTPATU..	•
 
·1	I BAJCO	·c   I BRONELl.
BOMBAY	•	!!OATH	c    I BRAD SON·	I !!RIDGE	c	I BRONSON
BON	•	BOAYANT	0	!RADY	• I BPIOCO:l!HAMPTON	• I BROOKE
 
.•c
0
 
BONAlli	0	BiJSANKO	0	BRADYVILL!	c	I BAJOGl!POAT
 
•	I BROOKf' l!"l.:D	•
 
BONANZA	•	eosco	•	BAA,..l"'.lTS	•	I BDIOGEA	•  I BAOOICINGS	•C/O
BDNCLAIR	•	BDSL.!A	•	l!IAAHAM	•	BAIOGll!SDNt     ORAINl!:D    c      I BAODK,.AN
 
BONO
BONOl"'-':AN
 
0	SOSO	D	BAA ILSl"'OliD	c	BRIDGET
D	BOSQUE	•	!RAINER?	c	l!'lflDGEllfATl!R
 
D
c
I BliODltSIDI!:
STONY
 
BONDMAN	D	80S58URG	D	BAALLJER	0	IBAIEDWl!LL
 
BROOKSTON
I ·!!IROOKSTON•
D
 
BONOAANCH
 
D	BOSSIBUAG•    ORAIN!D      c	l!JAAM	•
 
D   I 8A001CSVILL!"
BROOME
 
80NOUl!:L	c	l'DSTON	c	l!'RAM.trliO
 
9AJl!R
 
BON!	0	eoSTRUM	0	BAAMl;!TT	'	eAIGGS	•  I	MO
S'DSTVJCIC:	BA.t.Mi.ELL	c	l!'AIGGSOAL!	c    I !AOP_.Y
BDNEVAAD	c	BOSVILLE	c	&RANCH
c	· l!JOSlfOATH	0	BRANO	D	SRIGf.!TllfOOD	I BROSS	•
BONG·	•	150T!LLA	•	8RAND!NBU::i:G	•
!SONll"'AY	•  I BOTHW I	c	!AANOY'lilN!!	c	Bll'ILLJANT	•  I !!IROl:f!R	•
BONITA	0   ·I !IOTTIN!AU	c	BRANHAM	c	BP.l,.Lt:Y·	• I BROllfND!.LL
BONJEA	0     I BOT TL!	c	BAANSCONIB	•	!!IRJNSTON!	0     I ·!POtifNELL	•
 
E:IONN	0    I 9CTTL!qOCIC	C.	l!RANTl'"OAD	•	!AINEGAR  .
BONNEAU	•  I BOULDl!!li	•	llRANTL!'f	c	BRlNGNE!"
 
!AOllfNl"'·IELD
•· I !ROWNLEE	0
 
!SONNE LL	c   I BOULDER  LAKll!	0	BRANYON	D	BJl"JNk!R	c   I 8AOWN!f1GG	c
BONNER	•  I BOULDl!:A.  POINT	•	!llRASHi!AA	c	l!IRINiC.ERT	c     I IBAOlllNSCCMBI!·
 
BDNNl!ADAL!
 
•	I 80ULDEACRl!:!"I(	•	BAASS,..Il!LD	•	IBAINICl!RTON	0     I
 
!IAD"WNSCA.EEIC	•
 
IBDNNl!T
 
I BOULDIN	•	IBAATTON
 
•	l'IAINNUM	0     I BROWNSDALE	c•
 
&PNNEVILL!"	•  I l!IDUL,..LAT	c	BP UN	c	BAINNUM•   ORAIN O	c    I BADVNSTO
l!IONNll!	C/D     BOUNDARY	•	SRAllfl.EY	D	8AIOS	•  I BlllOllfNTON
 
c
C/O
 
PDND!D	c·	-.B.DU.A80N	• I OPAXTON	c	BRISBAN!!	• I l!'ROXON	•
 
BONNll!o
60Ntf'IOOON
 
D	BOURNE
 
c   .I
 
BRAY
 
.D	·BRISCO
c	BAI SCOT
 
I SRQYLES
0    I 8AU81!CIC:	0
 
IBONO	D	SOUS IC	D     I BPAY"TCN
 
ftAISCDTo   DRAINED	c   I l!IAUCE	8/0
 
BON.TA	•	BUW9AC	c   ·I BPAZ ITO	•	BRtSIC.'Y	0	· BRIJELLA	•
 
80"1$A·t.L	0
 
D     I· BRA.ZJLTO!<t	0
 

BONTI
 
c	l!INBELLS
 
•	I !RAZ.ITO• TriJCK
 
•	SRJSTOllf	0	BAUELLAo  l'fAAO	c
 
BONWl!"R	c	OVOlSH	c	I  S.URFACE	9AITTC	0	Sul!'STl<ATUH
 

80Nllf JEli •  GRAOl!D	D	BOVDLI!:
 
•	I l!IRAZITO,   T_.ICK	c	BRITTON	0	!AUf"'"Y	•
 
BDNZ	c	eo1i1Do1N	D       I  SURl""AC!" o	I BRITllf.t..TER	•	l!IRUl-ll!L	•
BOOl'"ORD	.c	eowQRI!:	c    I SAL INl!-ALKALJ	I
B'OOl"USS	D	eovl!N	c   I BAAZON	I
BOOICCLIFI'"	•	SOWl!AS	c    I !=RAZOR IA	0	I
 
800IC!A	D	eovl!s	• I BRl!CKl!:NA IDGE	6/DI   SAOADAX	•c
 
SRUNCAN	0
 
•	•	EL	0
 
BOOKOUT	c    I BOllfl!
 
I BRECKNOCK
 
I 9ROA09ROOIC
c  I l'IRDAOHl!:AO
·1
 
l!AUNOAGI!
c	BAUNE
SPUNl!LDA
 
SOOK.WOOD
 
I BC.WLAICI!	c    I BRl!CIC.SYILLI!
 
•	BROA.DHUAST	D
 
BOOMER	•	BDWLUS	•  I 9Rl!EC
BOVMANS'llLLE	B.1.0 I    BRfJEN	•
I BOWNAN  .	c    I &AEGAA	0	I BAOADNOQq	•c	BA UNO	•
 
BOOMS TICK	0
 
l!'AOADUS
 
l!'RUNSWl CK
•
 
BOOMTOWN	D
BOON!	• ·1 BDWNS	c   I l!'AEICO
 
I BAOADllfELL
 
!IAUNZl!LL
c
 
BOCNESBOAO
BOONl!YILLE
 
I eowSfRING	A/DI   l!AEMEP.	c	I "9AD81!TT	c	BRUSHCREEK
I BROCKET	c	ISAUSSELS	c
 
BOONTON	c	I 80Kl'"Oli0	c   I  SUBSTRAT:JN
BDDNYILLI!.	c   I l!IOXYILl.I!.	c	I BRE,.O	I
BOONVILLE	D     I BOX'!fELL	c    I BREMS
800.THBA'Y	c    I bDYC!	D      I BRENHAM	c	BAOCKD	•	BRYAALY
BOOT.JACK·	0     I ·6oYD	D      I BAfNNA.N	•	l!IAOCICPDAT	0	Bli'YCAN	•
BOOTS	A/DI   BOYEA	' I l!IRENNER	D	BAOCICAOAO	c	I BRYCE'
BOQUILLAS	c	I l!OYl!Ti	•  I !IFU N T	D	BROCKS BURG	• I BAYMAN	•
BOAi.CHO	. I	•
 
BORAH	c  ·I l!IOYLE	.0    I BAl!NTSVll.Lf	c	BAOCKllfAY
 
I BUO	c
 
e'OAAVALL	D      I !OYSAG	0     I !HlEf.ITWOOO	•	BROCKWELL	• I BUB US	•
BORDA	D     I BOYSEN	D      I
BORDEN	I BOZEMAN	•   I !Al!!VAAO	•	BAO!	•  I SUCHAN AN	c
BDROEA
 
F.IOA!AL rs	0    I BAACl:i
 
c    I BREVORT	e.1D I   BROGDON
 
•	I BUCHENAU	c
 
T E ORAIN!O/UNDAAINED SITUATJONo
"'DD 11'" J.EA5   SHOWN•   E .Go•  BEDROCIC    SU8STAATUNo   lif'l"ER   TD   • sPeCil"IC   SOIL   Sl!RJES  PHASE   FOUND   IN   SOIL   M.\P  LEGENOo

(210-VI-TR-55, Second Ed., June 1986)
5
 




TABLE A-$ CONTINUED	Hydrologic soil groups for United States soils


&UCHl!:NAU•    THICX:	•  I 8lJqCHl!LL	c    I CAPO   i>QJO	c	C ..LOO.O	c	I CANTE!:t-1	•
!!UCKAROD	c	I BUREN	<    I CJ.l'OT	D	CALOUSF	•  1· CANTlfl!A	c
BUCKCAl!!:K	c    I BUPG1	•  I CA9STQN	•	CALPl!AK	D	I CANTON Bl!NO	c
!!UCl'::I! YI!
BUCKHOUS!:	• I l!URIC!:TOWh	c   I CACTUSl"'.LAT	c	C..LUM!:	•  I CANTUCHl!	D
c    I 8URiCHAR0i	I CADl!VlLLI!!:	D	CAL,VIN	c	I CANllALL	c
.!UCICLANO	c   I iOJ L!J;..	A.IOI   CADILLAC	'	C.!.L'f.ISTA	D     I CANYON	D
0	CADMUS	•	CALZACORTA	0     I CAPAY	0
BUCICLl!Y·	O·  I !!ll.li:1LlNGTOh	• I CAOO""A	D	CAMAGUl!Y	D     I CAP!	0
!IUCll:t.ICJ::	I CUAt'AH
eUCKLICK•   THICK	I !UMNAC	0    I CA<i!'Y	CA14ARILL0
!UCKLON	D    I eURNl!:l.	c   I CAGUA!O	D	CAllllt	•  I CltP!:RTON	0
c
BUCICPl!AIC	•  I !URNS I DI!	• I CAMON A	•  I CAMl!IAAGI!	•	CAPJST ANO	•
•	I CAMl!l!:AT	c	CAP.JAC	c
eUCIC.SKIH	c· I l!IURNT   LAICI!	• I. CAIRC	D     I CAM91!TH	c	CAPLl!N	D
 
.....	D    I CA.JET!
 
I  CAM9R·10G!	c	CAPL!:S1   DFJAINED	c
 
SUCKTDN	•  I !UANTRIVl!'R	e    I i:A.JALCO	c	I CAo.ISF;'IA	•	CAPL s	D
8U!J!	c   I	•
l!IUOIHDL	D     I BIJRR IT A	0     I c.,..JCNO:   ove:RwASH	•.   I CAMO!'N	•	CAPON A	c
 
9UOL!:l11 S	c   I SIJRRCl"SV!LLE'	c ·I . CA.JO'#:_. t.OAl-<V
 
•	I CAMl!l!K	0	$=APOOSI!
 
.,.
 
flUl!LL	•  1·  suqSLEV	o.  I  SUIJSTAATIJM	I CAMl!L8ACK	•	CAPPS	•
 
l!IU! A   VISTA	• I l!IUASON	c   I CA.JON•  "SILTY
 
•	I<;AM!_O
 
•	C•PSHAW	c
 
...
 
eu.;ToN
 
1. CA.JON•   ALl<AL I
 
i CAllllLLUS	•	CAPT IVA
 
OU,..,..ARAN	0    I etJpt	D     I SUltSTRA rur4	I CAM!PQN	D	CAPT INA	c
 
l!IUfl",..CA!.!:K	I
 
•	1	•
 
BUl'",..INGTON	• I 9UA ..!!LL	c   I CV!!:PWASH	I CAMINO	c   I CAPULIN	•
 
eu,..ll'MEYI!	• I BUSl!l.Y
 
•	I CAJON1
 
I CAMPANA	I CA ACOLES	D
C.AAADAN	D
 
!!IUfl"l'"ORIC	c   t au:se	• I  $.AL {Nl!-AL1'ALI	I CAllfPl!l!LL•   MUCK	c   I
'lUl'"TON	•
CAMPl!l!.LL• ORAINEO  • I .C.AAS!HGLE
BUICIC	C·   .1 !IUSMNl!LL	c    I.CAJON•    GAA\l!LLY	•	CAMPl!IELL TON	c    I CADflO	c
BUIST	• I SUSl-tVALLl!Y	D     I CAJ!=N•   COOL	.,.
CAMP1A	I CAA!IONA	D
euico. we.T	c   I BUSSY	c   I· CALA!AA	0	CANDO	c   I CAll'l!OhDALE
!9UltAEEIC	I I eus·r!A	e   I CALAP..ASAS	D
 
D     I BUST I	c   I CALAflillNI!	0	C"'NPSPASS
 
•	I CARDENAS	D•
 
BULAIC!:
 
•	I eUTANO	c•
 
0	CAlllPUS
I CALA•t:S	•	CAMROOEN
 
I c.u DIFF	•
 
BULKLl!Y	c   I
 
!USY'lllL:>
 
I C.tL.t,-tTY
 
c  I CAAOl"GAN
 
9U L  RU •   AAODAN     c   I BUTCH!:	0    I ·CALAYl!R.tS	·•	CANA	c  ·1 CAliOINGTON	c
sueSTAATUN	I 9UTLl!A	D	•
 
SULL  TRAIL	0    I !UfLl!ATOVN	c   I CALCO	!/DI CANADIAN
 
I CAAEFAl!t!:	0
 
&ULLA ADS                           •   BUTlr!R,...IELO                       c   I CALCQ STA                           8/0I  CANADICE                            0    I CAREY                            • f:tULLFL.AT                           •   l'IUTTl!AS                           •   c...o                         c      CANANOA I GUA                     D     I CiAG!.hT                           • SULLION                                  D         !'.UTTONHOOK                         •   C.ALOEAVOO:>                         D         CANAYl!RAL                           c    I CARISEL                                •
 
lll!LL• e
 
ORA INl!O      •	CAND!"LAA I A	•  I CAAIOCA	•
 
8UL1.UMP	•	POOAL'!  DAAINl!O	CALI!' AST	c	CANOEALY	• I CAq.JQ .	c
l!IUi..Lw INk'LE	o·	8UXTON1   JlolODEAAfELY   c	CALEt"OHI A	•	CANDLESTICK	c    I CAALJNTON	c .
c	CAN DOA		•  I CAAL ISLE	,t./D 8ULO\I	•	9UZZN	CALfi:;A	c	CAN!	c    I CAAL I TO	D
eYee:e	0	CALl-fOl.oN	CANl!!IC	I CARLOTTA	•
!$UNO OAF	0	!YIHGTllN	c	CAL tco	c	CANELO	D    I CARLOW	D
l!IUNOYNAN	c	YLCI	•	CALIFON	c	CANl!"YVlt.LE	c    I CACfLSe:O"°G	•
AUN KER	•	l!!YAAN	c	C.ILI .rA	•	CANJll'IELD	c    I GAALSTAO"'	c
BU..ll;W4 T!A	c	CASALLO	•	CAl.K INS	c	CANIS Tl!D •  STONf	0    I CAA,..ACIC	•
dUNICY
CARMICHAEL	c
l!IUNflNGYILLI!	c	CA'Jl!IARTo   STONY	D	CALLEGUAS	D	CANNING	• I CARMODY	c
llUA8ANJ(	•	CA8£ZON	D	CALL I SBUAG	c	CANNONVILLE	0     I CAANl!Gll!:	c
BURCWAkD	•	CABLI!'	B/DI   CALNl!V.ti	c	CANTA LA	• 1 C'-'AOLINE	c
OTES:	T O HVDROLOGIC  SOll GROUPS  SUCH AS.8/C  INDICATES  TH!  RAINEO/UNOAAINEO  SITUATION•
MODll'"IERS   SHOWN,   E.G••   !OAOCIC   SUBSTRATUM.  A!Fl!'A   TO   A   SPl!'CIFIC   SOIL  SERIES  PHASE  FOUND   IN  sort. MAP  LEGEND.

(210-VI-TR-55,  Second  Ed., June  1986)
6
 


TABLE A-5 CONTINUED   Hydrologic soil groups for United States sops


 

CAROLLO
 

0	CATALPA
 

c	CENCOVE
 

CHARLOTTE
 

a ...01
 
CHf'lfACL,t.	c
 
CARON
 
A/DI
 
CATAfolOUNT
 
0	CE,..·lZA
 
CH£DLTON
 
..,
 
e	I CMEllfELAM	c
c	I C>-l!'tENNE
 
CAAONo    Jo4o\ASHY
CAAPENT!IO
CARR
CARR ACAS
C.lRA.tNZA
 
o	I CATANO
o	I CATARACT
o	I CAT.4PJNA
o	I CATASll:A.
e	I CA TAULA
 
C!NTENArtY
C'ENT ER.
0	CENTER C.:il!!:Ell:
C!,.,T!Ret.:RG
CfNT·l!l'olF I !LO
 
CHARNOCIC
c	CHAANOCIC •
c	MODERATELY
c	CHARO
•	CHA,5!
 
e	I CMlA	0
I CHlAR£	0
c   I CHICANE	C.
c	I CHICHANTNA	0
"CHICICAHOMINY	0.
 
CAARCREEIC
CARRIZALfS
 
a   I C"ATCHEl;L
CATIEl.LJ
 
CfNTlRYILL! Cf,..T.JSSIMA
 
0	CHAS! URG
CHASEY ILL!
 
•A .I,
 

CHI CIC.AMAN
 
•c..
 
4
CARRIZO	A
CAqllOLLS	D
CARRY8ACK	C
CARS1TAS	A··
CA,RSITAS•   'lffT	!!I
CAqSQN	D
CAASTAlRS	A
 
CA TERI.
CATH CATHARPI,.. CATtd'I 'ATHCART CATMEO'IAL
CATH£1E"I
 
CENTRAL  P.iINT
c	CENTl<ALIA
c	C!NT!;ALPEAIC
·c	C!PBAT
C!RE!CO
0	CERINI
e	C!Rl."11  o      .t.LKALI
 
CHASICA
·CHASTA IN
c	CHATBUAN
Cl-tATCOL!T
c·hATfAU
CHATl'IELD
c	CHAf ..AM
 
B/D I
o.  I
o  . I
B       I
o	I
e	I
e
 
CHICKASAW
CHICKASHA
CHICKRl!;EIC	D
CHJCOLETE	c
CHICOT!
Cl-II EFL ANO
c
 
CAASTU P	C
 
CATl'll!:RINf
C.&tHlA"IE.T
 
c	C!PLIN
•	C!l<R ILL.OS
 
CHATSllORT!-1
CHATT
 
I CHtGLEY
o	I Ct-11K.AJ' I,..	c
c	I CH ILAO	c
c
 

CARTAGENA
c.u Tl!"CAY
CART!"S:-
 
c	CA THAO
c	CAT ILLA
0	CATI.A
 
A ...01   CERAC
•o  I crsTNllC.
ICETRACIC
 
c	CHATUGf
c	CMAUMONT
c•	CMAUNC!Y
 
o	I CHILCOTT
o	I CHILCOTT• G AVELLY 0
C ·  I CHILCOTT.  COOL	D
CHILDS	8
 
C.&RTE ET
 
0	CATLETT
 
c.rol
 
CH.Ii CHA
 
CMAUTAUDUA	c
 
CARTHAGE
CARUSO CAAUTHERSV ILLf" CA.11VER
CAAW I LE
C.lRYTO'lfN
C.&RYV ILLE
 
o	I CAlLIN
c	I CATMAN
o	I ·c.t.TNIP
A	I CATOCTIN
o	I CATOOSA
o	I CATPOl!llT
a	I CATTCREEK
 
e	I CHACON
o	I CH•D
o	I CHA.Fl'!.!
c	ClUGFIN
CHAIN
•	c ..A JR!.S Cl-IA IAl!S•
 
CMAV I!S
c	CHAM'ANAICl!I!
0	(MAYSON
'	CHAZOS
C	CH!AOL!
e...c,  CHfA..iA·
0	I CHl!l!O'YG.t.N
 
CHI-LG REN	C
c	CHl HO.,J!	C
c	CHILI	8
c	CHJLJCCTAL	B
'	0	CHILKOOT	0
D	CHILL	0
·C... ILLU"'
CMILJilARIC	c
 
CASA   GRAND!
 
c     I CATTCQEEK  o
 
4	OEPRE'JS l N•L
 
I CHECHf	0
e	0
 
CASABONNE
CASA GA CASCADE CA SCA.JO
CA.SCA JO•   COl!l8L Y
CASC:lL!-A
C:ASCO
CASE
 
e	I GPAYELLY
c	I SUl'tSTiO'ATU"'I
c	I CATTO
A	I CAUOLE
•	I ..:.&lJSfllA
•	·I CAUSEY
•	I CJ.VAL
o	I CAVANAUGh
 
CHAl:X
CtotALC'l
0	CtotliLl'"ONT
c	CMALICCAEEll:
CHliLMfl.lS
CHAlollio     MOO!AATl!LY SLOW   Ol!:l"f.
c	Cl-t.AMAo       11110:>ERAT!
 
I CHECIC!A
0	I CHl!CKETT
c	1  ·cHe-o•TN•
I ·c..!OEl'IAP
B/OI .CHl!OE KI
! I CHl!DS!"
I CHffft!
F	I         CHEl!ICTOWAGA
.
 
c	C..JLOQUJN
0	C..ILPEP	0
CM IL.SON·	0
CHILTON
CMl"'A'l'O	0
c	Ct-lf E.	c
D	CMJ,..ENE£	0
D	CH.Jf'lfNt!V	•
 
CASE"'.
 
0 .. 1
 
CAVE
 
0	P!AMEA81LITY
 
I CHE!S!MAN
 
•	CHJNAPOJNT	0
 
CASH!L
CASHIERS
 
c	I CAY!GULCH
e	I CAVEHtLL
 
C,_.AJoOAo C'JOL
c	CHAMAtE
 
c
e•·
 
I ..!HAL.EM
I   ... ...ALIS"
 
CHI NC AP	•
I
 
CASHrON
CASHMIE.Pe .
CASH"40NT
 
o	I CAVE LT
•	r CAYENOISH
e	I C AVO
 
'""'""'"EA
Cl'IAMtECJJ"f;J
c	(1-'A,.  l!DL.1.IN
 
I C HULPUN
·I CHELAN
I Cl"IELSE-"
 
I ,,..,,,.,.HALLO
CHINCOTEAGUE
I CHINEN
•	I CHINI ""
 
0
0
0
.c•
 
CASI TC	0
CASLO	0
CASLOo  OOERAT!LY	c
>ET
CAS"IOS	0
CASPAR
CAS"l. A A
 
.CAVOOE CAVOUR
'C".t."Y"AGUA
CAYTON CA".UGA CAYUSE
CAZADER'J
 
c	CH4  ..ISi;:
0	C ...Al'(;ICANI!
0	CHAfllPAGNE
c	CMAMPION
c	Cl-I.AN AC
Cl-l•NCt
Cl-1.t.NCELLOR C ...ANOLl!R
 
0	I C·l-'l!:JlllA-VA"
c	I CH!li
.,  CHF.NA
S      1 · Cl-ll!:NANGO
I CHE"f ULT
0    I CHENEGA
c   I Ctol!NEY
e   I tl-!l!NNEBY
 
e   I CHINO
0	I CHINO• CRAl,..EO
A	I -CHJNDOtr;
I CHJNYAA	c
I  .Cl-'I PENO AL	0
I CHIPEN""ILL	o.
I CHJPETA	0
c    I CHIFLf"Y	c
 
CASS
CASSIA
 
c	CAZA.DOR
 
CHA f'Y
 
c    I. C1-'l!:NOlifETH
I C1-'E AM
 
8  . I   CKIP"'ANo	0
I
C	1·
 
CASSI.Ao MODERATELY  8
Wf"LL   ORA l"IEO
 
CAZENOVIA
Cl';flDLIA
 
CloiANNAHON
c	C   ..ANNJNG
 
D
Et	I CH!QUt!ST
 
!·	SAt.INE•ALKALI
.CMIP..AN•	c
 
CASS 1!10
 
•	CEPOLLETI.
 
c	.CHANT.I.
 
l'  I C,..ERIONI
 
0	I  MODERATELY  wET
 
CA5SI ROo   STONY	C
CASSOLARY	C

CAS·TALIA	C
 
CEt!ONE CE!!IOYA

CEOA
 
c	CH.t.hTlEA CtotAPANOK!

CkA IN
 
0	I CHERC'IC I! C	I CHERRY

C	I CHfDRY•    COOL
 
0   I CHIPMANo  DRAINED	0
c	I CHJl:IOLA
c
•	I  CHJPPe-. ..	0
 
CA.STA IC	C
c·.1.s r.1 N•	.,
CAST!!: LL	C
CASTELLEIA	U
CASTELLO
 
CECIL

CEDAQ  eUTTE
CEO AR   MOUNT A IN
.C!OARAN C!DAR8LUl'I'
 
CHAPEqTON

CllAP)ofAN CMAi:'DT CHAP Pl!: LL
c	CHAPPUIS
 
C·  I CMEPAYo  CALCAREOUS  B
e	I CHEDRY   SPRING	c
a	J    CHERRYHILL	e
A	I CHERU ...
C	I. Cl"'ESAW	A
 
I    CHI PPEN'Y

I CHj"RENO	0
I CHIRJCAHUA	0
I CHIPl)( ..ATTER
I CHISCA	0
 
CASTEPHE"I	. C
CAST IL	S
CAST I NO	C
CASTINOo  NONSTONY	0
CASTLE	0
CASTLEVALE
CAS TNE	0
CASTO	C
 
CEOARC  ECr. CED"'RF ALLS CEDAQGAP C!CIAPH ILL CED..:RPASS CEOUNIA CEEIC
CELACY
 
c	C.t•AOU.li
C ..Ar>CC'
Ct-..&_PCDL
c.....c
CHACIOOTO"I
c...,1PE TT!
C..AA.Sci
c	c..ARlTON
 
8   .1  CHESMlri.E
c	I·,...CSHhlNA
e.  I c ...ESNIM"'IUS
! I Ct-IESTATE!!
C	I CHESTfJt
c	I.C1-'EST!ATJ)N
t"	I CHESTNUT
C	I     CHE510NIA
 
I C-HISl"ORE	0
c	I CHI SOL..,
ICt41SPA
I CHJSTC'Cl-llNA
f    CHI TINA	c
0	I HJTlU ..	0
I CHITWOOD	0
0	I CHIV.I.TO	c
 
CAS lON	l"
CASTRC	D
CASTllOVILLE
 
CELESTE
CELETOl\I CELINA
 
0	CHAt;LE OIS
0	C ..4ALl!801So    WET
c	CHARl!S
 
I c1-1esu...coo11:
c	I Cl-'ETCO
c	I    ,...E lEK
 
c	I CHl•"UKUM
I  CHlllA•-" •
•	l CHO
 
•.,.
 
CASUSE	0
CASVARE	0
CAS•ELL	e
CATALJNli·	a
 
CELID CELLAR
CELSOSPRINGS CEMBEA
 
c	C-HAAL!ST'l"I
0	CHAAll!'.VOIX
c	C,..APLOS
c	CHAALOS•       "<fET
 
c	I  ChET•YNO
e	I CHEVAL
·£         I      CHEVELON
0	I   CHEVIOT
 
I CHOATES	c
c	I CH08EE
c	1  c..oeee.	0
•	I tiEPAESSIONAl.
 
,.,OTES:	rwo  HYDROLOGIC  SOIL GROUPS  SUC'H  AS  S/C  INOICATES  ,...E  OAAINE'C'/UNORAJNEC'   ITUATION.
Jo!OOJFIERS   SHOWN.   E.G •• ae:oROC"   suBsT ATUll!o   l:lf·F'EQ   ro  " SPECIFIC  SOil  ,SEPf ·s  PHASE   FOUND   JN   sou.  MAP   LEGEND.


(210-VI-TR-55,  Second  Ed., June  1986) 	7
 




 
TABLE A-5 CONTINUED	Hydrologic soil groups for United States soils



suesTRATUN	I CLAN    GULCH	D	I CLIF-Pf P• DRAINED	c    I COICl!'R	D       I  SALi !
 



.,.
 
CHO!U!-1! •  LI MES TONI!    0    I CLALLAM	c   I CLIDPl!q	D	I COK!:L	• I COLV(N•  ove:PeLOllN•  c
CHOCCOLDCCO	• I Cl.AMO	Cl'OI   CLOOINf	D	I CCll(l SeUAV	D	I COLllOOD
 
CJ:tOCK	0    I CLAMP	D     I CLONTARI"'	•  I COKl!YILLE	8     I
C}!OCORUA	0    I Cl.ANA	A	I CL00UALLUN
 
COLY	•
COLYER
 
CHOICI!	0   I CLANALPINE
 
c   I
I COM AP	c
 
c  I CLOOUATO
 
I Ct'L8AA
 
COM AO
 
CHOOP"	0     I CLANTON	c    I CLOQUl!T	• I COLEU!;AT,	D
CHOPTtl!	D      I CLAPPER
 
CHORALMONT	• r CLARl!MORI!	0     I CLOTf10	C.10 I-   COLBY	8    I C0"'1!5
 
8
'
.,.
 
c    I CLAAl!NODN	c   ·1  CLOUD   Rl'4	•  I CCLOENf	c    I COMl!TA	0
CHOliAH	D      I CU.Al!SiJN	I CLDUDCADl"'T
 
CHOTl!AU

CHRIS
 
CONl"OPT	0
c   I CLAAl!YILLI!	c   I CLOUD LA Ni>	c	I COLf:MAN	c   I CO."'l'P!Y
 
0      I COL!,.ANTOWN	C.1'01  COJoll"'REY o
CHRISTIAN	c.   I CL.Al! ION	• I CLOYELLY	0    I COLESTINI!	c   I C01'11TAS	'c
CHRISTIANA	I	CD"'lol!RC!	c
 
I CLOVERDALE	0    I COLHILL
CHRISTINI!	D    I CLARK   !"OPIC	' I CLOVE'RL.A'ID	c   I COLl8PO	•
 
I COMMSICI	•
I CDfoOO
D
 
c   I CLARICRANGf'	c    I CLDW(PS
HROOEA	I CLARKSBURG	c   I CLCWE'ASe
 
I COLI TA	0     I COMO Ael
c   I COLLAfole'.R	c    I
 
COMOOORE	0
c   I CLARKSDALE'	c    I CLD"fl'JN	• I COLLARD	e•	COMORO
 
CJ.IRYSLl!R	c    I CL.APKsv It.LI!	• I CLUFI"'	·C   I COLLAYOMI
 
CO.MPA5S
 
•	I CLARNO    ,
•
 
•	I _CLUNIE:	c•  I CCLL8RAN	c	CO STOC"	c
 
C>tUALAR
CHU91!1S	c    I CLATO
 
•	CLUR DE:
 
I COLLBR "f"
 
coe!lt.y
c
 
co,.us	•
 
..	CL'l' 1EP 1
 
I Cl"l.LfGEDAL!
e	I COLLETT
 
CON it.BY
c
 
.,.
 
CHUC!r;AWALLA	•	CLAUNCH	•  I CL'(DI!:	...	l!.1'01   COLLl!GIAT!	D	CQN,1;
 
CHUCICL!S
 
CLAVl!RACK	c    I
 
CONALS
 
cH'UCICRIDGI!	D	CLAY I CO/ti!	c    I COACHE'LLA
CHOGCREl!IC	c	CLAWSON	c    I COACHl!'LL•e
 
I CDLL.!TTe DRAINED
c    I CDLLIER	A	CON4NT	c
 
CHUGTl!R	•	CLAYl!IUqN	•  I COAl:fUILA	•  I COLLINGTON	8	CONASAUGA	D
CDALBANIC	•  I COLLINSTCN	•	CD.Nl!IOY	D
cHuJ4AL.L	•	CLE  !.LUM	c   I COAl.DALI!'	D	I COLLJNSYILLI!	0	CONCfPCIDN
 
CHUMMY	D	CL AA   LA.ICE	0      I COALDAA.V	•  I COLLINWOOD	c
 
CONCHAS	c
c
 
CHUMS TICK	0	CLl!AA   LAKI!•	c    I COALMONT	c    I COLMA	•	. CC!'NCHO
 
CHUPA.Ol!AA	c	STRATlll'll!D	I COAMO	c	COLMOR
CHURCH	0	SU85 TRATUM	I COAR.SEGOL:>
 

CONCOPD	D
0
 
CHURCHILL	·D	CLEAR   LAI!:!•	c  .1 COATSBURG	•	COLO	B.l'O t CONOA
CHUACHYILL	0	MQO!RA Tl!L Y	0
CHUSICA	D	CLl!AAl'IELD	c    I CCBl!t	•	CDLOCICVH	•
 
CHUT!
 
CQNDCN	c
A	CL£AAP'ORIC	D     I CCBBSFQRI(	0	CDLO A	A•	CQNI!'	'
 
CI.i.L!S
 
0	CLI!' ARV' TE A	D     I COBl!:N	D•	COLOJolBO
 
c	CONl!.JO	c
 
CL;l!:AYAG!	D     I coee:v
CI!!IO	D	CLl! .AYEA	D      I coet.I!	0	CCLONI!
 

'	CONE.JD•
 

W!T GRAYl!LLY
 
Cfl!tDLA
er•
 
I CLEAVMOR	D     I cceoC:	c	CDLDNYILLE
I:   I CLl!BIT	0   I CCSAE
 
CON!.JDe
SU!STRAfU"4
 
CIDR'AL	c   I ct.EGG
 
•	I CCl!U.RG
 
c   I COLOROCIC	0	CONESTOGA
CONl!SUS
'
 
crE El!tA	c    I CLl!'GlofORN	c    I COCHl!TOPA	c   I COL DA OW
 
Cil!NO
 
·o   I CLl!MAN
 
•	I COCH INA
 
D    I COLD.SO
c
 
CONE TD(
.CONGAA!E	'
 
Ctl!:AYO•   ALKALI	D     I CL!Ml!NTINI!'	c	COCH I Tl
 
I COLOSSI!	A	c
 
CI!R'YO•   ALKALI•	D        I CLl!lill!NTINE•	•	CCCHPAN	c   1.   COLP	c
CIERYOe   A!CLAl14ED     c   I CL.EMS	•	COCODAll!	c   I COLSAYAGI!	c
 
CQNGl!R
CONGERe
 
C09!L Y	D
 
Ct.,.IC	c   I C_Ll'!MY(LLE	•	COCDLALLA	D	1. COL T!R	•	CO"GLt	•
.(J;MARRON	c    I CL!NO N!N	D	COCDLALLA•   ORAIN!:D	c
crNCo ·	A       I CL!ORA	•	CCDOAUS	c    I C<OLTRODP	0     I CONL!N	c
Ct1'41!1AA	•  I CL!:AG!"RN	•	CODYLAK!"	• I COLi.JJ111tlAe   MUCK	• I CONNl!'AUT
CINNADALI!	D      I CL!AMONT	D	cce	A	I SUBSTRATUM	I CONN!L	•
 

crNHAMON	' I CL!Y!LAND	c	CO!AC.CK	D     I
 
COLUMBIA.     DRAINED•      •
 
I CQNNe'.RTON	c•
 
CtNT!'0 A	D    I CLEVERLY	CO!SS!	C.1'01	CLAY  SUBSTRATUM	I CONOSTA
c
Cta Lfl!tACK	A	I CLll"'P'OQ'lllN	•	ceGGCN	• I COLllNl!tA,   ORAINf!:O     • I CONOWINGO
 
I CDLUMl!tlA• FLOOO!D   c  I CDNPE.i.K
C?ACL!YlLL!	c	CLll"l'OAO	c   I .COGSWl!'LL	c   I COLUMBIA•   CLAY	c   I CONRAD
 
.0 ,.
•
 
ca.:o
 
•	CLll"'S.t.NO
 
•	I COHAGEN	D• I  SUl!tSTRA TUM	•  I CQNRO!	c
 
•	• I
 
CDNSEJO
l!l.t'DI   COLUN81NI!'	A	I CONS!R
 
cr e;	D	CLil''T!ASON
 
I COfolASSET
COHOCTAH
 
I COLUMl!IIAe  SLOPING	I
 
CrsPUS
 
CLl,.TON
 
D    I COLU eus	c  I CONSfABL!
CJ: TI CO	•	.CLIMARA	D    I  SUBSTRATUM	I COLUSA	c  I CONSTANCIA
 
crTAONELL.E	D	CLJN.t.X	D     I COHOE	• I COLVARD
 
•	I CONSUMO	•
 
<:i.JtCJC AMAS	D	CLIM!!:	c   I COILS	c    I COL.VILLI!'.	D     I CONTACT	D'
CL.AIIl!tORNI!'	•	CLIN!TllP	D     I CCIT	D	I COLVILLE•
CL.A.IA!	A	CLINT	c   I COIC!OAL!	0      I COLVIN	Cl'DI   CONT ID!	•c
CL.•IR!MONT	•	CLINTON	•  I COICl!OALE o   oqAJN!D    c    I COLVIN•   SALIN!	C·     I CONT IN!
TWO  HYDROLOGIC  SOIL- GROUPS  SUCH  4$  Bl'C  INDJCAT!S  TH!"  OR•lNEQl'UNOA.AIN!O   SITUATION•
NOOll"'IEAS  SHOWN•  e:.G.o  8!DRDCIC  SU9STRATUM•  RE!"ER   ro  .. SP!Cl,.tC  SOIL  S!Ate:s  PHASE  "DUNC  IN  SOIL  NAP  LEGEND·


8	(210-VI-TR-55, Second Ed., June 1986)
 


TABLE A-5 CONTINUED	Hydrologic soil groups for United States s.oils

.,
CONTJNe:NTAL                   c   I CDllRALITOSt   SILTY     • I cove: As                           •  I l:Rl!:VA                                     D           CUl!CRfll!:IC                          e
CONTRA COSTA       c    I CORAl!CO                                 c    I COWETA                                  c    I CAEYISCREEIC                        c       CUCA_,UNGO          D
CONVe:NT                                  c   I c'ORsON                              c   I COWHOAN           •  I CAIOll!:R                                   •   CUCHO              c
CR I NICER                            c        CUDAHY• ORA INEO             c COOK I>OAT                           c    I COftTl!:Z                            D    ·I COWLITZ                            ' I CPIPP IN                            '  CUDD[B.&.CI(            c COOLBRITH
COOL VILLI!:                        c   I  SURl"AC!:'                                 I COWTON.                              c   I CAISTCi.  LOAMY                            CUl!;QojQ                               c
CODPl!A                                  • . I CORWITH                                • I CQ)IY ILLI!                             D          CRITTl!:NDl!N                         •   CUl!:VJTAS                             D
CODTl!A                             c   I CORYDON                           D    1· COY                                    D         CADCKl!A                            '  CUL!l!ATSDN                     •
CDPAL JS                             c   I COS!'A                                   D    I COYATA                                 c       CPDl!SUS                               c       CllLLl!N                                c
COPAS TON                             D     I CDSH.                                     c    I CDYLf'                                     •   CROGHAN                                 •   CULP                                        c
OE'PRl!SSIONAL                            COSTILLA.                             •  I COZAD                            •    CJIONKMITI!:                            c        CULVJNG                             c c0P!!NHAGl!N                         D          CDTACO                             c       coziuA                             D          CRDOIC!D  .                              D            CUlllBAl!S                              c COPPl!R   Rl'f'l!A                    D           COTANT                                     D           CAACX.l!RCA!:!.X                    •   CROOKED   CRE!'J:: •           c        CUMMINGS                               D
c	CRADDOCK	CRDOKl!D   CR!l!IC •	c    I CUNARD'	•
SUl!ISTRATUM                                   CDTH A                                      c       CAADL·l!l!IAUGH                      D          . f'LQDOl!:D                                        I CUHD'I CK                                 D
CDPPE'A  'AIV!R•· TILL  a        C0J'ITD                                          c'RAOLEl!IAU.;H •                            CPOOKSTDN                                 ·'·
CDPPl!A   AIVl!R•                 •   COTOPAXI                                •   CRAOLl!l!IAUGi:t•                    c       CROPLEY                                   D      I CUPCO                                        c
 
SILTY  SUl!ISTRATU"'	COTT	•	MAIN!D	CROPPER	D
COPP!R  RJV!ll •
 
.1	,· CUPOLA	•
..
 
CAAi" TON	c	CRDSl!IY	c    I CUPPLES	c
SUl!IST.R TUM                                  COTTLE                                   D           CAAGGEY'                                D          CAOSrEA                             ·.c. I ·cuPP't                                  D
c   I CUR ANT
CDPPERTON                           • I C:OTTDN1f00D                         c       CRAGDS!'N                              0         CR0SSTl!LL                           D     I CUllDLl                                   c
CDPSl!Y                               D     I COTULLA                             D         CRAiGMILIE                        1!1;"01  CROSWELL                           • I CURHOLLOll'.                       D
COOUILL!                             D     I COUGAAl!IA'f                               D     I CRAMER                                 D     I CROTON                                 a    I CURRAN                                ·C CORA                                            D     J  COUGH A HOUR                           c   I CR.&MONT                                              I CAOUC':"                                                                                     ' CDRALLAltE                        • I CDULSTO                     • I CPAHECRE!.lt                        c    I CROV   CREEK                        • I CURTIN                        D COR9Jt.T                                 •  I Cou't.TERVILLE                    D           CRANNLIER                                  •  I CAO WC A.MP                                  D     I CURTIS   SJOJNG                •
I CUSHl!:Nl!IUAY	•
•	I CPOll' l!'ART
 
CORDELL	D   I COUNIAYMAN
CORDES	I COUNTS	D	CRAT!P  LAIC;I!
 
•	I CPOWL!Y.	D    I CUSHMAN	c
 
CDADESTDN	•  I COUP!!	•	CA.&Tl!RMO	c	I CROVNCST	D•  I CUSHODL	c
 
.. CORDOVA	c;-01  COUPl!YJLL!	•c	CAAY!N
 
c	I CROW SHAW
 
I CUSICK	D

D
 
COADY
 
I COURT	CRAll'l'OPD
e;-01  COUATHOUS!	D·	CAAlifLEYV ILL
 
D    I CPOWTHl!!:R
I CROYDON
 
CUSTCD
I CUSTER
 
c
CORKS TON!	D     I CDURTNl!Y	D	CRl!ASIEY	.CJ'O I CRUCES	D     I ·cuTAWA'r	•
I CRUCKTDN
CORL!TT	'.,.,,I COURVILLE	•	CR!!D	c	CAUICKSHANlt	c    I CUTlil!llERT	c
 

CORL! T
 
COUS!	c	CAEl!:O,.OOR	c	CRU.ISER	• I CUTlil!IERT.  GRADED	D
 
CORMANT	.,, CDUSHAT.TA	•	cAl!l!:L	c	CRUMAPIN!	•  I CUTOf'f'	c

CORN I CIC	D	COY!LANO•   ORA I NED      c	CRELOON	c	· CRU"IKER	•	I CU TON	•
CREN
CORN JSH	c.	COV!RT	'	CR!OL:.E	D	CRUST	D     I CYCLONE	'"
CR!SBAAO	c	CRUTCHER	c   I CTMlllC	D
CRtSCO	c	CRUZ!	c	I CYNTH JAN.&	0
D.	CRESlt!N	CRYLUHA	c	I CYNTHIAN I A	D.
CORONAC.l	•	R	D
 

COJIOZAL	c
COROZO	'
 
D	I CYRIL	•
 
CORPENING	D	COjjQl!N	D	"CR!S T,.AN	D
 
•	I DABNEY	'
 
CORRAL.	c	COWOAl!Y	c	CRl!STYALI!	c	CUAT!	c	I OA909	c
CORRALITOS	•	-COW!EMAN	D	CPl!:T!	c	CUBA
NOTl!S:	TWO    HYOROLOGJC    SOIL   GROUPS    SUCH   AS   e;-c    I NO.JCA T!S   TH!   ORAINEO;'UNORAJN!D'SITUATJON.
,.OOJf'l!RS  SHOjjN•  !.G.• 91!0ROCk   SU9STRATU o   R!l"'!A  TO  4  SPl!CJl"IC  SOIL  .SERll!S  PHASI!  f'OUNO

(210-VI-TR-55,  Second  Ed., June  1986) 	 9
 




TABLE A·5 CONTINUED   Hydrologic soil groups for United States soils


DA.COHO	•  I O.IALANO	•	Dl!CK!'RY I LL!!:•	c     I Ol!LLO•   CLAY	•  I OESCHl!LL	•
 

SUBSTRATUM'
 
•	I DARLING	•	Ol!CLO	..  I DEL.LAD Sf	•   I O!'SCDT	•
 
DACONO•   C088LY	c   I OARLf:Y	c	ORA INl!D	I  SUBSTRATUM	, I O!'SC/-IUTES	c
 
OACQAE
 
IDARMSTADT	D	Ol!CDLNl!Y
 
•	I Dl!LLS	c   I Dl!SEl!D	c
 
DACOSTA	D     I OAANl!.LL	c	Of!'CDADOYA	•  I DELLWOOD	' I OfSEJ'.IET	c
 
OAOI!	' I OAANl!N
 
•	O.!!:CRAM	c	I DELMA
 
c    I D!SHA	D
 
DAD JN                      D      I OARCW                            c       D!'CAOS                            •  I Dl!LMITA                             c    I DESHLER                             c OAGl"'LAT	C.    I QARRl!!:T                             c       OEDA!                             •  • O!LNORTI!                             c    I D!SMl!T                              • OAGOA	•  I O AROC"ia   f;;l!DPDCll:        c      O DAICK              •    Dt:LOSS                       81'01  O!SPAIN                       • OAGUl!Y	c    I DARROUZETT                       c       O!'l!CPl!I!                        •    Dl!LPHI                        •  I Ol!ST!R                        c oAHLOUrST	•  I DARST                             c       Ol!l!Hl!R                             •    Dl!LPil!OAA             •  I DETOUR             • OAICiLI!:	c    I OA'lTMOUTH                              •    Dl!'!PIEl!K                                    •    Dl!:LPOINT                                 C'  I DETR'OIT                                   c
SU8STQATUH                            I DAS he'll                                D        lle'Ell   PAA!(                         '  DEPR'l!5510NAl                       I DEYAOA                                •
 
OAINT	• I DASSEL
 
l'El!:lll"'Ie'LD	•	O!lRIDCil!:	•  I DE VEN	•
 
OAll::!NT	•  I OAST	•	Of;ER'P"ORD	•	Dl!:LSON	c   I DEVILS	0
 
OAJ::OTA	.•. I OATl!LAND
 

OEl!PHOAN	c	DELTAJD	c   I OEVILSCAl!:EI(	c
c	D!'EALOOGI!	c	O!'L TON	I Ol!:VtLSGAIT
 
OAL80
 
I OAT!MAN
 
I DATIL	D!!R'TON	Ol!:LWIN	' I OEVILSGAIT•
c   I DA TINO	0	Dl!:EllTAAIL	c	Ol!'L_YNDIA	' I OR'AINEOo
 
DAL CAN
OALCO
 
•	I OATINO•   STONY	•	Oe:EPWOOD	l•!/DI   Ol!:M.alJ	D    I OCCASJOHALLY
 
DALE
 
I DATWYLER	c	DEl!'TZ
 
I Ol!'MAST
 
I ·Qf;VILSGAIT•	•
 
DAL!!:CRl!f:IC	c    I OAULTO"I	c	Ol!'rl!:k AU'iM	• I Ol!'Ml!ttT	• I ORAINl!:D
 
OALEYILLI!:
 
•	I DAVl!'V
 
•	Ol!:l"'IAN(I!	D    I DEMING
 
•	I DEVINE	c
 
DALHART	• I OAVl!Y·•   WARM	'	OEl"Ll!:P	• I DEMICY	D     I Ol!V ISAOEllO	c
OALJG	•  I DAYIOSON	•	OEGAl:?MO	D	Ol!lifOGUL	•  I DEVOl.GNl!S	•
DALLA/of	•  I OAYJSON	•	01!'. 0L	•	Dl!JlllONTAl!VILLI!	• I DEVOJGNl!:So	c
!)ALLE SPOA T	• I DAWl!S	c	DeGR!Y	0	Ol!MOPOLJS1   CD98LY      0     I O!:VOL	•
DA.LUPE	•  I DA.111SDN	A.ID I   C.l!JofAfiT	•	Ol!MOX	•.,.I DEVOY·	c
 
...
 


Dl!:WEYV J LLE	•
 
DAL,Z!LL	c   I DA111TDNIA	• I 01!..AVl!N	•	DEffPSl!Y	• I O!" AIES	c
 
OAAl!PON	• I
 
D     I 01!' ..L JfrilGl!Q'	•	Ol!NAUO	•
 
OA.fl4Elf000	c  I· OAYIS'!LL
 
OEolAANET
 
0-t:NAY
c
 
<	:Ol!;WMINI!	•
 
DAMLU rs
 
c   I DAY
 
SCHOOL
 
I OIUC.t.Le
D    I DE!COOi-.
 
01!"9.t.A
I DENllY
 
DEWYILLI!
 
OA..,Oh	0
DANA
 
I OAYID!ll
I DAYTONA
 
•	I Q'l(QYl!"I	0
 
I Ol!NCO
 
CEXT!R .
c
 
;)ANAHEA
 
c  I OAVYILLI!:
 
c   I Cl!"L   Al!"Y	c• I CIENHA1'1KEN
 
DI'
c
 
OANAVOQ!.	•
 
I OA.Zi?
 
·1  Ol!LA
 
OE"flSDN
 
DIA•   WET•
c	I A•
 
SALl E
 
B/D I    DI!:   MASTERS
 
I DELAMl!"TEA
 
I DENMAN
 
WET
 
CANCY
DANO AN	c    I Ol!ACON	I DELANCO	I D!NNAAIC
 
DIAllLO	0
 
OANOAJDG!	.o   I D!AOHOASE	c   I Dl!LANl!Y	' I O!'NNDT	•	DIAMANTE	•
OJANONO SPQINGS c DANIA                               e/DI O!ADYON                               • I DELCO"'                               •  I Ol!NTON                               •   OJAMONDYILLE                  c OA"fKO                                              0    I Ol!:AH                                                •  I 0£L!CO                                  0   I Ol!'NVl!R                                   c      OJ ANOL.i.                                      •
OAN...fMOAA	0   I Ol!AA'l"TON	c   I OE.Ll!PLAIN	0    I Dl!'PO!	• I DIAZ	c
OAN'ilC IN	I O!ATMAN	I D;l!'L! TT!
c	I Dl!.PPY	I Oll!IOLL
DA'lf'IERS	c   J  oe:a11a	c    I Ol"Ll"T	.,,Col  Ol!'PU1Y	c   I OICIC	'
 
:>ANYILLE.	c   I ol!et:NG!R	c  I Ol!LGAOO
 
•	I D!RA
 
•	I DICKERSON	•
 
OAPHNE"OALE	c   I DfBEOUE	•  I C!LHI	•  I Cl!AALLO	•  I 01i::1Cr:v	•
OARllONNE	• I Ol!BORAl"I	• I DELKS	c.101  O!A8Y	•  I OJCIC INSON•    TILL
DARCO	• I DEBUT!	c   I D!LL!K!:R	•  I O!AINOA	c  I DICKINSON•  NAAT>SO  •
OAAD!N	•  I OECANT!L	•  I D.ELLt'•   SAL·IN!	c    I D!AOUX	...	c   I DICK'NAN	•
0
I Ol!CATMON	c     I O!LLC•   GAAVELL'f'	c     I DEA.A	c    I OJ CIC SON	c
DJOOY
 
OAROOOW
OAR'!	0
 
I O!CATUR
 
•	I SU!STA4TUN•  W!T
 
I D.ER'R ICJ:;	•	c
 
O.tiAFUR	B.tOI
 
D!CCA	• I DELL Do	' I 01!"5   MOIN!S •
 
I DIEHLSTADT	•
 
OAAGOL	D     I DECCA•   NONG AY!LLY   c   I  SAi. IN!•ALl(AL J	I 01!5  !O'OJN!"s.  coeeLY c   I OJEASSEN
OAAll!N	c'  I DECHEL	D    I O!LLD•  ..-oo!;RAT!LY    c   I _Ol!SAN	'
 
OARKeULL	• I DEC ICE A	c    I  wl!'t	I OESAAT
 
c   I DIGBY	'
 
OAAICCANYON	c	I DEC:KERV ILL	• I CELLO•  DRAIN!D	' I Cl!"'SA.ICYA	c    I CllGCiER	c
OT!S:	rvo WYOROLOGIC  SOIL GROUPS  SUCH  AS  .,,c: INOICATl!"S  T I!:  ORAINED/UNQAAINl!'D  SITUATION.
MOOl,IEAS  S OWNo   f .Ci ••  '!EOR_OCI(   SUl!9SlRATU"'•  QEFl!:A   TO   A   SPl!"Cl,.IC  SOIL  SE ll!'S  PHA.S  FOUND   IN  SOIL  NAP   LEGEND.

10	(210-VI-TR-55, Second Ed., June 1986)
 
.I,

'l
l,
·- ·


TABLE A-5 CONTINUED	Hydrologic soil groups for United Sti,ites soils
.,
OJGlORGIO	• I DOLAND .	•  I DOUGAN	c	I DUCHe'SNf.:	•  I DURfl'!IE	c
DILAN SON	D     I DOl..191!!	c    IOOUGCITV	• I OUCICH1LL	D     I
DILLARD	c   I SUllSTA.lT':JM	I DOUGH	D	I CUCICSTON	Al'OI   DUROC	•
'	DILL!Y	•  I 001.:!K! I	•  I OOUGH!'RTY	A	I ouco	D     I DUAASTEIN
D
•	•	CUOGl!:N	D      I DUSLEA	<
 
I	I OOUGl1T Y
 
I DUDA
 
A	I DURST
 
· 0 ILL'l'YN
 
A	DOL!H
 
•	I OU<iTON	A
 
OILMAN	c    I DOL!S	c    I DOUGLAS
 
I
CUCL!Y
 
.. I DUTTON	c
 
Oil.TON	D
 
I DOLL AA	c
 
I CDUGYILL!:	I
 
D
A	I OUT(H!!:SS
 
DILTS	D     I OOt..L.AAO	c
 
I DOUHID!	D
 
I DUl!L
 
c   I OOt.t.AAH_JCf.:	D .I,·. 001./RO
 
•	I D.U.l!:Lflt	A
 
I OUTl!IC	A
 
DIMAL"
OIMl!'!IOX	D    I OOL.LY LAAK
 
DOVl!'f'
 
•	I DUl!TT!:
 
.• I DUVAL
 
DU041CIC
 
D   -1  DOLMAN
 
c   I ODYll'AY
 
C/D    Duirir
•
 
•	ouxeUAY
 
I DOLPH	c   I oov
c	I oa..us	c   I DC''l'AGIAC
 
OUFl"'AU
OIJll'l"'f.:A
 
I	A
c   I CUZ!L	c
 
DINA	c    I DOM!	• I DD,,DI!	•	Ot.•l"'l"'!JtN	•.. I DWIGHT	•
 
DINCO	•	00"'!LL	• I OD'l'!LL TON	D	OUl"I" I !L .
 
I OWORSHAIC
 
DIN!!:S	•	ODM!HGINI::	c    I DOWN.t.TA	D	ourl'SON	•  I
 
Oll'YtR
 
DINl!'YD	•	OOM!RII!	• ·I OOltNl!:R	•	DUl"_l"Y"'ONT	c     I  DT!
 
DINGLI!	c	DOM!Z
 
•	I oo ,..r.:Y
 
•	"OUl'"O T	•  I OYlt!	•
 
c   I ODll'N!YVtLL:f	D	D\ll'UA	• I DYLAN	D
.DINGMAN	c	DOl41NIC	• I OD"N!'
 
OUfGL ISHNlt	D	0_014 INGUEZ
DUGOUT	D
DINICELS	•	DOMl"fSDN	A• .1 OO.Y.C.E•   L!)AlfllY	c	t'UGll'AY	c
 
D
fACHUS
EACHUS TON	D

EAGAR
 
0-INNl!N
DINSOALI!
 
DONO
.OCiNA    AN"A
 
•	I DOYCI!•    WDOl!AATt!'L Y      c
 
DULAC
 
c    I	•
I !AGLl!CDH!"
 
c
DONALD	c   I OOYCEo   SANDY
 
I DULCE
 
. OIHUl!IA	<	DONAHUE	I	c	c
 
DINWODOY
 
I
I	I!AGL!:AOCIC
 
OINZl!.P
 
DONALDSON	• I SUISSTl:IA TUN
 
Duf...·EYLAIC!
DULLES	·o
 
!.&.GLl!PASS

D
 
DIO!ISUO	c	DONAVAN	• I OO'tLl!:STQWN	D	I DULUTH	•  I !AGl.EYILLI!
..
OIOUi!:	•	DOH JC.A•   LOAMY	• I DRAGOON	c    I eu..DNT	•  .I  E.&PA	•
 
DIAl!GO	0	SUR,.AC!	I CU:t.t.GSTON	c	I DUH   GLEN	• I
 
!AA-C'RI!!
0
 
•	•	•  r
 
o•·
 
I,. EARLMDNT	D
 
.DISAl!!l!L
 
DONIPHAN
 
I ORAKI!
ORAKNAl!t
 
DUN9.&P
I OUNSARTON
 
l!APLI!:
•	I !"ARLMONTo  DRAINED   c
 
OISAUtl!L
 
OONK!HILL	D	•
 
DISCO	•	DONLON TON	c	DAALL
 
I OUNl!!IRIDG!	•
 
Dfi.&Nl'DN	I DUNC	c	I !ARP
DISHPAN	c	DONNAN	c	OP.AP!A	c    I DUNCAN	D     I !"AASM'.&N
DJSTl!LL	c	DOHNAROO	OR.AX	I	c
 
01ST!RH!I'",.
 
EASBY	o·
•
 
c	DONN!L.	•	DAAXo   •!T	c	I OUNCKL!Y.
 
I l!"ASL!Y
 
DIS TON	.C	OONNl!:LLY	A	DREISG!	•  I "DUNCOM	D      I l!"ASPUR	•
,.	. I
 
OISWOOD	D	D.0NNER	c	DAl!SDl!N	•	I DUNDAS	0/0 I EAST
..
 
FORK	c
A
 
DI TCHCAlilP	c	DONNI HG	D	DA!"SSL!R	c
DITHOO	c	DONN'+'8AOOK	D	OPl"WJNG
 
DUNDAY	A
1.	DuNDf!
 
EA!T  LAK!
 
DI THEY	c	OODDLELINK	•	DRl!:ll'S
 
I OUNEL.L!""I	•  I IEASTC.t.N	•
 
OJVIO!'	•	DOOLIN	D	DAll'"TWOOD	C.1"01    DUNG!"N!SS	•  I EASTGATE	•
DIX	A	ODOR	•	DRISCOLL	c	I DUNLAP·	c    I
!"ASTON	D
DJX.&LET.&	D	DDDWAK	•	DDIT	•	I DUN,LATOP	•   I EASTPORT
 
DIXBORO
 
A
.,o ORtV!R	c	I OUN'40RE	I l!ASTWELL	D
c	I DUNN	A	I !ASTWOOD	D
 
01 X( I!	c	DORAN	.C	OROl!M
DIXMONT
c	DCM I!: ATON	•	DRUMMER·	.,...0      OUNNVILL!	I  l!AUGALLIE•
D
c	DORMONT	c	OAUlilHOND	D	OUNOIR	•  I  OEPAl!'SSIDNAL
 
•	DORN.&
 
•	DUNPHY	c    I EAUPL!IN!
 
OIYOU OQAIC
OOAKUM
 
DRURY·
O   DSHJN	D	.DAY  CA!EK
c	LAKE
 

c	DUNPHY•
c	OUNPHYo
 

ORA iN!O  . HARDPAN
 
c'
•	I E!AL	•
 
c	DORO'VAN	D	OAYADINE	·c	SUBSTRATUM	I 1!89EAT	UD
 
008155
 

DC!APEA	D	DAYBUAG
 
•	DUNSMUIR
 
c• I
 
EBl!IS	•
 
OD!ll!"L	0
 
•	DU SMUIR•
 
I E!!JC	0
 
OOBENT	c	OO'lRANCE	OAYDEH
•	D-AYVALLEY	c	DUNTON	c	-; E!IOOA o    STONY	c
 
DOBY COCAS
 
D	QOASET
OOSAl'tlGOS	D	OU  PAGI!
QOSPAl.05	D	QUAN!'
 
OUNut. DUP!E
 
•	!"BON	c
•
 
OQCD E	D
c	DOSS	QUART
 
c	DUPLIN
 
c	fCCLl!:S·
 
DOC!NA
·ooi::J::I! AV	c
 
DOSSMAN	•	OlJBAKELLA
 
c	DUPO
 
c	l!CHAAD	D
 
OOCPAA	OOTl!N	D	OU9AICl!LL4o	c	OUPO T	D	!CHAW	A
OOCT	c	DOTHAN	•	GPA'VEl,.LY	ouPREE	D
•	OOTLAICI!:	D	.CU19AICELLA•    COB8L 'r      c	OUR&OOS	A	l!CICtPT	D•
 
OODE"S
ODO GE
OOOGl!VILLE
 
DDT SERO ODTTA
 
Out!IAY OUBl9S
 
OUR.t.LOE DURAND
 
c	ECll:LEY
l!CKMAN
 
o•·
 
DODSON	c	OOTY
 
OUBl!IS•   FLOODED  ·	c	DURANGO
 
ECKRANT
 
OOEL.	c	OOUC!.TTE	•	DU!IJNA	c	OUAANT	D	ECKVOLL.	•
COGER	A	OOUDLE	•	OUBLDN	'	PURAZO	'	ECL  IPS!
OOGUE	c	DOUGAL	D	DUl!UOUE	•	OURELLE	•	!CON	•
T I! ORAJNEO UNOR.t.INEO  SITUATION .. ·
MODIFil!:RS   SHOWNo  E.G .. o   BEDAOCIC   SUl!!ISTRA TUM o   REFEPf   TO  A.  SPECIFIC SOIL SERll!S PHAS!  FOUND   IH   SOTL  ••• t;.l!GENO •
(210-VI-TR-55, Second Ed., June 1986) 	11
 




TABLE A-5 CONTINUED	Hydrologic soil groups for United States soils

ECONFINA	'	l!:L80WL41(!	• I ELRICK	•  I l!NOCl-lVtLL!: o	c    I
!STEA	0
ectoR	0	l!L8URN	•  I ELRI,_.	•  I  OPA1NEO	I ESTER•   THAWED	c
 

ED.llLGO	c
 
ELSUTTE	c   I l!'LPOS!'	• I fhOLA	•  I
 
ES TERO	O•
 

EDDINGS
 

ELCO
 
•	I ELS	• I ENON
•
 
I l!:STES	0
c
 
eoos	•
 
'LO
 
I ELSAH
I ELSIE
 
I fNOREE'
Ef'IOS
 
0   I !STESLAICf
' I f"STf'l!RV [LL!!:	•
 
EDDY	c	l!:LDl!A't
eoe:N	c	ELD!R
 
•	I!LStN80AO
 
·	1     ENOS8URG
 
c   I ESTO
ESTAEL'LA
'
 
EDl!r.teowe:R	0	ELOl!R  HOLLO\f	0    I !LS,.ERE	' I !NSENAOA'
 
1!!:DENTON	c	·EL<JEROH	• I
 
I
I !NSLEY	Bl'DI ETC::Hl!N
 
0
eol"qo
 
0	f.LOl!:RON•  STONY
 
!LSTON
I ELTRE!!
 
I ENSJGN
 
ETA CH
c
•	I ETl!Ll(A	c
 
EDGAR	•
 
!LOGIN	" I l!L TSAC
 
0     I !hSTPOM	•	•
 
!!:OGE	0	'.!LOON	• I El.VI!	•  I !NTl!NTI!
 
I ETHAN
•
 
•	ELYEPS	!.ID I ENT!"PRISE	' I ETHl!L AN
 
EOGl!HlLL
EOGl!L!Y
 
.c,
 
!LOORAOO
ELDRIDGI!
 
I ELVEDERE	c   I
I
 
E,..T!!l;!:O
 
ETHANfA
0	"ETH!TI!:	'
 
e.101  fNTIAT
l!OG1!:1;1ATEA	c	l!U"ROV	•  I l!'LWft.L	' I l!NTMOOT.	c	l!THET!o
e:OG!'lf  lCIC
 
SALlf.IE	c
c
 
ETHAIOG!
e:OGT ....GTON	C'/DI   !V'CRl!fl(	c   I l!L"OQO	c	I l!NVOL	0	l!TIL	•'
 
EDINA	0     I !LFAJOA.	• I ecv	' I !HZ JAN	0
 
ETDE
 
l!LYSIAN	I ·e:oJ	c	ETOIL!	0
c   I ELZINGA	' I !OLA	0	ETbtl'AH	a
 
e:orsTo	c  I l!LHINA
EDLIN'	' I ELIJAH	c  I l!)'BAL
 
•	I EPHRAflil
 
c	E:TOWN
l!TSEL	0
 

ll!OLOI!
 
•	I ELJNOJO	c   I !lilr'AAGO	c	I !PIKO""	0	ETTA	a
 
!DMl.NSTl!R	0     I ELJOAK	c   I .!,..edl!t4	•
EDMONDS	0    I !LIZA	D      I	•
f  !LIC  r.fQUNTA IN	•  I e,.·euoo	'	fPOUFE'TTE	A/DI  e:ueANICS	•
 
EDMOR'I!'	0
 
I fLK	• I f"'eL!M !	• I E'POl(I!	•
 
fTT!RS URG'
l!:TTPJCIC	0/0
 
l!OMUNO
!OMUNOSTQN
 
I l!'LK  HOLLO
 
•	I ldl!IP'I'
 
•	EPOT
c
 
EDN.t.	0    I ELKA	c   I l!'""O'!NT	0	!PP ING	0     I EUCLID
l!ONE'YTClilN	• I ELKAO!q	I !MDl!l'!T•     :Je:oqocii::
EDOM	c   I !LICl-IART	• I DFl'AIN!l'	!CUIS	• I
 
EQR'OY
 
c  .,
 
•	I E"'EPAt.O
 
•	l!PAKATAK
 
!'UFAULA	•
I C:ULONlA	c
 
0 . I ELICHILLS
 
I !"'O!NTo  O AINEO	c	l!:AA·
 
c ·I
 
euHARLI'!!
 
EDSON
!'OWAAOS
 
'eue:HOAN
!'LICIN$	D I EMl!PALDA
 
•	ER ...	c    I EUNOLA	•
 
•	EL-KIN VILL!	•
 
0    I !U l!lr:A
EIUll!i;	c    I EUS!IO
 
E!L
 
I!J.l!qSON
 
!RAMOSH
c
 
!.l!LCOV!	0	'!.t.l(MOUND ·	0    I !)'JGAANT
•••	c	fLICDL	0    I l"!ILY	•  I EPO	0     I eur.a ..	0
 

El"'I' II!.	c	!.LICllJDG!'
 
•	I !Mt.I,.	c   I !RICSON	•c	!VA0At.t	•
 
!Fl"'.INGTON	0	l!Ll(.Sl!L	c   I IEfolMA	c   1 !'f:°l!' EGA ...	c,.	ELKTON	C#"D I· !'Mfill!RT		I
EGAS	•	!'LLEDGI!	c   I "'NCNS	• I ERNEST	c
 

!;VANS
EVA"ISHA,.	0
EVANSTON
8/0
 
•	EVANSVILLE
.E	GSl!RT •  STPATIFte'D  c	!.Lt.ETT	0     I !lolC:T	• I EAAAMOUSPI!:	c
EVANT	0
•	•	'	E'V.&RO
 
sues1AATUlt!.	ELLIBI?
 
I Elol CAAO'l
 
I EPYID	'
 
EVA RO
I ESCALANTE	6	l!'YA.li'T	0
 
EGSl!RT,
 
wOD! ATELY    c	t.Lt.ICDTT
 
I !f<llf.'l!YV-JLL
 
!5CA80SA.
I !SCAM! IA	c	EVENDALE	c
 
•H	CLLINGTCN
ELLJNOA
 
I !,.. IP!
c   I Eto!J"DN:A	c
 
E:iBl!PTo   OAAIN!O
!G81!:A.T•   SANDY
suesTRATUlof
 
c	CLLIOTT
ELLIOTTSVILLE
 
c   I l! AICK
I f,..Fl'O
 
I !.SCANAE'4
c    I !SCA NO	c
 
EVf'AETTo     .lll'O	•
 
·I !SCAALO	SU!StAA.TUM
S:GELAt<iO	•	!LL I Si':OFIOt	• I !N8AAo  Wl!'T	·e   I I!SCOND IOO	c	EV!SJGLA0£:i
 

0/0
 
!Gl,..9E"fCH	c	tLLISVlLL!	•  I f)<ICA_fllP !"ff	•  I 1!!=,.,U•Y	•	fVEALY	•
!GLI"'
1  E'VER A"'	c
I
 
EGYDT	0	ELL(IREI!'	0     I e,,.ctEPi.o	0
 
ES.,EPALOA
 
I EY!RSOh	0
EVl!RlfHITE	c
 
EiC<!	c	. ELLSWORTH	c   I l!f'!'ClNA ..	• I ESHOP,.D	•p      I
!IGHTf'ILE.	D	l!LLZl!:Y'	!/OI  ENOEFl'S	c	I tSPELlf	8/01  .FV.R.tOGE	'
 
E JGHTLa,;	•	ELL UM	c   I l!'tfC'CAV	c	I esPAATO
E?L ATSEN	•	ELM  LA<'!	A/DI   ENO!R!BY'	' I ESPtL	<
 
I EVES801i0	'
6
 
EITZ!IY	•.
EICAM
 
ELMO AL!'
 
I EIYCICOJt	c  I l!Si;otNAL
If'SPINOSA
 
Elf••   ee:DAOC'IC	c
SUBSTRATUiil
 
EICALAKA	•
 
!LMENOOAI"'	0     I !"'DLICrf
!L."' fNA	c   I P'NOSAlf
 
c	I ESP INT
 
0	f'lfALL
 
1!1Cl1"11	c	!LMl°'.t.	' I e:,_eqGY'	•
 
I ESPLIN	0	EXCELS IOA
 
0	!LMOJ\fT	•	!,.Et	•  I ESP'I'	c	EXC'HEOU!A	0
 
FL  OAAA	•	.fL..OR!	•	l!N,.It'LO	• I !..SQUATZ L
 
f'XCLQSF.	•

•	SOLUM
 
EL  PECO	c	tt. PIDG!	c	ENG!L'"IARO	6/01  ...,
 
0	EXEL
 
'
o   THlCir;	'
 
EL  QAN(HO	•	ELMVILl.E	a	!:NGl!!'TT	' I ESFIO•   HOOERATEL'I'	c	EXl!f!P	'
EL  SOLYD	c	!LfltlfOOO	c	fNGLE	' I
SUBSTRATUM	ELOCHO ..AN	•	E:NKD•  .JV'!i:JJLCWN	•  I esse:N	c	EXIRA	•
L!9A	c	l!LOll(A	•	e: NING	c   I l!SS.!XVU..LE	A.IOI EXRA'r
 
fLBAV ILLE
 
•	!LO,..t.	c	Er1NIS
 
0
fSTA(AOO	I l!XUJA	c
e:y.tl(	c
 
ELBERT	0	ELOAl4	0	fNCC'H
ELBE TH	ELP!OQO	EHOC' ..VILL!'1:
 
c . I ESTAC?ON
I ESTATE
 
I
c   I fVE!iflOll	c
 
ELSON	•	ELA ED	B/01	I EST!LL IN!	I E!YLAU.	c
INOICATe:S T ! oq.tJNl!O/UNO AIHEO SJTUATION.
MOOI,Il!:AS   SMOWN   E.G.o   BE!DROCI(   sue STRATUM.   R!FER   T  A   SO!!:CIF'IC   SOIL   SERIES   PM.ASE   FOUND   IN   SOIL   MAP   LEGE NO•

(210-VI-TR-55,  Second  Ed,, June  1986)
12
 
1
l

1

·j


TABLE A-5 CONTINUED	Hydrologic .soil groups for United States soil.s
0	I l"OAIClfOOD	•
!'YA!!:	0	l'AAAAA	•  I F!'TZER	c	I l"LATTOP	0     I FOR"' A OE A	c
l"IANC!'R	0    I f'l..!AK	0    I l"OAMC-ALE	•
l"AC!YILL!	•	,.AAAOT	c    I "I.t.NDEA.   OAAl D	c    I l'L!!'A	A.IOI    FORNEY	0
l"ACTDAY	c	P'AASON•   WET	c   I F.IDALGO	c   I l"L!MING	c   I l"OAAEST	c
l"'ACTQAY•  MOIST	•·	P'AAYA	c	I fl'IODt.!:A	c	I l"l.!'JollNGTON	0     I FOltS!'!A	c
l"ADDLL.	•	l"ASHJNG	0    I F'IOOYMENT
l"AGASA	c	P"ATHOM	• ·I  f ll!:LOCA!'EK	•  I •LO	•  I FOAT  cot."t.INS	•
"Jl'AIM	c	FATTIG	c    I I' J!LtiON	Bl'DI   Ft.OKI!	0   I l"OAT   MOTT	•
l"'AJM,   MOIST	•	f'AUNCE	• I f' 1P'EP	0	I FLOM	11"'01  FOAT ROCK	c
l"AIAllURN	0	,.i.UOUl!:A	c	I f'JLJON	0	I l'LONOT	• I l'ORTll!:SCUI!:	"D
l"AJACMILD	c	,.wsse:	0     I I" IL IRAN
 
l"AIROALI!:
 
•	fAVR!T	c  I I" ILLMORI!:	0    I f't.ciRAHOM!
 
0
I l"ORTWINGATI!:	c
c
 
·c	c   .I fORTYl"OUA
l'AIAI" 11!\.D	•	•••	c   I P'INCH	c	I r:\.ORENCI!:	c	I l"'ORYIC	c•
f'A IAHAYl!N	•	jrAXON	Sl'DJ   l"lNCHl"OAD	•  I l"l.ORESYJLL!	c  I ,ORWARO
,.A.HILD	•	fA'l' TfEYILL!:	• I FINGAL	c	r P'LORIOANA•	0     I f'OSS ILO_N
 
l'A.JAMOUNf	0    I l'A'l'WOOO	c   I P'.JNGEADCK
.o   I l"INLAHD
 
0
I  D!PRl!:SStONAl.	I· FOSSUM	A/0
I	c
 
c	. I
" I
 
I"AIRPLAY
 
I
c   I l'"l!:AAS
 
•	I FINLEY
 
P'LOAIDANA•  FLOODED  0
l'\."oR IN
 
l"OSTl!:R
l'"OSTDRIA
..
 
Jl'AIRPDl"NT
I'AIRPORT	c   I ,-e:ATHl!RL!CiiS	I l".1Nl.f'#POl"4T
 
I l"LOA ISSANT	c.  I l'"OUNTAIN	0
 
P'AIRW,AY
 
c	I F·l!:A TH!:RSTONI!	0     I f'JNNERTY	0	I l"LOA.ITA	•  I FOUR   ST.IR	c
l'"!D.JJ	• I I'" IND
 
l"AJAYDll!:LL	c   I
l'AIRYLAWN	0	I ,!DORA	B'DI.  F INCL	I f"LOWl!"LL
c	I ,et>SCR!:l!"ll:	I f'JON!	I l""LDWl!"R!I!
 
FA.JAROD
l"ALAYA
,......
 
0  · 1
 
P'n.AN
 
F   IFAOA
 
c   I l"L:OYD
I l'"LU!:TSCH
 
l'DURME
I .l'O,U.f!MILI!:	•
 
l'ALl!IA	0    I l'"!LCH!R
 
I l"·I.Al!"BALL
 
l""'LCON	0     f  P'l!:LOA	!I.IOI   I" JA!!IO:C	• I l""LUGL!	• I
 
,,..
 
c   I 1'!'.LD.t.•	0     I FJRll!:STE!L	•  I FLUKER	c    I. FOXC::f!f"IC	·o
 
I  Dl!"Plf!SSIONAL	I F IPl!STONI!	c
 
•c   ·1  P"e'LICITY
 
I P"JRMAGI!	• I l'"LY!IOlll	0    I FOX HOM!	•
 
l"AL,..UAlllAS
l"ALllt
 
I" LUY ANNA
•	c
 
,-.1.Lll:lllll:	•  I l'"l!LIP!	0     I FIPO	0	I l'LYG.tll!	• I P"OX"40UNT
 
.. I P'ELICiA	• I l'IRSTVJ!W	c	I P'LYNNCOYI!:
 
I FOXTON	c
 
l'"ALJtNl!R	c    I fl"l!LJZ.	•  I I'" I OICI!	• I l'"l.YNN	• .I FOXOL
,.A.LLllAOOIC.	•	A
FALLCAEEll:	c   I l'"l!LLOWSHIP	0     1· I'" JATH.	c	I POAO	c  I l'"OXWOATH
 
P"ALL!AT
 
•	I ,!LOR
 
I I'" IRTH•  D"AIN!O	I l'"DARD	o.    I FAADDLI!:.
FA.t.ILEY
 
l"ALl.ON	c	I l'ELT	•  I I"" JSH!RMAl'f	0     I l'"O!:HL IN	•  I	•
·l'"ALLON•   NONl""LOOO.l::D   • I l"l!:LTA	c    I I' ISH!AS	•  I FOIO!L	• I FAA IL TON	0
l'"ALLS INGTON	!il'D J   l"l!L TN!R	0     I l'"ISHHOOK	0	I l'"Ol..OAHL	•  I l"RANCIS	•
FALO ..A.	0    I l'"!L TON	• I F ISHLAIC.E	0     I l'"Ol;!"v	0    I FA.I.NC JSC-'N	c
l'"ALULA	0	I Fl!:NC!	• .1· F ISHA.QCJC  ..	0	I l'"OMS!"NG	c	I f'RANC ITAS	0.
 
l'"ANAL  _	c	I l'"!"ID.ALL	c	I'" ISHTRAP	0    I l"ONO.t.
 
.0.
 
.I	FRANDSEN	•
 
l'ANCHEA	c    I l"!rrrtlELO	c	1'" JSIC.	•  I FONi:>tS	c   I l"AANICl'"!JRT	c
 
,ANDANGL!	c	Fl!:NN	0	,-ITCHY ILL!	c  .I FONNER
 
I FRANK IRK	c
 
FAANICLIN
!'"ANG	•	l'ENWICll:	c	l'"·tTZHUGH	•  I l'CNT.t.NA	• I l""llANIC.STOWN
 
FANN.IN	•
 
F!.NlllOOD
 
•	.,. IV!!ILDCll:
 
c	l'ONTA!!N
•	I ,.QPI.t.NO
 
I l"'AANICTOWN
0   I l'AANll:YJLLI!:
 
c	FIVEMILI!
l'"ANSH.t.W	•	l'"l!"ROl!:Ll"ORD	·c	I'" Y!MILE •  SALIN!	c	l""OA.t.OA	0/0    l'R.t.T!RNIOAD	0
l"ll!:REll!I!:	0	l'"IY!PINI!:	0	l""DIUIAA	0	Jll"A.t.VA·L •  GA:AV!LLY	•
·l'"OR-S!S
 
l'"ANU
_l""APS	c	l""l!RGUS
Jll"AAAWAY	0	,.EPN  CLlFI'"	,IV!SPAINGS	f:CR!t!SVILLI!
 
l'RAZ!R	c
c	FAAZ!RTON	•
 
l'AAl!t	0	l'"ERNANDO	•	FLACO	c•	l"'"OAIS I NG  ·	0	FAED	c
,-.a.Al!tl!A	•	Jll'ERNCREEK	0	.   L.t.GG
FARIS I TA	0     I l'"!ANl!Y	0	P'LAGST .IFF	•	l""OR'DHfY	•	. FAECON	c
l'AALOW	•  I l'"!RNL!:Y	c	FLA l!IE AU	•	f"MOTAAN	c	FREOONYER	c
 
FAALOll•   HIGH	c   I ,.EA.NOW
AA INF ALL	I Jll"!ANPOINT
 
•	l'"LAN.t.GAH	•	FORDVILLE	•
 
.,0
 
l"R!El!IURG	c
/l"AAfl41!"LL	•  I /l"!ANWOOD	•  I FLANDREAU	•	,.OAELANO	0	FR!e:c;:e:	0
 
I"ARMINGTON	c	I  F!AAlLO
 
•	I 1LANE	c	l"DAll!:LLE	•	l'"RE OOM	c
 
F.t.RMS'IORJH	0	I FERRIS	0     I' FLANL'f	•	FOO!S,.AN	•
0	l'"A!l!LAND	c
,.ARNH.t.MTOH	c	I Jll"!RTAL INE	0     I f'.LATHEAD	•	FDRl!!TER	c	l""A!flol.t.N	c
FOAGA'r	•	f"REl!"ON	•
l'"AANUM	• I l""l!:TT	0      I FLATONIA	0	FORK	c	l'"AfER	c
MODll'"IERS   SMOWN1   e:_.G. •  l!ll!"OAOCI(  S\J!ISTRATUM1   REFER   TO  A   SP!CJl'"IC   SOlL   SERIES  AH.I.SE   FOUND   IN   SO IL   ,.,p
 
NOTES:.	T'wO  HYOROLDGIC  SOIL  GROUPS  SUCH  AS  9.IC  JNOIC•TES  THE  DRAINl!:Dl'UNOA.t.INEO   SITUATION.
 
L!:G!NO.
 


(210-VI-TR-55, Second Ed., June 1986) 	13
 




TABLE A-5 CONTINUED	Hydrologic soil groups for United States soils


l'Rf!!:ST	c	,.ULSHt.:AR	c	GAPCD1	O·	GEO	0     I GILJSPll!:	0
0
l"Rl!:!!:TO'llN	D	l"UL. TON	0	GAPO•   DRAINED	c	GE!!IURG	c    I Gilt.ENDER	0
l"'R!!!:WATl!:R	•	l'"ut.TS	0	GAPPMAYEA	GEE-1'0A!
,.RE!!:ZEOUT	•	l"'UNT!'R	0	GAA l!:R	•	GEE:RTSfff	•  I GILLS	c
FRf"40NT	c	l'.URNISS	0	GAPetUTT	•	GEIS!L	•  I GILMAN	•
l"REN	•	l"URSHUlt	0	G.li Cl!:NO	c	Gi!:ICE	c    I Gil.MOR!	c
 

FR!'"fCHCRl!:EK
FAl!'fCfi.ICHh	c
l"'RfNCtfMAN
FRt.:NCHT0111N	0
l"Rl!SHl:IA T!A	0
,..A SNO•	0
SAL.INf'•ALKALI
 
•••	c    I GILPIN	c
"	GEMID	c    I GILSTON	•
•	·•	Ge"MSON	• I GILT !!OGE	0
GENl!St'f'	•
 
l"Al!SNO•    THICK	c	G.t.qia-t,.	c	GAAONl!'AY ILLe'	c	GENl!'YA	•  I Gl!llGl!R	0
FAl!'WA	•	GASINO	0	GAA!Y	'	GENOLA	•  I GINLANO	0
ll"AtA .:0	0	GACHAOO ·	0	GAAl'"lfL('	c	G!NrAY	0     I G'INSEA	c
FAJA-fT	0	GAClllA	0	GAAHILL	0	G£0CON0A	c   I GIRARD	0
I-RIOLO	c	GAOOl!'S	c    I GA.A IPE"A	c	G£CHAOCK
 
FPIEOio-AN	c	GAOSDEit.	c     I GI.Pt.ANO	•	Gl!DA<i!TOWN	0..
 
GIST	0
 
Ffl'IEDLANDl!R	c	G.t.DDY	• . I GAFOITA	•	G!OAGECAl!'!K	•	Gtr:JCf	•
F"Al!NOS	c	GADSDl!N•  ·w(T	c   I C.APLF.T	•	GCORGEYI  Lf:
 
FRI NOSHIP
 
GITAl(UP	c
A	suesTQATUM	I GA LOCK	•	GEORGIA	c	GI.TAM	0
 
0	G.1.0lfl!LL	.c   I G.UtH N
 
GCPl'ORO
 
GIVIN
 
FRIES
'"'IZSLAlllO
 
.GAGl!.9Y	I GI.AM DP!'	G!PO	GLACl  PCRl!!K:
•	6AGET0•1\i	I GARN EL	0	GEPPESiT	GLADOEtf
 
•C.IJt'LES
FAl OLE	c	GAGIL	I GA,.N!ll	0	GERALD
 
.FAINES
 
c.	GAJ-11!1!'	•  I GAANf!:
 
•	I <;EAl'IEA
 
.0.
 
GLAOtY rt:.LE	0
TEA
 
l"AIO
 
•	GAii!	0•
 
I GA"O
 
0   I GEP'D.AUM
I GElt JNG
 
0	GL•o·ew"	0
G«.AOSTCNE	e
A
 
FIJJOr.tA	c	GA.fl.A
l"'At·'J10M	.c.	GAIN!S·
 
I GAAR	0
c    J   GAr:.AETSO-.
 
I GEAL,iCH
 
GLADWIN
c
 
f'AIPP
 
•	GAINl!SttCR:O
 
c   I (-:J.Ar:JEl'.T
 
GEALAhE GEALE
 
GLASGOW

GL!::AN
 
FRISCO	•	GAINe-SVILLE	4	<;&At:t IS N	I
 
GLASS NE A
 
FIJJSITI!
 
GALA TA	0	(i,IAAOCHAL!S	D      I GEOMANTOWN	•
 
Ft;,JTZ	•	GAL15Al!TH	0	GARS ID	<    I ·GfFIMAPl.Y	e	GLEASON
 
...
 
""'I.!ZELL	c	GALCHUTT	c	GAPTCN	c   I GERMER	c	Gt.EeE	c
 
Gl!:qONI	•
FR'ODO   '	0	GALEN	•	GAi::'V IN	0       I GEl;QAPD	c
 
GLfp.fP.AP	•
 
FAOl-IMA"t	c	-GALIEl=IPI	•	GARWIN	!!./Of   GEORAAOo    OAAJNI! ·	' I GLF.,...!!AAo	c
0	GLl!:N!![ltG	e
FROLli:"o	c	GALEST'JWN	A	G.u:;zr.h1.	0      I GE5SIE	e	GLE,,.15t.AIA	c
 

L::V•TION<a oo
 
G.4LEY	•	GAS    CREE(
 
•	GESSNER	f' OI   GL Nt!AOOK	0
 
FJ;OLIC•   FLOODED	r.   I GALILEE	c	GASCt\f(AO	0	GIESTP IN'
 
•	I Gl. NCAAB
 
'.,.
 
1""1:11).,.l'U) F	•  I··U.ALISTF.O	c	GASJL	•	GETA'll'AY	•  I GL!NCAABo    WET•	c
·F;;ONT rec	c	I  SALIN -1.LIC.Al.1	GASSAWAY.	0	GfTCIAIL	• I GLENCOl'"
.·;.a..,ra"'	0     I .aLLAhO	r	G.l.SSVJLL	c	Gl'"TTVS	c	GLENCO!'o  POf.IOEO	0•
l"A.;51	0     I .:;1.LLATIN	i;	GA TOH	<	G£TlVILi.E	0	GLENDALE
Fs:i'UITA	•  I GALLEN	•	GAU:;S	•	· G!"YS!.ff	c	GL!NOALfo    RARt'L.:'f'	·c
FAUITHURS1'	c    I GALLI.,."!	•	CATEVf£,lil	•	a1eeoN	•	GLf:NO!QSON	•
FPUITL4""0
FAUJTLANO•	c    I GAl..LMA:-.	•	GATE•not'	c	GUH!1 $	0	Gl.!NOOAA	,,
..	GALOO	C.IDI   GA TOP	0	I  t;tliSC V.fLL!"	0	GL!Nl!LG
MtJO!.RATfLY   "C,T	I GALI.UP	• I GAT\. Jh	• I G te.,.EY	c	GLfH!OfN	0
FQUJfLANO•	c   I
FPYE	c   I GALT	0     I GA1'TCN	• .r  GUIW!:LL	c	GLENFORD	c
FRYF.aUAG	• I GALVA	' I GAULOY	•  I GIO!QN	c	GL!NHALL	•
 
"· 1'Pl.M	c	I GALVES TON	•  I G"Ul.o;:V	c     I Gl!"t.O•
 
c	Gt:..ENHAM	•
 
r. G::!.fEP<	0   I GALVEZ
 
c   I GAV!(	c   I GIFFOPO	0
...
 
Gll!NN!N
c
 
UaillA	c   I GALVIN	0     I GAV(LAN	c   I G!GG!.P
FU!'9LE	0     I GAL.WAY	I G.AVINS	0	I GILA
 
GL!Nt<fOAA
GLl!-NNALLEN	c
GL!NOiof.a.
 
FUEGJ	c    I GA ..!LE4	e   .I  GA·v I OT A	0      I GIL81!:AT	0	•
 
FUl!GOSTA	0     I 6AMl50A	• I
 
e.101   GILl50A	•	GLENPOOL	•
 
FU!AA	c    I GANGEi!	c    I GAIYLE.SV ILLS:	0     I GILBY	•	GLl!!NAIO	0
 
FUGAlill!'f
 
I GANAOD	0     l c;°.AYLCAO	c    I GJLCHPIST	•	GL NAOS!	•
Git.CO
 
FUGMES	c    I GANC!	c    I GAYNCM	c	I
 
•	GL!NAOSS	0
 
FULCHER	c   I GANOIJ	0     I Gil.YVILLI!"	0      I GILi:A!ST	•	GLl!"'NST!O	0
FULt,..i.loO                                c    I GANNETT                                0     I GAZo"s                                 c   I GtL!S                                •  I GL!NTON•   VET       c FULLERTON                          •  I GAN!N(R o   PQNC!i:C             0     I <;EAS:l-1 ..AT                            •  I Gtt.FCRD.                            0     I GLE:NY1Elil                             • FU HEA•   ORA JNl!O           c    I GAPSUffE                         ·• I G.EB5CN                                        •  I  suesTAAfUM                            I GLEN YON                                     •
N0TS:S:		'•0 MYC'ROLOGIC  SOIL GAOUPS SUCH	.,c [hO ICA Tl;;S    TH!  0QAINf0/UNOAAIN 0   SITUATION., MOOll"IE'i;>5   SHO'llNo   E.G ... AEOPOCIC.

14	(210-VI-TR-55, Second Ed., June 1986)
 
i
.1


 

TABLE A-5 CONTINUED
 
Hydtologic soil groups for United States soils
 

 

GL.0H14 GLORIA GLOUCESTl!R GLOVl!A GLYNDON GL'fN.N
GLYNliOOD
 

c	I GODS!f"LATS
D	I      GOOSMUS
•	I GORDO
C.101 GORI!"
GOREl!N
c	GDAG·AS
c	G0RGONI 0
 

D	GAAN    [YILLI!• DAA IN!D
taAANGl!YlLLf"•
D	DCCASlONALLY
D	ll'LOOD!D
D	GAANJLI!
•	GRA.NMDUNT
 

e		GA!LL  TON GA!'NADA
t		GA!NltOJER GAt'.NVILL!
GRl!SHAM
P	GAETOJVIO
C	GRt'.VINGIC
 

I     GUAY.I.SOTA	D
c	I GUAY AMA	0
I GUftE	c
I GUISEN
c	GUCICEEN
I GUDGEL	c
•	I GUDGRf'f	•
 

GLYDHS
GO!AA
 
·••
 

GQRHAM G01JtN.

GORMAN
 
8/0
c
 
GRAND GRAN SHA Iii
 
.p.
 
GAl!"Y1'ACIC GJJ!Ylll;I
 
/    GUELPH
I GU!: HES

I GUENTHE°'
 
•c•
 
GOlll!ANAOOA
GD! INE
GO!!LI! GOBLIN GOCH!A GODOAAO GiJDOI! GDD INGi GODl!CKI!'
GOD,,Al!Y
GODWIN
 
D	GoRJ.NG
c	GDASICl!L ·
D	GDRST
GOflUS GoftZELL
D	GOSA
c	GOSHl!"N
D.	GDSHUTI!"
D	GDSINTA
D	GOSLIN.
 
c	G.RANT
c	GAANTFOAIC
D	taRANTHAM
D	"GRANTSBURG
GPANT·SDALI!
GffANYILL! GAANYON GIU1N.ZAN
D	GAAPl!"VJNI!" GRAP  IT
GAASHUL
 
GRl!YBULL
D	GAEYEAGL!: GJJl!YS
c	G'Al9BL!
GAJD!LL
GAIOGf GAIDL!Y GA JET A GAll!Y!S GRl,.,.ITH
c	GAl,.f"Y
 
c	I
D
I
D     I
o·  r
D    I
c	I
P•  I
I
D	I
6.  I
 
GUE NOC

GU!'Q"NSEY	c
GUE RO	c
GUERRERO
GUEST	D
GUFFEY	c
GUFFIN	0
GUGU.l.K	0
GUILDEP	c
GUISEQ"	•e
 
GOl!MM(A
GO!SLING
 
GOSNEY GOSP!A
 
GAAS  ERI! GRi.SSNA
 
GRl,.TON  . GPIGS1'Y
 
GULER
I GULF
 

fll.'D
 
GOESSEL·
GO"ll'P.l!AI(
GOGI!! re
 
D	GOSPORT GOSS GOSUNI
 
c	GRASSY AL
f     GAASSYALL!Y'
I Gf'ASSY  SUTT'!
•
 
D	G.RJGS"iON
D	I     GIJINM
' I GRIM.-.  STONY
 
I GULi(., NA
I .GULNARE	D
I GU ..BLE	D
 
GOL
GDL
 
O	GDTE80
C	GD THAN
 
I GA ssvcDN!
A ·1 GRAT
 
•	I
D.     I
 
GPfNSLl!Y
GRllllSTA·O
 
I   GUWllOOT	0
f   GUNl!IDOTo    DRAINED       . C
•
 
GQL.. NONS TON 'f
 
c· I GOJHAAD
 
C      I    GRATTAN
 
.,  I GAINS TON
 
GUNl!llAAAELo  SALINE"  0
 
.GOL • GAAiYl!LL Y GOLCONDA
GOLD   Ciitl!l!K
GOLDBl!:RG GOL:Dl!.NOALI!
 
C        J    GOTHl!NllUAG	D
C     I GOTHIC	.c
D    I GOTHO
0  .I. GDTHO•   "°DERAT!LY
e	I  .we:T
 
I· GAAUf'l!L S
I GAAVOEN
J    GRAYl!"L TON
I GAAYll!.A
I GRAY!l!RT
 
c   I GRIMA
D     .I   GJJINOAt.:L
!.ICI GAINOBAOQIC
a   I GAJNDSTON!
•	I G INK
 
D·	GUNllAAAELo     DRAINED     A
D	GUNO	·c
C.	GliNOY	C
c	GUNLCCIC	C
c	. GUNN	S
 
GDl.Oli INCH
GOLDHl!AD GOl.E>HtLL GDLDHILL• LOAMY
SUISS1'.AATUM
 
D      ·1   GOTHO •·   COOL·
11/0 I GOut.D ING
·i>     .J·  GOULOSBO'AO
C   •  I    GOURDIN
·f   GOURLEY
 
I! I GAAYCAL/lt
D   .I GAAY..-D.AD
D      f   GAAYLAND
·	C      I   GRAYLAND     ORAINl!"CI
. C    I GAAYLJNG
 
•	I GAJNADO
a   I GAtSDAL!:
D I GIJJSWOLD
c  I GRJTN!'Y
' I GAJY R
 
c	GUNN EL	0
GUNS IGMT	a
GUNSONf	.D
c	GUNS TOCK	C
c	GUNTER	8
 
GOLOL.t.KI! GOLDMAN.
GOLDflilJRE GOLDRIDGI! GOL:DRUN GOL-OS!OAO GO&.DSTON   ·
GDLOSTRl!AM
. GOLDS·TAl!AM•
 
11     I GOV-!
c	I GQW!N
C    · I   GOlillCl!A
II	I .GOWfi:JN
A	I GOZ!M
II	I    GAA-81!:
C  '., GA.i.ISf.!
D	I GRAC!NONT
THAwe:o  11	I GAACEM9AI!
 
. B     I GAAYLDCIC
8 'I GAAYLDCIC•  STONY
c. I GAAYPDJNT
19       t   GAAYPOJNT•     wl!T
o·   I GAA"YAOCIC
&    I GRAYS
e    r GA'AYSILL
.C      I    G"AZl!A
c   I GAl!AT   el!ND
 
•	I GRiY!A•   we:T
a   I GAIY!:A•  OAAIN!D
a   I GRIZZLY· c  I GA08UTT! c  I GAIJGAN.
•	I GA DON
c  I GADS!:CLDS!:
c   I GROSS
o   I GAOSSlil!LL
 
0	GUP	·c
9	GUAOANE	(
GURDON	C
II	GURLEY	C
11         I    GURNEY	B
C	I   GUSTIN	0
C      ·f   GUSTSPAING	e
c	l·GUTMAIE	0
C	I     GUY
 

GOLOU.ST GOLDY AL! GOLOVALI!•
GOLDVEIN ·
 
C	I GAACl!YfLL!
11        I GAAOCO
NONSTDNY   C      1 GA OON
C	I GRADY
 
. a    I GAl!DGI!
c  I GAl!l!N  e1.·v,..,.
C     I GPl!l!N  CANYON
0    1 GAl!l!N   AIVl!:ll
 
D	GROTON GAD TT! GPOTTO
c	GPOUSECAEEIC
 
A	I GUYAN	c
l!I	I GUYANOOTTE
A	I GUYTON	0
B	I   GWENA	0
 
GOL.D'fltl! GOLl!:fA GOLIAD GDLLAHl!A G.OL.SUM
GOL TAY GOLVA
GOM!qy
GOMl!Z
GONVICK
 
I GAA;!N
I GAAFI""
c   I GRAHAM
D    I G.AA.IL
c	I GRAINOLA
I· GRALl!:Y I GAALJC I"liAAN
I GRANATH
I GAANllY
 
It   I GAl!l!H  Ri V'!:i:t •
0    I·   STAONGL Y    SAL INI!
D     I GRl!l!N  AIYl!R•
c  I f'LOODl!D
D       J    GAl!!,..B.llA!
D	I    GAi!!: NBA I Ait
11    I GA!l!NCAl!l!JC. D     I GRl!l!hOALE
I!!    I GRl!l!"NI!
A.IOI   GAl!.l!Nf'IELD
 
-G DUS!YILLE
GADY!" GROV!CJTY GACY!NA
c	GADVl!A
GAOVl!TON
GROWDEN GROWL!"f' GRDW·TON
I GIJU911!;
 
C	I    GWIN
A	I GWl"fo  GRAVELLY
S	I    GllllNLY
1!11	I GWINNETT
&· I GYM!R
8     I   GYNELLf
C	l.GYONEYEE
8   I   GYSTAU ..
De	I H"'A"".I".R"V.I.A
 
0
c
.•,

c
0
D
 

GONZAGA
 
c·   I
 

RONDE
 
D    I GRl!!Nll' l!LD •
 
c   I GIJUl!S TAIC!
 
B	f·  HACCKE'	c
 
GOOCH
GODDING GOOD INGTON GOODL.AND
GooD1..ow
GOODMAN
GOODNIGHT GOODPJ.STl!R GCODP JCH
GOOi:>SPA INGS
 
GRANDE
D   I GRANDP"l!:LO
D      1  GAAND OA.!
D	GRANDPON GRANOYl!W.
GAANDvie::w       DAililN!D GRAN'!: A
GAAilllil!
D	GRANlil!MONT GRANG!VILL••
D	OAAINl!Do    SLOPING
 
15	I	l;+AADP.AN
.e	I SUl95Ti:tATU•4
9C         .,l     GAEENHAL.GH
GRtl!NHOAN
19    I GA!l!"NLE.AI"
e  I -GAEl!NLl!I!
C       I    GAl!l!NMAN
c  I GIJl!l!:NDUGH
a   I GRl!ENSDN
f: Gi:t!l!NTON
 
I GAU!NE
I GRULLA
o  I GAUMMJT
D   I GRUNDY
o	I GAUY!A
o   I GAYGLA
· c    I GSCHWl!ND
•	I GUAD.t.LUP!"
c  I GUAJI'!
c	I GUAN
 
0	I   t;+ACK
D    I HACK.BEARY
0     1. HACIC(RS
C	I HACK.ROY
C	I HACKWOOD
81'0 I   HADAR
8      I    HADENCREEK
fl	I HADES
0   I HAOLE'f
D	I 1-1.1.0SELVIL·LE
 
•
•
•
c•'.

0
 
GOODWILL GODD•fN GOOLAWAY
 
GIJANGl!YILL!•	.
c•	•<T
SALIN!•ALltALI•
 
C        I   GREE NY  U..Le:
I GRl!l!NY IN!
I GA!!NWATl!R
 
B	I    GUAMA I
D	I      GUANAllANO
•	I GUANAJll50
 
e	f   HAFl INGER	•
C       I    HAGEN
C	I HA:GENBARTH
 

GOOSI!  CAE!JC..
 
•<T	•c
 

SALIN!-ALICALJ
 
I GAl!!NWOOD
 
Al'DI
 
GUARD
 
c	I H.l.GERN.AN	c
 
GOOS!!:   CR!l!JC

GOOS!   LAICI! GOOSl!:BUAY
 
GIJANG!VILLI!•

GAANG!:YILLf• MODERATELY W!T
 
II  I GRt'.! WAY

9    I   GAEHALP:M
I GR!LL
 
o   I GUAN ICA
e	I GUAPOLA.ll;f
D I G AYABQ
 
0  . I   HAGER	0
.I.	I     HAGERSTOWN	c
A	J    HAGGA	D
 

NDTl!"S:	T•O  HYD"OLOGIC   Still.  GROUPS   SUCH  AS   IS.IC   JNOICAT!S   TH!  CRAIN!D/UNOAAINEO   SJTUA.Tl'DN•
MOOIFl!RS  SHOWN•  £.G.•  Bl!OAO(IC  SUBSTRATUM•  Al!,.!A  TO  .A    SP!Cll"IC  SOIL  SERIES  PHASE·FOUNO   IN  SOIL  HAP  LEG!NO.

(210-VI-TR-55, Second Ed., June 1986) 	15
 



TABLE A-5 CONTINUED	HydrOlogic soil groups for United States soils

HAGGA  •	c   I HA JPOEo  BEL>ri0C1'	c	HARSH.t,	•	I HAWJ	• I	•
 
SAL I Ne'. •ALl!:AL t	I   SU9ST ATUM	HARSLOW	c	I HAVICIC	• I
 
Hf lNSAll	c
 
I HANIS	c	HA.ASTIN!	c	I HAWIC.!Y!	•  I' Hf IS!TON	•
I
 
HAGG RTY
HAGS TADT	c   I 1-'AN"'.tNS	HARSTON
 
•	HAif!( fNS·
 
c   I H!IS!TON•
•	Hf_IS!TONe.
 
STONY	c
c
 
HA·GUE	•  I HANKS	•	HART	D     I HAVICSSILL
 
I
SALINf·•ALKALl
 
HAl.G	C/D'/   HANkSVll.LC	0	H.f.Qf   CAHP	0	I. HA'iflCSN!:ST	C./DI
 
HE E'SLER	'
 
HA,IGrtTS	' I HANKSVILLE'	c	HARTER	c   I HAl#KSPRINGS	I
.f	u.1Ku	• I  NCNFLOOOEO	HARTFOQO	•  I HAWICSTON	•  I HEIST	'
 
l'fA IR!
 
HI!' ITT	c
•	HAPT ILL	-c	I HAWSL!!:Y	•  I HE'IZER
 
c   I HAJ\ILY
HA IA!•  ae u ocic:	0     I HANNA	HA11TLANO	' I
 
0
•	I HELOT	c
 
i kANNAHA TCHEE
 
•	HARTLE.SS	' I HAYeOURN!	• I 1-' L!,.ANO	c'
 
SU!ST.Q.:OTU'-l
HAKIC'!.R	c    I
 
HA"'NING
 
•	MARTt.i!'TON
 
•	I 'HAYCRllC
 
c  I Hl!Lf ..A
I HELENDALE
 
HA.LAC AN	D      I HA O	c	ttA!"TNIT	c   I HAYDl!N	•
I
c
 
HfiLAWA
 
I ttANOVE"
 
c	HAlfT!:e'URG
 
HAYES TON
I HAYl!SVILL.I!
 
•c   I
 
HELLGA'rf
 
HALaERT	0   I HANS
 
H4ATSELLS
 
I	STONV
 
HELi'	D
 
HALCOTT
 
C/OI  I-IANSEL
 
c	HART SHOR Ii
 
HAVfSYILLEo
c  I HAVl"'IfLD
 
•	I Hl"L.14EA	c
 
,..ALOEFi	c   I HANS A·	D.IDI   ...,f,RTYILL!
 
I 11AYl""OAO
 
c   I EL ER•  GRAVELLY	D
 
HALE	D    I HANSO ...
HAL!!:•   O"AINl!D
 
•	I 11,l.AT ELL	D•
 
I
I HA'IJ4AAIU T	0    I Hl!LjotEA•  THIN
 
c   I MANTHO
 
I HAA\IARD
 
I HAYHOOI(
 
SUe!'SOit.
 
HALE;tON
HALE I WA
 
•	I HANTZ•  ORY
 
I HAAYl':STER
c   I . ,-pve::r
•
 
HA·YHONO	I SUA fiCE
I H!L"4l"RD
 
0

SEVERELY	0
 
H LEY
 
I HAP
 
I HAAYP'Y•  3.l!OqoCK	c  I HAYMONT
 
EROOf:O
 
HALI"'   ,.OON	• I HAPGOO::I	• I  SU85fAATUH•  oqY	I HAYNl!SS	• I
 
HALF AOAY
 
I HAP.JAC	c   I HARWOOD	c   I H.AYN·If	• I
 
HEL,.JCIC	0
 
i.tU..  ..FWAY	0•  I hAl:INE'I'	c• I HASll: ILL	•  I
 
HAYPAESS
 
•	I Hl!;L TEA	•c
I HELY	•
 
-MALJ 1
 
c	I
•	I ttAllUA	0     I HASSEi!	0	I HAYSPUR
 
c   I Hl!LVl!.TtA
 
HfiLtIMAILE
 
I·HAPPL!!:
 
I HASKINS
 
1-fAYAACJC
 
HEMBRE
 
c
.,.
 
HALL	• I HAil' AH AN	0      I HASSe'LL	c   I HA.YSUH
 
HE/llCROSS	•
 
1-fAi..L   OIANCH	c    I riABM ILL	c    I HASTINGS	•  I HA·VTfR	•  I
rtAi..LANDALI!:	a/DI
 
HE"INGFDRO	•
 
HALLA.NOA.LI!:•
liALLCAl!:fK
 
0    I HAV ..IR'I!	c   I Hl!MDST!AO	•
I HAR CA NY	' I HATCH	c   I HAYl:l'OOD	' I
 
HALL!!: CK	c    I tfARCO	• 1. HATCH    GR'AVELLT	• I H"AZ!L	I
 
Hl!NCO
Hl!NDEASON
c
 
HALLECK•
 
GRAV LL'I'       •
 
I H4QCOT
 
HATCHl!AY
•
 
c   I hAZl!LAllf
 
l-ll!NOON
I He:111oq"1c1es	c
 
SUSSTAA TU,,.	I l-t4'PO.l!HAN
 
I HAf(Hl!T •
 
I HAZ.!h	c	I
 
,..ALLETTSVILLE	• I t-tAR01!STY
 
I·  OYl!.'.A8LOWN•  THICJC	I HAZLlfHURST
 
.14ENDT
I
 
lfALLI SON	c   I 'HAAOHA T	•  I  SOLUfil	HAZLETON	•
 
Joll!Nl!"Fl!A	c
 
c   I lol4f:)QING	D    I HATC ..itT. GR'AYl'LLY     c	. H,toiTON.	0	I HfNHOIT	•
 
HALSEY	·c.101  HARD.I STEA	•  I HATCH!T•     Y!R&LO"'N   c	Hlt'"AOLl!Y	•  I
"tALSD	0     I
 
Hl!NICIN	•
 
HAMACEQ	•  I HAAOSCRAtll!IL!	0    ·1  11"ATCHll!	c	111!'... '(I!:	0      I
 
Hl!"ILl!T	c
H!'NL.INllE	c
 
1o1AMAll'.U4POIC·O	a	I HfiQ()TR>IGGf:R
 
•	I HAJE'PMUS	e	HEALDTON	• .I
 
Hl!Nflfl!L	c
 
MA ..AA	4/D     HAHO'I!'	c    I HAJl!FifON	•	...!'ALING	•
c	tfAAGILL
Ma1'4aONI!	'	HAPGAEAVE	c   I .MATLEY
 
HENNEPIN	•
 
MA1'49R !GMT	0	hAR.JO	0
 
c	HeARNI! •  GAAOl!O	0	HENNl!SS'f
I HAJL lf"fl"	<	HfATH	c	HENNl!_WAY
 
Ma,.auroG
 
•	HAAICl!RS	c    I HAtMAICl!IO"	c	Hl!A'rHCOAT	c•	M!'NNl!Y	'•
 
Hfi,..9Y	c	l-IAAl(l!'t	•  I HATPEAK	c	Hl!:ATLY'
-..&Ml!L	c	h-'RLAIN	• I HA.JTON
 
•	HENNINGSEN
'
 
c
0/0
 
c	HE1!8AONVILLE
 
Hl!NRtl!:TTA
 
. HA.'IE:ALY'
 
c	HARLl!!M	c   I HA TUA	c	Hl!"fll!A
 
HF.NRIEYILLE
c	Hl!NRY	D
 
hA"llL TUN
 
•	HAALE,.o
 
CHANN!L!O   0  I
 
HATtfA 1
 
D	Hl!Bl!AT
I Hl!'80
 
MA,.l.E' t	•	HARLi!STCN	c   I HAUBSTADT	c
 
0	Hl!NSMAW
0
 
HA'°'LtN
 
HAPt.lHGl!N	0    I HAUG	/at  Ml!!RON	•
•
 
"'E'NSL!'I'
 
,.Ali!MO..,TCN	•
 
HAl:fLOW	0     I HAt:GAN	•  I Hl!'Cl!Tlt	0	Hl!HSON	•
 
HA,.,lofACIC
 
HAA E"t.
 
c   I HAl,;L !NGS
 
I Hl!CHf AN
 
HEPLER	c
H!'PPSll!:	0
 
Ha,.PS,.,IAE	c	hAJ;,.QN'f	c   I HAUN CHI!!	0     I H!CKl!A
 
.1,-.,f,&,,N..qPe.SON
 
c	HAANeY
 
I HAUZ	c   I M!"CK ISON	o·	HERAr.t.E	0
'
 
.. I HA\fl!LOCll:	!I/DI  t:tEDGf	D	HERO
 
•
h•"!R't.19	• I HAPPl!R	0    I HAVANA	• I HEC:TOR	0
 
Hl!A6MAN	•c
 
H-AMTAH	c    I HARPERSVILLE	•	•
 
HEAl!fi'ORO
c	MERI  TO
 
MAN a
 
I HAAPETH
 
I HA'tlf
 
I H!:OOe'S	c
I
 
c
HEAi(iMER	•
 
HANAGJTA
 
0	"'AAPOLI!
 
I HA\l!EAOAO
 
HfDOX
c    I Hl!!O ICJC	•
 
hA.NA<EQ
 
c	"'-'APS	s.101 HAVEF!DAO •
HAAPSTl!i:R	&.IOI	MOOllEAAJl!!LY     SALINE
 
I t-ti!DSTA-OM
 
Hl!ALONG	0
 
HANA LE I	c
HANA,.fiUt.U	'	H•APT	I HAYi!AHtLL
 
I Ml!OYILL!
 
0	HIER	c
 
1o1&N.CEVILLE	•	rtAAOllA	c   I HAY!' ALY	c   ·1  Hl!l!CH!I!!	•
 
Hl!RNANTiJlllN	c
 
HANO
 
•	HARRAH	• I HA'tlfANOM
 
•	I Ml!l!LY	•	HEAM!A!NG	•
 
hAN')PAH	0	HAARJl!T	0     I HAVl!ASON	• I HE!SER	'	Hl!!AMISTDN	•
 
•	HAAAJJ4AN
 
•	I HAVILAND
 
I HE,-EO
I
 
Hl!AMOfl
l HEAN NOl!!:Z
 
H•NOQAN
hANQSBORO
 
0	HAAAl ... AN•   WET	c   ·1  HAYl\.\.AH
c	c     I HAYINGOON
 
•c   I
 
Hl!f'l"Lf
Hl!GLAA
 
"  I HERNOON	•
 
HANO'f
HAl\IEY
 
kAqAJNGJON
HAA IS	0
 
I HA.YA!
 
I HEGNI!
c
 
I H.!AO
I HEROD	0
 
l\IANFORO
 
HAAr:tlS!!URG	c    ·1    HliVAfo     SliLIN!
 
I Hl!IOl!L
 
HAN(iAAAO	0	HARRIS Or	• I HA.VG,!"•   J;f']"J!RAJllEL.V     c   I M!IC>EN	0      I Hl!RRICI(	•
 
HANCiDQ	'	HAARISVILL!'	c   I
 
I Ml!IOTMliN
 
c   I "'e'.ASH .
0
 

"'•"lGTOWh
 
•	HARROUN	0    I HAYAl!"LON
 
'• I H!"lGHTS	!ll'OI
 

HAN I POE
 
•	HARSAN
 
I HAW
 
i HEIL
 
0    I HE A TT
 
NOTES:	TWO   HYDROLOGIC    SOIL   GROUPS   SUCH   AS   el'C   INDICliTES   Tri!    AAINEO.IUNORAIN!D   SITUATION•
MOO !F IEl?!i   SHOWN.   E.G •• 3,!"0ROCIC  - sues TRA JUM.   R!l'!A   TO   A     SP!C II"' re  so II.  S!R·le'S  PHAS!  l"'OUNO    IN   so IL   MAP  L!'GEND.


16	(210-VI-TR-55, Second Ed., June 1986)
 



 

TABLE A-5 CONTINUED
 
Hydrologic soil groups for. United  States soils
 


 

HESCH
 

8   I H ILLS80AO
 

HOLC'EAMAN
 
C	I        HCOOVIEV
C	C
 
HESP!A
H!SP!RIA "HESPERUS H!SSEL HESS!l-B!AG
Hl!SSEL.T IN!
HESSING H!SSLAN t-j!SSON H!TEIUfA
0
He:TT INGEA
H!USSEA H!UVELTDN HEW I TT
'°'EXT HEYDE A
HEVOLAUP'f'
HEYTOU
H!Zl!L
HI "VISTA
HJAAC HJBAR HI98;t.RO Hl88JN HIBERNIA HJ°:!!IRJ T.EN
 
8    I HILLSDAL!
B	I      HILLTO
8  I HILLVDOD
8/D I HILMAA.
D         J    HILMAAo    DAAIN!O
a	I HU.MO!
B	I    HILD
. C.      I·· HILOLO
C	·I  HILT
C	I     HILTON
C.rt>      HINCKLEY
C	HINO!S
C	HJN!S8URG
O	HINICER H·IP:"KL.! 111NNA.N HINSOAL! HlAAMSBUA'G 111AJOG!
c	HIASCHDAL.!
c	HIS!GA
c	HISIC!T
c	..ISL!
c	HITCHCciCK
·HJTILlJ
HI Tl
 
HOLO!A"IESS
HDLOJNGl"'OQO HOL!>REGf: HOLILLIPAH HOLLAND
c	HOLLANDLAK
HOLLINGER
HOLL IS Hot.L JS TEA HOLL0!4AN HOLLOM!)I'
c	HOLLOW
c	HOLLOVAY
.c	HOLL Olli TA!!
D	HOLLY
c	HOLLY.     P.JNOED
0	HOLLY  SPRINGS
c	. HOLL YW!LL.
D	HOLL Y OOO
c	HOL"'AN
c	HOLMDEL
HOLMES·
HOLDMAN HOLD.,UA "HOLOPA'lf HCLOPAW•
Ol!;PfiE SS.I ONAL
 
c	I 1100GOAL
C       I    HOOKS
I HOOICSAH
A	I MOOKTON
I HOOLEMUA
B	I  ..OOLV
!'	I 1100PAL
c'/o I ·...oOPl!R
D	I HOOPESTON
O       I    HCDPLlTE
8     I    '"4COs•."H
c	I.1'100S!GOW
e	I MCOSJC
C	I HODS.fl!AV ILLE
8/Df HODSIMl!II"'
0   I HOOT
D   I HOOTEN
l!I	I HOPCO
0    ·I  HOPDA°AW
A	I MDPEJtA
C     I HOPKINS
B       J    HOPLAND
8	I MDPLEY
l!I        f    HOPSONVILLE
81'0!' HOQUIAM
.c   I Mo.RD
I HOR!e
 
0	HOWELL	C
HOWi,. ANO
[l	HOV SON	C
HOYE	8
C	HO°vLF. TON	C
8	HOYPUS	.t,
C	HOYTVILLE	C/O
D	MUAt UCA	C
C	HUALAPAJ	C
B	e	8
0	HUBBA,!;O	A·
B	HUB AA TON	0
8	HUBB LI.	S
A	HUBE PLY	0
.C	HUBERT	8
a	U9Lf S8UAG	e
D	HUC<l.ESEQRV	C
0    I HUCKLEBE AY•  HIGH    B
C      I	RAINFALL A	J    HUDNUT
D      I ·MUDS!JN	c
B     I MUECD	C.
B	I    1-fUEL	•
8      I   HUENEME	C
c.    1  HUE' NE HE.	. e
e   I  MODERATELY   W!T
B	I HUENE)olE;  i>AAJNEO	8
C	I HUf;RF ANO	0
 
HICIC.J4AN
 
'	HIVAL
 
0
o.. ·
 
HOLOPAW•
 
0   I HOREB•
 
GRAVELLY
 
B  I  ""VEY·	O
 
HJCICOFiT
 
c	.Hl'lfAN
 
FREOU NTLY.
 
I SU!ISTRATUN
 
I	FINE	e
 
HICKS
HJCICSVILLE
HJ"CXSYILLE•
8EDADCIC
 
'•c
 
HIW.t.SSl!E
HIWtJOO HIXTON
HOAOL T
 
•c.
 
FLOODED
I HCt.SJNE
I HOLSTEIN
 
I HOAN!"LL
e	I HO°R JNG
e	I  HOANITOS
 
Mu·
0	I HUFFMAN	B
e    I HUFF TON	.e
0   I HUGGINS	C
 
SUBSTRATUM

li.IDAL  COD
 
.H08ACK!A

H0885
a· ·1
 
IHOLSTON
•
 
B	I
•	.I,
 
Mi::IANS8Y
 
C	I HUGHES	e
C	I MUGHESVlLLf	C
 
HICOT.A

HJDATSA
HJDe:Awi.v
 
e	I HoeAN

HO!ICAW
·o   I HDOe
 
I HOLT
f   HOL T!I<
I l"IOL'l'LE
•· I HOLTON
 
e	I HORNSVlt.LE
HORROCKS
H()RSECAMP
c	I HDPSEAIOGE
 
B     l HUGO	·B
0.    I HUGUS	B
'8	I HUGUSTO.N	0
 

HIDEWOOD
 

!I/DI
 
HOl!U!:AG
 
c  I HOLTVILLE
 
c  I HORSESHO!"
 
e	I HU.ICMICA	!==
 
HIERAP   . HIGGINS
HJGGJNSYILLE
HIGH GAP
 
e   I HO!IJT
D I H090.
11080G
c   I'· HOBONNY
 
c   I MOLYOIC! D     I HOMA
0   I  HOfltE  CA/io!P D     I HC,,.El..AICI!
 
C(.D I HOASElHJfF
c   I MOASLEY
c  ·I HORST
o	I  HORTONVILLE
 
6 I HUICHICA•   PONDF.O	D
0    I HUIKAU	A
e-	HUKILL	e ·
 
HIGH...MS
 
D	I      HO!ISON
 
C      I   HOMl!L.ANO
 
c   I 1-1051( JN
 
tUGHISANK
HtGHCAMP
 
c  I HOl!UCKl!N
e   I ,..OCAR
 
0     I   HO,..!R
o  I HOMl!STAIC!
 
o	I HOS'IC JNNJNJ
c   I HOSLEY
 

0	HUl,.UA	0
 
HIGH,- I ELD
 
e    .I
 
M.OCHH!lM
 
e  I HOMEST!AO
 
e	I HOSH A
 
C	HUH	9
 
HIGHHDAN HJGHMOAI! HIGHPOii..-T
 
e	I HOCKINSDN
•	I HOCKINSONo
D    I	"40D!A A Tl!. LT     WET
 
0.., HOM!V000
,· I HOMME
I "10,,.ME •   MOO AA TEL Y
 
c	I HC!SSJCIC
c   I HOSTAGE
•	I HOT  LAK!
....OTA'lf
 
9	HU,.. AC AD	8
8	HUH.AT AS	C
C	HUM"AA<OER	9
C	HUM81G	C
 
HJGHRD.CK
HIGHTOWER
 
o  I Ho'CKl"ISONo  DRAINED  8
c   I HOCKLEY	C
 
I
I HOMO SA SSA
 
I
o   I HOTCAE!IC
c
 
0	HUliietRO	a
 
HIGHWOOD
Hll:UMANU
 
c  I HOCKLEY•  GAAO!D
e   I HODA
 
D    I HONAUN°AU
c  I HONCUT
 
I HOTl!L
e	I HOT SPRINGS
D
 
'o    I
 
MODERATELY   WfTo
 
HI IBNl!R
 
c   I HODl!.DD
 
c  I HONOAL!
 
I   HOUDEK	I
o
 
HJICO  PEAK
HllCO   SPRINGS
MILAllll!
)LANO
 
e  I HOD!NPTL
•	I HDDG!
o	I HOD.Ci INS
e   I liOOGSbN
 
I HONOOHO
I HONEOYE
I HONEYDEW
c	I HONEYGAOVE
 
.c•
 
I HOUGH •
I HOUGHTON
I HOUGHTON• PONDED
HOU.GHTONYILL!
 
' I
A/OI
o	I
c	I
 
SALINE-ALKALI
HUMPOLDTo	8
ODfRATELY    WET.
SALINE .
 
Hlt.DEl!!IAl!CHT
HILDRETH
 
c	HD!HN!
0	HOf'l'LAND
 
'I HClN!Y.JON!S
I HONEYVILLE.
 
HOUK
c	HOULA
 
c   I
e	I
0    ..,
 
HU"fBOLOT•  DRAINED•   8
STRONGLY  SALINE
HUMBOLDT•    ORAlNEDo    9
 
MIL.EA HILES HILGER HILGAAYI! HJl.IGHT
 
0	-HOF I':NA NV I LL!
HO,.l'STAOT
HOl"LY
•	HDGAD!RO .
0	HOGANS BURG
 
c  I HONKER
e   I HONLAIC
c   I HONLAIC •  ORA INEO
e   I HONLU
e   I HONN
HONOBIA
 
0	HOULKA
C	HOURGLASS
B	HOUSE      MOUNTAIN
I!	HOUSE A
8	HOUSl!AOCK
 
B	I	NONS•LINf       .
o	I HUN90LDTo	a
D      I	l.IOOEAATELY           wET
o	.    HU BOLOTo   OAAINEO  9
c	I HUH OUN	•c
 
Hll.JNE
HILL8RICK
"'II.LCD
 
o.	HOGBACK
HOGG HOGMALAT
 
c   I
c	I HONOKAA
o	I HONOLUA
 
C	HOUSTAK!
A	HOUSTON
8	HOUSTON  BLACK
 
o	I ...U"fl!
o    I 'HUH!STON
HU"fKEA.
 
C,/.D
 
HJLL!MANN
HJL-L!RY
HILL.fl HILLf' l!LD HILi.GA TE. HILLI.6.RD
·	HJLLJAAOo MODERAT!LY W!LL ORAIN!D
HJL.LDH
 
c	HOGR S
c	HOH
8/D I HOHMANN
a   I HOKO
o	I HOLBORN
e	I HOLBROOK
c  I HOLCOMB
.I HOLDAWAY
I HOLDEN
c  I HOLDER
 
o	I HONOMANU
B.	·I HCNONEGAl1. c  I HONOULiUL.I c   I HONTAS
c   I HON TOON
I HONUAULU
D         HOOD
0      HCODLE
I HOODOO
I· HOOD SPORT
 
A	HOVDE
A	t-10.YEN
HQYfN'llfEP
8	I 1-!0VEAT
9/Df  HOVEY
A    .  I HOVARD
B	I        HC!WARDSYILLE B	I   HOlfCAN
0	I      HO'llCREE
' I HOWE:
 
D     I
o	I HUH"flNGTON	c
c	I HU"IPHRETS
o	I HU ..PTULJPS
c	I  HU,. SIC EL
' I J:tUN.
' I HUNCHBACK	0
' I 1-tUNO AW	·O
C	I      HUNEW.ILL
c   I H.UNGAY	c
 

NOT!S;	TllO  HYOAOLOGIC  SOIL  GROUPS  SUCH  AS  B/C  I.NOICAT!S' T"'fE  ORAINEO/UNORAINED   SJTUATJOH•
HOOJl"'IEAS   SHOVN1   e..G,..   BEOAOi::IC    SUl9STAAT':JM1   AEF!A    TO   A   SP!CIFIC   SOIL   SERIES   PHAS!  .FOUt.10   .JN   SOIL   •AP  LEGEND.


(210,VIcTR-55, Second Ed., June 1986) 	17
 




TABLE A-5 CONTINUED  Hydrologic soil groups for United States soils


HU NTON	c	I lLOECA.Qe	•	J.P.I.Sl-I	c	JACAGUAS	•	JEHE/of'W'	0
 
HUNTl!ASVILL!!:	• I ILJFF	c
 
JACINTO	•	Ji!O"fEZ	c.
 

JACIC    CR!:EK	JE"'A
hU"'11JNG	c    I IL.IC"'	0	llOEOi::Lt.	c.101  JAC E'T	c	J,ENICJNS	c.
HUNTINGTON	• I H.LABOT	c	I PEL ANO	c	I JACIC LANO	0	JENklNSON	0
 
HUNTPOCIC	•
 

I ILLEq
 
•	JPi:TEBA	'	J"CICNJFE	c	.JENNESS	•
 

HUNJSeUPG
 
D     I ·ILL.ITO	0	IRJGUL	D	J"CKPORT	·o	JENNINGS	c
 
c	c	JENNY	0
HUPP	I IL\11.f.CO	•	IRMUl.co	•	JACKS	c	JENOR	c
c	IMBLEFl	IR'CN   1n.osso"'	c	JACJCTON!	0	Jl!RAULP	0
U4l.AY	D	IRON   MOU fAlN	0	JACOe	D	Jl!RtCHO	0
.JACOBSEN	0	.J!POMI!	0
URRICANI!	c   I J!o!MIG	c	IR'ON QIYl!R
HUPRY8ACll:	• I !MMOKAL!!	l!'/ri    l ONOAL!	c	.J.u;oT.	•	.JfQRYSLU	c
HuRw•L	•  I  bl!'PAESSJONAL	JRoN5P.11l'iGS	•	.JACOUitH	.c	.JERVAL	•
MU ilO::A	D      I . JJ.;Ot.flL	•	lf•c.oauors	e/OI   .IACWfN	•	.JESSE'   CAMP	•
HUSSA	0    I IlfPAC:r
HUSSA•  CLAYEY	« I IMPl!AlAL	0	l RfGON
HUSSA • '40Dl!RATEL'(    'C    I IN.4RAJANe	c	IRVl E'	D      I ,.c	•	JE'TCOP	0
WET	I  STRA T IF I l!D	IRVINGTCllOI	I
I JAMES
HUSSMA"I	0    I INCl!·LL	0	ISA!U!LLA	• I JA,.l!S   CANYON.	• I JElf.ETT	•
H!JTCHINSON	c   I INCHl!'LIU"'	I ISAiiiTJ	£/OI   JA ESTON	C/OI   JIGSAW	c
c	I JANl E•  OVl!PBLCl'llN •	I .JO•·	c
HUTT	0    I INO!X	•  I I  ..,I  P ISi-ft	c    I  CRAIN!O	I _,.lll'CPEl!IC	c
0
JANUDE
IND IAH-3	c   I ISICNA1'	c   I JANUOE o   CLAY	c	I .JIMEHE'Z	c
HYALL	c   I INOl.ANOLA	•  I lSICHAT 0    C.JOL	0    I   SUl!S TRA TUM .	I JJMLAICE
c	.JARBOE	0     r JIMS.t..GE
,._VATTV fl.LE	«  I (NOUS	.o	ISL!S•  SL.JUGM	A;'Clj   .JAR01"9	0	JJMTOWN	c
"'1> I INF! NAL	D	l!MAY	•  I JAIJITA	c	J [VAS	•
•f¥0A9UAG
H•OER	D    I INGALL"S	•	IS C	c	I .JAIJ,.ILLD	•	JOA CHE"'	0
c   l l'"°l!H hl	•	I SC'l.CIE	•  I JAROLA	•c	J08	c
 
H'fbAO
"'"
 
•	I ·INGERSOLL
 
•	J SO"f
 
c•  I
 
JAROSO
 
J060S	c
•	EAIC	D
 
•	t!Tl!R
 
I	.JClfi
.JAQJ:10N	0	. JOCAL
 
H¥L:::JC
 
I INGRAM
 
•	JSTOICPOGA.
 
JAAAf'
l!l/DI
I .JARVIS
 
K'fl"IAS	0
 
I lfUtLf'A
 
iot¥l'R.t.IRIE	I IHICOM	0	I JANO
<
 
•	I J SCO
 
JOC I TY
0	JOCIT'f•   l.O NY	c
 
M AUM	' I INKOM•   OIJAJNIED
 
I IAS CA
l TAIT
 
•	I JASON
 
0	SURFACE
 
l+YSHAM	0    I JNICOSA
M"SHOT	0     I INKS	0	ITCA	0     I JASPER
 
•	JUCICO	•
 
...	•
 


0	ITMF.
 

I .JAU IGA	•
 
c    I .JAUCAS	JOt:ERO
MY ZEN	D     I IN..OW	c	I TMAl'.N	c     I JAUCAS•    SALINE	c•	.JDt"l.
MAE
I	JC!'!NEV	0
 
INMACHUIC
 
...	•
 
JOE'
r
 
lBElfJ.l
 
O·    I
 
INNAN	c	JTSWOC:T
 
I .JAV.A	•
 
c•.
 
JUICA
 
c	I
c	,.y	c   I JOEVAlt
 
IC'ARJA	0
 
I '""o
 
I JAWDO,..lf
I·
 
0	JOES
'
 
ICENI!	0    I INN'INGER
1"4Pl!"fQENCE	IVAN	.I .JAYAR
lCHaOD	0    I lNSAIC:	0	IVANEl.L	c	I JA¥1!1EI!'	0    I JOHNS!U,AG	0
rC::H! T!JCKNl!:E	0 IINS IDEl;T	<	_J  VANHCE	0      I JAYEL	0
10.1"	• I INSULA	0	IV!RSE'N	c	I JAY"fE'S	0	.JOHNSTOWN	•
 
JOAkOJolE	• I	•
IO E	c   I
tOLE.W lLO	0    I
 
e	.J"fAGE:R	c	JOHHS•OOO
0
c	JE'ANEAETTI!'	D	OJ HEP	•
c	Jl!'!lf.	•	.JOICOOOVSICI	0
 
JEU.EVILO•   DRAINED    : I 10	•
 
c	.JESO	•	JOI.AH	c
 
c	Jf09UIOG	c	.JOLIET	0
1110'!.LL	c    I ICNA	•	IZAGORA	c	JE'OO	c	.JOLLY	c
IQIMC10	c   I !OSCO	•	I Zl!I!	c	.JEDD I TO•	'	JONAS	•
 

'""	0    I ·IOSEPA	0	llO
 
...
 
AN	•
 

CGUALOAO	0    I
tl*.EN	I
[.I*"'	0    I
ltACHE.TOMEl.	D    I
 
•c
YILLI!'	'•
 
SUCH	S/C  JNOJCATl!S   T E.'  OltAINEO/UNOPAINl!O  SITUATION•
MODIFIERS  SHOWNo   E.G.•  13E'DROCIC   sues TPA TUM•   i:J!'FfQ   TO·  A   SPl!CJl"IC'  SOIL  SE.Rll!S  PHASE  FOUND   IN SOtl.  MAP  LEGEND.

18	(210-VI-TR-55, Second Ed., June 1986)
 
..1,





: TABLE A-5 CONTINUED	Hydrologic soil groups for United States soils

JONNIC	c   I KAHANA	•  I KAPLAN	•  I  KfEI	c	K!ll'"° IT	•
 
JOPLIN	c    I KAHANUI	D     I KAPOt	• I
 

Kfflt!I!
 
•	Kl!'RNAN	c
 
JOPPA	•
 

IKAHLER
 
I KAPtl'ilSJ"ft
I KAPTUAI!
 
I KfEL
I KEEL OAR	•	•
 
J0RAl9?	• . I KA.H!-Ofl.IS
•
 
•	I KAPUMIK.ANJ
•
 
•	I Kl!l!L!

c
 
Kfl:!ADA,;o:	c
ICfRRf' !!:LO
 
JORDAN
JORGE
 
I ICAHUA	I
 
KARAM IN
 
Kl!l!LEA
I Kl!!LlN!
 
K!RAICK
ICl!:Rll.\l'.ll:LE	c
•
 
JOANA HAM
 
·1. KAIOl!RS
I KAllCLI
 
I KARANKAVA
I
•
 
I Kl!:!Ne
 
c	KEqSM6111
c	IC!RSICIC.
 
•.,.
 
JORY
JORY•   STONY	c   I K.AILUA
 
ICAA9AHA
I.,   ICAAC6L
 
D	I ICEENO
 
,JQS!!JUA&	c    I 1t:t.h1u.	A
 
ICAAOI!	•  I KfESE	D	KEAST  ON
 
..	I icARLAN	I	..
 
JOS!PH.	c   1 KA:INAL?U	A	I K4flHE!"N
 
I ICl!l!"Sl!Mi	c	ICEA'T·	c
c
 
•	c	Kl'l!SIAN
 
·KESSLER
D
 
.JOSHU.A	c    I KAJWIK?	A	I KARLIN	•  I IC!"1!" TEA.
 
JOSEPH JN!:
 
I 1(6JPOJ D.J
 
c	ICfSSON
 
J.051!"
 
I KALAi!	•  I ICAl<LO	D	I lt!'l!"VATIN	c	KESTERSON	D
 
JOS'LIN	• I KAL6LOCH	• I -KAPLSl!IUAG	•
 
I •••	•
 
ICl!S'ilICIC	c
K!'TCHLV
 
.. I K!Gl!L•   DRAINED	c	ICETCHU"9	•
JOSS ET	c	I KALAMA	c   I ICAALSAUHI!:	• I KE.GEL	•	•
JOURDANTON	• I KALAMAZOO	• I KARLSTAD	•
•	•	•
 
,JOVl!C
 
D     I ICALAPA
I ICALAUPAPA
 
•	I KARL.UK	D	I Kl!GONS.A
 
ICl!TONA	D
c
 
•	I l(.AR"'A
 
Kl!MAA	D	Kl!:lTf:NeACH
 
c
JUANA   DIAZ	·• I ICAL!fTANe    TILL	c   I ICA'RNl!S	•	ICl!'HOI!'	•
 
IC!TTt.f
ICETTLEDl!:LLV
 
JUl!IJL!!	• I SUBSTRATUM
,..,.
 
JCAAOC	•	Kt?GLEY	•
•.	•	K!JTH
 
r.!TTLEto!AN	·c
•
 
.•. I K.&l..IGA	!/O I   KARRO	•
 
JUS ?LEE•   OAAIN!D	• I ICM.JFONSIC.V	•  ' ICAJ;PP	•	IC.EIS!'R	•
 
IC.ETTLl!:""AN•
GPAY.fLLV
 
JUDD
 
c·   I
 
ICALJGA e  Jl'LOOD!O
 
I KAAS
•
 
•	ICll!'I THV?LLll!'	•c   I K!TTNER'	0•
 
JIJO!LL	• ' IC Al IHI	D      I flCAASHNEA
 
I
KEKAICE	0     I i;i:l!:Y.ANTON	c
 
JUDICE	D      ' It.At.ISPELL
 
I I( ...,.,A	..
 
KEUTEAV ILLE
 
JUDITH
 
I KALKASKA	A	I KART All	•	KEK·A'l!'AK.&	•  I KEVIN	c
 
JUOJC I NS	·c   I KALLIO	c   I KASl!"BERG
 
1tELJC	c   I ICElil:ACM	c
c
ICELLfA!IUTTE	e   I KEWEENAW	•
 
JUDSON
 
I KALNARYll.L!	8•/D I KASH!il TNA
•
 
'
IC!LSEV
 
KEVA
I IC!YES	D
 
JUDY	c   I IC.ALMJ;,f,
 
I KASI(?	•
 
'""
 
•	I KALD	c   I ICASOTA	c	KELLY	•
 
JUGET
 
KALOICO
 
I Y.ASSLE
KASSON	c
 
c   I ICEYESPO INT.	D
I	D
 
...I 11:.AMACflC	•  I tr;ATHfA	c	ICl!LYIN	c   I IC!YSTONE	•
 
JUGMANOLI!:
 
l KALONA	•
 
ICl!LSO
ICELTNl!"ll'
 
IC!YNER
lt!YPORT	c
 
JUGSON	C.
 
I K.ALSIN
 
I ICAT.ANA	•
 
JUt.!:S	• I ICAL.STEO	• I ir;AT!MC:Y	c	Kl!L"TVS	I
 
. .JULESBURG
.JUL.IN
 
•	I KAM.&ICOA
 
•	I K.&TO	!/DI  KEMAH	•0    I KE
 
ZAN
 
•c.,.
 
•	•	c
 
I
I ICIAKUS	c
 
JUliilSO
 
I ICU4AN.
•
 
I IC.ATSE.A ES	0   I ICEMAN
I ICEMM!Rl!:.R
 
ICE AR
c
I
 
.JU"PCREEk	·C  I ICA)llAOA
JUMPE	I KAM.AOL!
 
IKATULA
I KATY·
 
I ICEMOO
I
 
ICJAN	c
c   I KIAWAH
 
JUMP!R	c   I K"."'"'o	c  I ICATYeLAY
 
ICFMP
 
•	ICJ881E	•
 
.J	UMPMORll!'	•  I· l(AMAY	• I IC.AUDER	D	' ICEMPSVJLLE	I
 
•	I KAMll!
 
I IC.AiJICAUNA
 
•c  I IC!NANSYILLI!:
 
c    I KJBfS IL.LAH	c
I JCIC:ICAPOO
 
JUMPOJl'F	c    I !CAM.ELA	c   I ICA_UFMAN
 
I IC!NA."I	•
 
JUNALUSltA	•
 
•	IClCKEAVILLf	•
 
JUNCAL	c   I .JCAMPY ILLE	c    I ICAUPO	•  I IC·ll!'NOAIA	c    I
JUN<;OS	0    I KAMRAR	• I ltAUPPJ
 
JCIO.D
 
JUNCTION	•  I KANAC:ltl!':V	D       I IC A Vt TT	D	I ICENDALLYILL!	•.	Kil?DEA	•
 
JUNEAU
 
•	ICAN.AKA
 
•	I IC.AVON
 
•	I ICENORICIC
 
•	ICJE'Hl	•
 
JUNG,	0	· r.ANAPAHA	•/D,I
 
KAVA IHA!!:	c  .I ICENEf'ICIC
KAWA IHAPAJ.	I ICENESAW
 
I( t!'SEL
IC   JETZKE
 
A	ICANARAA	D     I K·AlllBAWGAM	c   I ICt;NMOOR
 
JUNIPERl!IUTI!'"
JUl'H PEAD JUNIUS
 
•	ICANASICAT
 
I KAWJCH
 
•	j ICl!:NN
 
KIEV
r1C	c
 
c·	KANAWHA
.,.
 
I ICA ..KAWLJN	c	I ICENN.&N
 
K       1
..	'
 
JUNICl!'"TT
 
c	IC ANDA LY
 
KAYMJNC	c   I ICl!'"NN!Bl!:C
ICl!:NN!IO	0	ICJLAGA	c
 
JUNO	A
 
KA/lfOllC
 
.•.
 
I KAYO
 
IClKON I

I ICIENNEWJCIC	KILAf;'C	0
KENNEY	A	KILAUEA
 
JUNOUITOS
 
c	KANDOTA
KANE
 
I IC!AAIJ
I JCEAHUA	I
I IC!ALAKl!'"KUA	I
 
JUNTVAA	0
JUPITER
 
KANE8REAK	c
 
Kl!:NN!V   LAIC!:
c
 
c	KILBURN
KllCHIS
 
JUf;'VANNAH	c	KANl!PUU	•	ICEAN!;9URG
 
•	I Ki::NOlilA	KILDOR	c .
•	KILGORE	•
 
.JUSTESE·,..	c	KANER	A	IC.EA L	c	ICfNOTAAIL	c	KILFOIL	c
 
.JUSTESEN•  LOAMY.
 
IC.ANG	c	IC!ARNS	•	KENAAV
 
SUBS TR.A TU"9	KANGAS	•	ICl"ARSARG!	•	K!'NSAL	•	KJLICfNNY	•
JUVA	•	ICANl·KSU	•	ICl!:AUICAHA	•	JCENSPUR	•	IC  ILL'!.!VCK
 

JUVAN	D	K.&NIMA
ICA.&LUALU	A	KANKAICE!
 

K!"AWAKAPU
ICff\LtP.
 

IC!NT ICENUSICV
 

ICILLOUFF KILL.EV
.,
 
C'O

D
IEL V   c
 
KACMl!:MAIC
 
•	IC.ANON.A	0	ICfCKC	•	. ICEt!	•
 
IClt.Ll!:Yt
 
MODERA
 
ICACHl!:SS
 
0.	KANOSH	c	Kl!'CKSAO.&Q	c	K!OKUIC	•	KILLINGTON	D
 
KAO!
KAOLl!:TZ
 
•	ICANTISHNA
 
•	I K!DA
 
•	IC!ON.&H	c	KILLPACK	c
 
KADOKA
 
c	IC!OTA	IClt.NANAGH	c
!CEDRON	c	ICE"OWNS	8/DJ   KILMER	c
•	K.&PAA	e    I •••	•	KEPLER	c     r ICJLMEROUE
 
ICAE"NA	D	i.ANZA	D
 
KAFING
K6GM.i.N
 
c	ICAPAPALA
 
•	I Kl!:ECMELUS	c	KEA9ER
 
•	.I IC!t.N	D
 
VE"V	•	KAP.AP.AL.At    BEOR9CIC      c    I IC ff CHI	.C	ICEP!IY	•  I KILO.&	•
 
ICAGMANt
GRAVELLY	sues-TR.I.TUM	I K!!"f'A.	IC.ERHAVDEN
 
I ICJLOHANA	•
 
.KAH.Al.UV
 
D	ICAPIN
 
c    I K!Ef'ERS	c	KER'!.	• I ICJLO'ilAN	c
 
NOTES:   . TWO  HVOROLOGI C  SOIL  GROUPS   SUCH	BIC    INDlCAT!S    TME    DRAIN!OrUNORAINEO     SITV.&TJQN,.
MODIFil!:RS   SHOWN•   E-.G.o l.!IEDROCIC  .SUBSfRATUfll.   REF!R   TO A   SPECll'"IC   SOIL  SEll'IES
 

_.AP  L!GENO_ ..
 

(210-VI-TR-55, Second Ed., June 1986) 	19
 




TABLE A-5 CONTINUED	Hydrologic  soil groups for United States soils


KILll'l NtNCi	0	l(ITTTTA	0     I ltOOGA	c	ICRESSON	c	LA CONNER	D
''"	•	KlTTITAS•   URAINE:O     c   I K'J!!HLlA	KREYfhHAGEN
 
I( 1:4o   SALIN€	c	I( ITTP!.::GE	•c
 
I ICt"f'LE	•
 
KFUER	D	LACOSTE	c
LA COTA
 
ll"IMA,....t.	•	I(
 
JTTSON
 
ICOCPkE
ICOJ!QLJNlt
 
.C'
 
ICFlll!:ST
Kl:ON
 
'D	LACRES(:e;NT
 
"' '
 
KJp.co?JALL
 
D	KIV•	I	•
 
11:;1MsEQL 0•4	•	I( l'llANJS	p	I O::CETHER	D	ll!ROTO
 
LACPOL	0
 
•	IC  IZHUVAI(	' I ICOFl	D	ICPU!'AT!	•	LAC.Y	D
ICRUM	D	LA.Ol!'L-Lf
 
KIMBf:HLV
Kl"'6ROUGl-I
 
D	ICJAR	D    I ICCFA •
 
SAL I NE	c
 
KJ:OUEGER
 
e	LADO	•
 
l(lMHERLJNG	0	«LAe-fl)	0     I lt'CFl"GO
KIMO	c	KLABERo   ORA I Nl!C	c   I ICOGISH
l(J ..Dl!R	0	ICLAONICK	' OHALA
D
ICl"IA	D	ICLADNtCICo   STONY	•  ' ICCt.AN	•	ll:U9LER	c	LADOGA	•'
 
l(l"IAN	•	KL"MATH	D     I KOICfl!!:	•	ICUIH.1	•0
 
t.ADRON
'
 
/ClNC'"IELOI!:
 
D	Kt.ANELNfE CHl!:NA
 
D   I KCllC!'ANOT
 
ICUC!;IJA
 
LAOUI!!:
c	LAOYCO,.e	D
 
KINCO
 
•	ICLANEL-.EECHl!!:NA.,	<   '
 
r.oi::o
 
I ICUC!t
ICUDLAC	0	LADYSMITH	D
 
c	LACUSTAINE	I KOICCKAHI	c
ICIN.JIG	•	S•JBSTQ.lTUM	I ICOKOICA I •  'STONY
 
'I IOJ...L	D	LA ..E	D
 
l(JNOY.	c	Kt...APATCl11!"	c    I ICOIC0""0	8/DI   KUICAIAU
 
4	LA,.ITTE	D
 

ICINESAVA
 
•	ICLAUS	c    I KOLAR	0    I ICtJICAJAU•  Bl!DAOCK	·c   I LAG	'
 
KINGC'ON	a	KLAVAS I	D     I ICOL51!A'i	c   ' SUISSTRATUM	I LAGITOS	c
 
I( INGF'ISHEA	'	ICLAWAS I•
 
•	I ICOLEKOLE	c    I ICl,;LA	• I
 
LA LOAIA	'
 
l(!...G...ORK	0	LACU'STRINE	I  OL lJ•	c	I KULL Ii"
 
c•  ' LAGNA,.	'c
 
<UU llf	c	suesrqATU,.	I KC'LL!i	c   I KULSHAN.
KtNGINGHAM	c	KLAWATTI	c   I Kl'll.LUfUIC	D     I
 
LAGONOA
I LAGAANG!:	D•
 
ICING"44N	D	I KLA'lf'iOP
 
l::OLOA	c    I " NA TON	D      I LA.GROSS  .
t..lGUNJ:_rA
 
4    I
ICLECICNE'IC	c   I· ICCLOR.   STOliY'	c   I. XUNIA	e   I LAGUNITAe illeT	c
O:.U!: 1.NflUSl4	c   I l\CLOKCJLD	IICUNUVE' IA	I	'
 
KINGS	0	'
 
•	11!\lfrroZ	•
 
ICHl S:IURY
IC    l"'GSDOWN
 
•	I'
 
ICLf.J	•  i ltOLD"'DIC 1
 
.
I XUHZLl!:R
 
...
 
I LAHOtlTAN	D
I LA ... ITY
 
•	I KLICK I TAT
 
KCNA
 
D	ICUPAl!'AhOP'
 
c
l.AIOLA	c
 
l(JNGSLAhO
 
Al'DI
 
ICLICKEQ	c   I KOll'O
I
 
•	LAIOIG	c
 
ii:tNGSL.l!Y
l(JNGSPOJ"IT
 
KLICK SON
•
 
' KOh4 ..A
•	'
 
I K.IJPAe'ANOP'o
c	I
 
c	l.A IL	c
LAIRD
 
I J:.LINI!" • c:ceBLY
 
ICChEPT
 
MODl!'AATl!!:LY	•
 
KJ!'llGS TO,.,
K IN:O:S.'.'IL.LE	A.IOI    KL.IHI!•   PAOTECTEC	J:.nt\llEJ:°!• Ol:fAIN!D
 
c   I Jr;URl!I'	4
D
 
IClNGTAIN	•  I Kl.1/':'IESVll.L	C.IQf    ltON,.f:A	D     I ICUAO	D	LA l_A05V ILL!!
 
ICINK!:AO
 
c   I JCLINGE':f
 
•	I ICCNNF.P•   Qo AINE'O	r.   I KURTH	c	D
 
K lf,jl(IE,L	c	I KLIS.r.Cllt	c    ' KflNOCJI	c	I ICUATZ	c	LAJITA!
 
IClNl(EL.    Gii.;.'IEl.LY
 
I KONOCTI·•   Sf:JNY	I lt"USHNl!"AHIN	D	LAKE	4
I ICl..SKOKltlM	D	LAICEo CLAY!Y
 
INKCl)A	0     I ICLONOI'('!	0     I i:"C . IL	• ,.
 
I(
Kl"'1"4A ...	•c    ' Kl.ON!
 
c	I ICUSL INA	D	Sl.'Rl"ACi
KUTCl-I	c	LAKE'   CHARLES	D
D     I Klt TLe:A	c
 
!';llltl\I! AR
l'INEY
 
I KL0(1CrtMAtl	i:  I l(OQN{C"I 	4
•	I KLOOTi::!i	c   I KOONTZ	•
 
L.AKI!!:  CPl!'!K.
1ELO
 
11. INR.OSS	A.10 I   ')LOOTCi-11!:;	•  I ICOOSl-'A E ..
 
I KUY
 
LAKI!'
 
.;.IANEE
 
KINSMAN
 
.,c,,I ICLOT!N	D    I r:.COSKJA·
 
LAKEl'"
 
KI'ISTON
 
KLUG	•  I r.coT!N• I	•  I KVEO	4•	L K Hl!"LEN	c
 
l'i: IN Tl
 
ICLUM	c   I l':OPlf"	D    I ICYBURl
lfLUT l'llA
 
LAK!"MUAST
 
.••
 
11.
 
l"'TON
 
c	KLUl40
 
•	I ICCJ:"PEPl.
 
KYOAICA
•
 
0	\A !t.AhO
D
 
•	I K.JPP!S
 
I ICYOEST!A	0	LAl(E!ol'C'NT_
 
•	I ICYLf'"	D	LAK.EPC'AT
IC  IOh.t.	'	IC NA PO A	•  I ICCA!"Nf	c	' IC.YL A	c	LAKESHOA!
 
KIOTE
 
•	Kl'oAPPT.JN
 
KCAN,..Alll	e	I !CZ JN	0	LAICESIOI!;
L.tlCESC'L
 
a	ICN!ELAf40	c    I ICOREiPAGO	c	' LA   BAIER	D	•
 
JC  IDER
I( ll>L l!'oG	0	11:.,_.EP	I ICOROhl  S
 
•	I L4 P'ARGI!:
 
t..llCETON	c
c
 
ICNICICERBCCIC.!A	I
 
' u FCNOA
 
E	LAICt"\ll!W
LAll:.E'llN
 
l'i:  IPOES 	4
 
4	ICORTTY
 
•	L4  GR ANOE	c	'
 
K.	IPSON	D	'l'"'ff!SLl!Y"	c   ' IC.DSC  fUSICO	I	•
 
ICIRe"v
l(JR9YY ILL!::
 
11''-tfitflttN	c  I KOSETH
•	KNIGHT	fll'Eil   !CCSltOS	D
 
I LA
I LA
 
HOG:..E
LANDI!
 
LAICl!''IOOQ	4
L.&IC I	e
4
 
K'IAK
 
•	I KOSSE	e    I LA   PAL"'A	c	LAI( JN	•
 
D	KNl'C
!CIAKE"NOALL	c   I Kr-.llliLIK
 
•	ICOSSUTM	e.101    L4   POST A
 
LAICCA
D
 
K lRKl-IAM	c    I KNIPP&	c   I ICC!t.Z T.l
 
' LA
 
PR.llAI!
 
LAKO,,.A
c
 
0     I l(N09   HILL	•  I l(CTO	0   I LA  l:ICISE
ir: IP.KSFY	c   I KNO TOP	c   I ICCTZilotA ..	c   I LA9!NZO
 
LAICAICGC
LALA AU
c	LAL I NO•
 
l(JRl(YILLE
 
c    I icr.oco	0   I ICOUAY
 
c	I ot;NO(E	&/"C'll    ICOVICJ.'	D      '
 
l,Al!llSH
 
0	LALLIE
 
IRTLEY	c    I If.NOLLE.	' I Jf.CYEN	• I LA81C·l!:Y
 
•	LAL.OS	o.
 
IA\llN	c    I l(N:JSS	c    I ICOYNO.'..	D   I LAeORCl TA
 
LAM
 
I(
I l':QY1JrUK
 
•	I LABOU
 
L.a.IOIA	c
D	LA,,.AN GA
 
(JQYIN.  CiRAOEO	0     I IC OTT	0
KISATCHIE	D   I IOIC•LES
 
I ICP.ICICLE
 
•	I LABOUNTY
 
c
•	-L.MAA	'
 
LABA!
Kl SHONA.    -'L-<ALI	c    I ICNl!LL	• I Kl" AC ON	' I LAB SHAFT	D     ' L.l,,.AASH	c
 
K IS lt4G•   'IF. T	D       I K0!3AA	c	I ICAANSIC  I	•  ' L.&eUCK	•
 
I LAMA.Rf INt	c
l.A,.A TM
 
D
LAfl4A'IA
L.	lC!"ROA.	0      '
 
(ISSICIC.
 
c	I KOBE::H
 
I ICAA ZSUPG
 
I LAC AMAS	0    I
 
t.ISfli=tN	•  I KC3EL	I KAATICA	el'OI
KITCHEN   CREEJC.	• I IC.OCH•   ORAINI!!:!)	c    I ICf;fA,..ER	c    I LACIT.A	•  I L.a.NSMAN	D
'	•
 
I(	..
 
c   I l.&MCOE:l!:P
 
c	I Ji::OOAIC o   NONFLOOO!D	c	I KPl"M	4      I LACKS
I LACI,. EDE
 
O::ITTEl='LL	D       I itOO 1 AJC
NOTES:  rwo  HYOROLOGIC   SOIL  GPO UPS   SUCH
 
•	IIC.A'C"'t.f:lf
"" tNOICATES   '"" OR4 INl!!:Dl"Ut.CA.A INl!!:O
 

SITUAf.JON.
 
' I LA,,.rNGTON	D
 
,.OOIF IF.RS   SHO'lfN.   EoG••    't!DRCC:I(.    SUBSTR'AfU"'•    RCF A    T>   4   SPl!"Clf.IC   SOIL   SERll!!:S   PHASE     ou,.o   IN  SOIL   MAP   LEGEND•


2D	(210-VI-TR-55, Seco11d Ed., June 1986)
 

 
.·•·
 



TABLE A-5 CONTINUED
 


Hydrologie soil groups for United States soils
 

 

LA.MKl.N LAMO LAMOJLL!
LA.NONO I
 

B	I    L AJA T
C	I    LAl:IJM
B	I     LAAJNER
B	I         LAAJOSCAMP
 

B	LAVINA
I!	LAVON
e	LAlllAI
D	l.A'!'EN
 

0		LEETONIA LEfYAN
lfl'"OQ
L!GALL
 
.c'.
•
 

I LF.1r
I LElrBEACM	c
J   LEo10L AC	0
I	D
 
LAMONI
 
c	I LAAIC IN
 
"e	"L.&t.'ET
 
fl.IOI
 
LEGAULT
 
1.e111s
D      I LEWTSefREl'Y	c
 

LAMONT
 
8      I   LAAICJ?.ON
 
C	LAlllET•
 
•	r LEGGfTT
 
f  Lfw ISBUPG
I Lfll'JSTO,.,.	c
 
LA.MONT A
 
o	I I.ARMIN!
 
C	SALJN!-ALICALI
.
 
I LEGLE.11
I	s
 
LA.NOOSE
LA. ..OTTE
 
D	I      LAAOOUE
B	I LAROSE
 
e	L.IWL!R
0	L.t.ll DALE
 
•	I LEGORE
e	I L!MEW
 
L!'w1Sv1LL
' I LfWl(.4LEi	c
 

LA"'OUAE LAMPASAS
 
c  I LAARUP IN
.o    I
 
e ·     I·LAWNWOOO
o"   I LAWNWOOD•
 
!!.IDI
D	I
 
LEHIG .. LEHN ANS
 
c	I LE.I
c  I LEXJNGTOPj
 
l.ANPH IEA LAMPSHIRE
 
a	I LARRY•  DRAINED
o	I lo SON
 
C  f	CEPRESSJONAL
D	I    LA  ENCE	.
 
I LfHA
c	I  L!l.CESTER
 
.'.
 
I· I.EXTON
I Le: Ye A	e
c
 
LAINSON
 
''°I 1.ARTON
 
A	J         LAWAENC!VILLE
 
c	I LEIDL.
 
c	I LEYDEN
LIBSINGS	0
 
LA.NAIAK
 
a	I LAAUI!:
 
A	I LAWS ...!.
 
D	I   Lf'JGHCAN	I	•
 
LAll!ICASTEA · LAN(f.
LANO
LANO.   OAA lf.1!0
'	l:.AINOAVASO
LANO CO LAINDEA LAINOES
LAI.NOL OW LAINOMAN
LANDS ENO
 
e  I LAAUSH
o  I LAAVI!
c   I L'5
e    I LAS  ANIMAS
e   I LAS  l'"LOlifES
c  I LAS  LUCAS c  I LAS   OSAS s   I LAS  VEGAS
c   I LA_5A
a   I LASALLE
c   I LASAUSES
 
B	I      LAWSON
I)   I LAllTHEP
C	f    LAWTON
c   I LAlllYElt
D      I   LAX
E	f      LAXAL
c  I LAJLTON
0 1."LAVCOCIC
A	LAYOUo1T
ti	LAYTC'N
0	LAYV ll!:W
 
c	I LflLEHUA
D	I     L!ISY
c	I LELA
e	I LEL.lND
LE ..AH
LEMl!IOS
c	1..euco
LEMERT
c	Lfloll!TA'
•	·LEMING
D	·LfMJTAR
 
I Ll!IEG
•	I LIBERAL	D
D     I Llf'OAY	•
D    I LIBRARY	D
I  Ll!USE	c
c  I LICHA
c	LICll.
0	LJCKOALE	D
0	LI.CIC ING
D
0	LJ"OAN	c
 

LANE LANESBOj;O LANEXA
LANEY
 
·c   I ·LASCO
c   I LAS IL
D I LASKA
s   I LAS.SE I.
 
l.AlAN LAZE AR·
LE  !Ait
c	LE    SUEUR
 
D	1.fUJol
D	L!l.IOLO LEMOND LfNONEX
c
 
e	LIDDELL
0	LICIDl!YILLE
B.IDI   LJC'V
C	I LJfSER!o14N
I
 
e/O.
e
P.

0
 
C	I.JEN
 
LANG
 
c·  I LASSEN
 
D.	LEA
 
LEJolOOAE
 
e	I. 1.·1EsN01
 
LANGFORD
 
c   .,
 
LASSI TEA
 
LEAD EA
 
•e   I LEMP IRA
 
LANGHEI
LANGLAOE LANGLOIS
 
s  I LASTANCE
a	I LAT.lH
O      I    LATAH•    HIGH
 
LEADCqt!:
0	LEADJ:OlN.T
c	LEADV.t.LE
 
LeN
c	I LEN.II
c	I LENA•   FLOODED
 
C	I LIGGET	6
. A.IOI   LJGJ.lfNJNG·	c
0     I    LIGON	0'
0   I LtGHU.,
 

LANGllELL
 

•	I LATA •  D AJNl!D	.(
 
I LE.ll'"
 
LfNAWl!E:	•
 
LANGOLA
 
s  I AAlNl'"ALL•  OAAINl!:D
 
LEAD VI LL'!
 
LENAPAH
o   I
 
8.ID    LlGURTA
 
L-'NGSPAJNG
 
s  I LAfAHCO	C
 
I LEAl'"AJVl!R.
 
Ai"OI
 
Ll!NAlifE! • PONDED
 
D	.LlHEN	•
 
LANGSTON
 
•	I LATAHCD•
 
D    I LEAl'"U ·
 
c	I LEN8ER'G
 
c	·LIH.UE	•
 
LANG TAT
LAN1EA LANtGe:A
LANIGEA.  GRAVELLY·
 
o ·  I l. AT.AM J!R
' I t.ATCH
' I LATE NI!
I LATES
 
D  I LEAGUEVILL'F.
'. I LEAICSVJLL!
I LEAL
I LEALAlllDJC
 
l!l.101
D	I
D	I
. D	I
 
Lf.N.NEP
LfNOIP 'LENZ
LENZ o    STONY
 
c	L IKfS	•
LIL•'"'
J..lLSERT LIL!!IOL:RN
c
 

LANK9USH
 
s   I LAT.EX
 
I LEANNA
 
o	I LENZo   VERY   STONY
 
LILLINGS
 
LANK.JN
 
C·    I
 
LATHAN
 
I LE.AlllTt'
 
c  I t.ENZSURG
 
LILL,INGTON.·
•	c
 
L,ANlc;TAf!:E LA NOAK
 
c   I LATHER
s  I t.AT..ROP
 
.D.
 
I L·E&PS
I LEATHAM
 
'c	LfO
c	LEOL.l
 
l;.lLI. YLANOS
•	LIL TEN	c
 
LANO NA
 
LATIGQ
 
.••
 
I LE&TH!RMA">I
 
0	Ll!ON
 
a/DI
c
 
LILY	a
'
 
l,ANSDALE
 
LATf.NA
 
D   I I.EA VfNWORTH
 
C	i.EON.f.RO
 
I LI•
L	'
 
LANS·OOWNE
 
c	L.&1".IUM
 
D   I ·L'l!AVE"RS
 
! LEONAPOO
 
o' I
 
flol.t;
 
LATON
 
D   I L!AVJTT
 
8	.LEONARDTOWN
 
I LJJ.l!!EA
s
 
LANSING·
L4NTEAN"
 
LATONIA
 
•	I LEA\11 TTV (LL
 
l!I
 
LEONI
 
I LIJolEJC: ILN	D
c
 
LANTIS
.LANTON
 
LATOUCHE
D	LA"TOUR
 
I LE!A.,.
I LEE ANON
 
fl.	LEGUJEU
. C	LERO.AL
 
D    I Ll.,ERICIC
c   I Ll"'E1110GE
c	c
 
D	L!ROO
 
I LP4KI NG
 
LANTON•    LOW
 
c	LATOUAELL
 
I L!!E AU
 

B	LEADY
 
e	I LJ!olON.
 
PRECIPITATION LANTON IA
 
•,.
 
1.ATTAS LA'l"TV
 
D    I LE!EC
0    I LEeo
 
r	l.!R'tOlif
C	LESHARA
 
c	I Ll ..ONo    lllET
e   I LJ,..Ot.'ES
 
(.ANTAY
 
LAUDf.110&!.C
 
0    I
"'°
 
LEl'tSACK
 
e	LES HO
 
c   I LJ,,.PIA	•'
 
LANTl
 
0	LAUDERHILL  .
 
L!CIC  KILL
6
 
0	LESLI!
 
D.     I
 
Ll"4CO
 
LANVEA
LANYON
 
c	LAUFE.lf
C.10 I LAUGENOUR • LOAlllY
 
LEC .IG
c.	LEDFC'ctD
LEDG!FOlollC
 
e	LES ON
A·   I L!SPATE
 
D	I LJNCCLN	'
c	I LINDAAS
 
LAP
 
D	I	suasiRATUM
 
Cl	I LESTER
 
e	I  LINDALE'
 
·LAPARI  TA
L,APOU"' LA PED LAPEER
 
<:	I LAUGENOURo    SILTY	•
e	I	ueSTRATUM
D	I   LAUGENOURo    DRAINED    9
B	I   LAUGHLIN	C
 
LfQ.,OQUNT
Lf'OOlf L1;;0J.1U
I.EDU&
 
9	I Lf"SWILL
C	I    LETA
e	I LETCHER
ei"OI   LETHA
 
e	I Ll..,OE.LL	'c
c	I LINDEN	•
p	I LINDER
c	I LINDLEY	c
 
LAPHAM
LAPIN!
. LA.Pl.ATTA
 
'I 1.AUMAIA
LAU!: EL
c	LAUAEt.WDOO
 
L.!DW ITH
Lf!
LEEBENCH
 
a·  I· LETHENT
C    ·I LfTNf'Y
 
o   I L.JNOAITH	e
•	I  LINOSIDE	c
c
 
LEEDS
 
C	I     LETON
 
D        I     LINOSTPO ..
 
LA PON
 
D	LAUREN
 
C.      f   LETORT
 
8	I I. f"40Y
 
LA.PORT!!
 
D	LAURENT ZEN
 
LEEF IELO
I
 
e.101
 
LI Nf	•
 
LAPOSA
LAPWAI LARANO LARCHNOUNT LAROE LL t.J.REOO LARES L.AAGO
 
c
.•c.·
•
 
LAV.t.CREEIC
t.•VALL!f LAVA  T! LAVE A GA LAVEEN LAVEN  TANA LAVfRl(JN LAV JC
 
LFEICO
I LCE&:Oo  ll'A M
I LE!LAN6U
ILEEJ.4CNT
I LEEF'!l1
I LEEPAY
.I  LEESBURG
I Lt.ES VILLE
 
C	I LETA I
e	I L!TTI"
A	I LEVASY
0       I    LEVELTON
0	I .LEVELTDNo DRAINED
0	I  LEVERETT
e	I LfVIATHAN
. ' I LEVY
 
8    I l.JNEVILLE
.,  I I. INGANORe
o	I LINHART
c	I  L INl"GfR
c	I L l"'ICER
s   I LINICUP	D
D     I I. I ..ICV ILLE	a
 
NOTES:	TWO.HYOAOLOGIC  SOIL  8 0UP_S  SUCH. AS  9.IC  JNOICATES  T!-1!  OIJAINED.IL'NOR.AJNED  SITUATION•
MODIFIERS   SHOWN.   f.G ••  eEOJ:fOCI(   sueSTRATUM··  RP!FEl:i   TO   J,    SP!CIFIC  SOIL   SERl!S  Pi'IASE   FOUND   IN  SOIL   MAP   LEGEND.


(210-VI-TR-55,  Second  Ed., June  1986) 	21
 




TABLE A-5 CONTINUED	Hydrologic soil groups for United States soils


LINLITHGO	' I LQD1	' I t.ODf'Z	0    I LOZANO	• I LYL.ES	B/D
LINNET	c   I LOCO	0    I t.ORACIC	• I LUALUALEI	0     I L YHANSOP't	c
LCl"'TON	0     I LCl A IN	C/Of LUAP	c   I L Y'°ICff	0
 
LINO
LlNilY!Fl
 
' I Ll]GAH	0    I LOP.t.fil
 
•	I 1..ueeocic
 
' I LYNCHBURG	c
 
LINFICSE.
LINSLAV
 
'c	I LOPAY	A	I t.ueqf: HT	c·  I L YNOEN	e
I LOGGE'HT	0    I LCIROSTO'loN	c    I LL(CAS	0    I L YN"f     MAVE:N	O/D
 
LlNT	• J. LO:IHOUS	• I LCiRfAUV It.LE	c   I LUCE	c   I LYNNDOW	0
B/0
LINVILLI!'                          •  I LIJHLe:;::,                          c   I LCRtNZO                         •  I LUCEi:.O                           •  I LY"fNVtLLE                       c LINWOOD                                  ......01  LOHN!!:S                                  A       I LC:J<IP.!G                                   c    I LUC JLE•  MODERATELY   c   I LY°'.i:                                   • LIPAN                                  0    I LOHS,.,A"I                                    0     I LCRJilA"'                                          0     I b<T                                        I LVN>ICREfl(                              '
LIPPINCOTT	9/01  LOlc'l!N	c   I l.03  ALA ·JS	c   I LUCICl!'NeACH	c   I LYC"'S	0
c	eA,,.0$	c	I LUCW:IAMUTI!	0     I LYONSVILLI!
LlAiOS                          3    I LOKl!AN•                              D     I LOS  G.tT0'5                        c    I LUCK'I'                                   c      LYRA                                     D
LIS.AM                                    0    I >ET                                            I LCS  osos                   c    I LUCICYAI'CH                          •   LYSTA fl;                   '
l.1$BON                               •  I t.OKf;:oN.                                                                                                                                                                                                       '•
t.	ISCO                                  c   I  SALINl!'-ALICALI                     I LCS   TA.NOS                        c   I LUO                                       D         LYVILLI!'
c
Ll·SIC	•  I LOLAIC	• I LCSl?:I!'	•  I LU INGTON	e	...t.eANIC	0
LJSMDA!'.'                              •  I LOl..!JCA4                                  •  I LOSTC"AEl!IC                          ' I LUEDCPS                               c      MAel!N                                    c
LITHGOW	.C    I LIJl..I T!	0    I LOSTf:'QINT	0     I loUG!AT	•	"'ABRAY	0
LITIMBl!R	• I LOLO	• I Li:"STSpq"fN'l	1
•	I LUK!	c	a:tAC!
LITTLI!  ""ORN                   c    I LOH&                                                c   I.  LOSTWCLLS•   •ET           c   I LUICIN                                  c      MAC!'DONIA                         '·
LI TTL!  ...:ioo                • I L.:IMAI. TA                                 0    I LCTT                                          c    I LUL I.NG.                                     0        MACHETE                                 c
LITTL!"Bl!:AR	• I LOMAX	•  I ·LCTUSPOt ..T	c	I t.UJ>fBE!'	B,O:DI    MAC:HUELO	0
LITTLE·NAN                              c    I LOfJLL                            0    I LOl•Ol!PaAC:IC.                           c    I l.LN\tl!R                                      •  I NAC:IC •  LOAMY                        c
LCIUOC:,_	I
LITTS.AN	c   I "LO'otrr•·s	O·   I   LOUF:O,.,VILL!	c   I i..U"'"'T•  ORATNl!J)	c   I MAC:KE·N	0
LITZ                            C.  I LOMOINE                              c    I LOlJtLLA                                      I

L.	VEP"fOA!                          •  I Lr,lolDO                           c    I LOUI E_CAE!IC                          •    LUNDS                            c    I ....t.CMEAt.                            • LlYINGSTQN                        0     I LONI:                                c   I LOUISA                                •    LU.. IN<;:                                •  I MA(C'""9f."J:f                                c L.IVO/tfA                                 •  I LCNE.   ROCll.
•	IMAOAlll.&SKA	•
LLANOS                               c   I LON!Pl ...1!                            • I LDUROtS                            c       l.UPINTO.   SALi"!'!"         c   I J<.t.t'D(N                                     c
t.O'!ELVILL::	c   I LON!TRJ!'!	A	I LC"Vr'J'JV	c	LUPTON	A 1'.0I  lltAOEL INE.	0
t..D&El:G                                 c   I LO !lfOOD                                    I LC'Y!LAC!                                        LUPTON•
LOBITOS                                c, I LONGfl'OAO                             c       Lr.Vl!ll.A ...0•                      0         t.:UAAY                                     C/O     MAO ILL                                  •
 

LOaO
LC.eUlfN
 
LONGJI""	0	t'l.l!YATION>65DO	LUANICIC	c	MAO ISON	•
LONctLDJS	•	_LOY!"LL	0
 
LOCANE.                                0          LpNG,..AqE                            0          Lf !LOCll'                      c   I LUSK                                c         Jiil.AOAAIC                                c LOCHl.005A                          c      LO..GRtf                               •     SAL JN! •ALX.AL I                     I LUTA«:                               •    MADRID                               • LOCI(!                              •   "LDNGVll!lf                            c       LC'Vl!' ..ELL                           •  I Li..-TH                               c         "'aoy:"l!'Z                              • LGCK!R8Ye   C06BL Y         •    LONIGAN1   C-OBSl.'r          c      l.CVt"LL                                c   I LUTI!'                                  •    MA GALLO ..                      •
l.OCIC••lllT                          •   LON•B•                              • I LIHlllll&la                            •  I LUTllE•LOH                       •   NAG&•S                              '
 
..,	c	LONTl
 

I Lll"'V II.LI!
 
I 1.uze:r.•	0	MAGIC	0
 
LUV!ANE	c	MAGG IN	c
LQCl(lfOOC'	'	Ll.::NOICI!'	• I t.OllS	e:/DI  LUX OR	0	"'AGMILLS	'
LCCIC'tlODO •	•	•
LOCO	c	LCOll(. JNGGLASS	c   .I  LOX	c   I LYl!IROOJC:	0	JoOAGINNIS	0
LOCODA	0	LOOKOUT	c   I LOXLEY	A.IOI   LYDA.	0	MAGNA	0
0     I L.YERL Y                           0        "'AGNOR                           c Lao•R                               0     I LCONY                               c   I t.OYSVILLE                         0    I LYFoi:o                               c      MAGNUS                                c t.OOF.	• I Lil:Je'R	c   I LOZA	0    I LYK-ENS	·c	MAGOTMA	0
NOTES:	TWO    HYOAOLOGIC    SOJL. AOVPS    SUCH   AS    8.IC    INOICAT S    THI!   CAAINl!O/UNOAAIN!O    SITUATION.
"'CIOIFl!AS   SHOlt!f•   E.G ••.i;tc!CROCK     USST ATU ... RPFER    TJ   .t,    SP!CIFIC  SOIL   S'At!"S.PH4SE   FOUND    IN   SOIL  MAP   L_e;GENO.



22	(210-VI-TR-55,  Second Ed., June  1986)
 
: ,.
I


 
TABLE A-5 CONTINUED
 
Hydrologic soil groups for United States soils
 

 


M.&GOTSU MAGUAYO MAHALA MAH_ALASVlLL.f' MAHA"'
MAHANA
,.AHAS KA M.&H0!iAN
MAHONING
lo!AHOOSUC MAHTOMEDI "f&HTOWA
'MAHUKONA
 

0      I   MA"iAVA
c   I NAH8UR"4
o  ·I M.ANCELONA
8/01 M.ANCME·S TEA
c   I )l_•NOAN
e   I ""ANOARIN
e	I MANOfllfFIEL£J c   I ""•NDl!"Y It.LE o  I MANDY
A·   I MANET
"   I "'"Nfl'Ae'O C;:D I MANGUM
8    I MANMATTAN
 

c	M AGO	B	.,AAYSTDWN
0	MARIA	e	MASADA
MARIANA	C	li!AS AAO IS
MARI AS.	D	,..ASARYI(.
•	MAA!A"VILLE	C'	HAS CAMP
•
c'

0	MAAl""E:L•  OAAIN!D	! lol.t.SET
0	lolAAJNA	I!	,..ASHA.Of
.AAJNE	C	MASHEL
c
 








NAL
 

C	I  MAY
c	I M.AV  e.tv
A	I MAY&CU'A
..   I M•YBELL
0	I   lllA YBERRY
C	I MAY!3ESC
B	I      MAVBID
8/0I MAVOOI.
D	I      MAVEP:
I "'AYES
e	I  "'""""IELD
0	I MAYrLO"ER
B	I"  ..A.YGF.A
 


0
c

0
0
•
.o"'°
'c
0
 

...
 
..... 1..
M.A IDEN HAILE
,.Al NS TAY
14l ITLAND HA.JADA
lolA.JU8A MAICAALAE
·MA.KAH MAICALAPA MAKA.PILI "4Al(AWAO MAK AW ELI "4AKENA MAI( I
"lllAIC.11(1 MAIC.LAK MA.KOT I

JotALA. NALABAA
NALABA*f  o
D'fP.RESSIONAl. M41.A8AAo
FAEQUEMTLY
FLOOOl!:CI
 
8    I. MANHEIM
c   I "'.AN1
'I lolAHIKAN
I lolA ILA
M.t.NISTe"I!
e   I MANI TA
.c    I lolANITOWISH
!3	I lolANLEY
e   I ""ANLtus ·
o	I "'ANN
' I lolANNJNG
•	I M.i.NOGUf
loANOR
MANSELO JotANSF JELD
e   .J  folANSIC.
.t.     I MANSKER
8    I MAl\ISONIA
C	I MANTAc'HJ!
8     I   MANT C"A
8:10 I MAhTEO
0	I   Jil.ANTER
IMANTON
0     I   MANU
. I MANVEL
MANVl!"L • SALfN! M.ANZANAA
 
c
'c  c•

c
B/0

0

ir
0•..
•c
c
C/0
'
c
c
c
 
HAAJON	D	MASHULAVILLE
MAr:'I PO	"!	MASKELL
.,.APJPOSA	C	MASO
MAAtSCAL	0	MASONFOAT
MARJ SSA	C	MASONTOWN
lolAAX:ES	D	,..ASSACI(
MAA.l!"f5AN	9	M.ASSACX:o  DRAINED
MAAl(fT	C	f  M.t.SSACl:'.)NA
AAkEY	A/el MASSANETTA
lolARKHAM	c	I .....SSANUTTEN
MARIC LAKI!"	0	I   ·ss ACH
..APltLAND	.C .  f" MASSfN.A
HAAKLEP.t.SS	D	I    M.ASSJE
MAAKTO	C	f   MASTERSON
. MAPLA.	D      I   MATA.
A L.All:f	0	I MAT.AGOPDA
MARL ORO	· B	I   MATAMOROS
lolAALEAN	8   I M.t.T.ANUSI(
MARL.ETTI!	!!!.  I MATANZAS
......LOW	c	I lolAT"APEAKI!"
HA.ALTON	c   I ....TAWAN
MARMARTH	S      I   MATCHER
.....N....AATH•  COOL	C	I MATFIELD
MARNA	C/DI   M• GO
..AROSA	8     I   MATHENY
MAPOTZ	C	I MATHERS
N•APA	c	"''THERTON
 
8/0 f" .,AVHEW
a	I ,...v.,.·EAD
8     I MAY ..EN
C	I M&YNAPO  LAKE
D	I M_.l.YO
c	I H&YDD"N
B	I ...AYowORTH C	I MAVOUf /\I e	I MAVSCORF
e	1     1o1&YSPPtNGS
e	1  1o1.&YT•G
c	I .....YTD.'llN
D    I MAYVILLE
8  . I MAVWQOC
c	I lol.t.ZARN
D    I ·MAZASICA c	I .....ZOALE
£'1	I MAZOUAIC.A
I!!     I MAZUMA.
B	I    MC    COA-T
C	I MCJ.FEE
A	I MCALLEN·
C	I MCALLISTER
0    I "'CJ.LPlN
P:	I NCl!'EI!"
8	I MCSE. TM
B   I MC9ETHo  S.ALIJ\IE
 
0
A
.c•
•
0'
c
•c
C/O
c

c
•c
c
c
0
c
 
HA ABO.N
 
: ca
 
'I MANZ.A.NJ T.&·
 
c	JilARPLEEN	D	MATHESON
 
8     .1  ..CB'!:THo    ORA INED	c
 
MAL ACHY

MALAGA•   STONY
 

A	J     •    GRAVEL.LY
 
•	lotAAQUEZ	c·	M.t.IHIS
 
e  I ..ceJGGAM
 
M.ALAGA

HALAMA_ MAL AGO
 
I"""ANZANJTAo

A	MANZANO MANZANOLA
 
HAROU TT	A	HATHIAS

9	APP	!!I	lolATHISTON
C	-HAPA IOTT	e	,...t.THON
 
C    I MCl'PJOE
.C   I MCCAFFE"PY
a. I fllCCAIN	c
 
MALAYA
M•LBIS
 
'.D .'
 
MAPLE   MDUNTA IN •
lolAPLECREST
 
! M•AADWBONI!	C	MATLACHA
a	MAASOE!••'	e	MA TNEFLA  T
 
c   I fllCCALEf
e	I 1o1CCALL
.·c    I HCC LL Y
 

MALCOLM
 
; I MAPLEMILL
 
C	lolAA.SEILLES	e
 
•)tATOV	0
c
 

NALOEN MA.LEZA MAI.HE.VA MALIBU "'ALIN MAL.JAMA.A l\IALLO  Y MALM
HALMES.A
 
( MAP"(ETIJN
i'  MAPL!TON•   STONY
loll.RACK
0  . ' flAR.AGUEZ C	I MARANA
MARATHON
c  ' MARSL!
MAR&LECREIEIC
MAR9L!H0UNT
 
C.	MARSELL	e	MATTA""US.ltEfT
C/DI  MA S .ALL	·e	MATTAN
.C     I MARSHAN	!/D  ,..ATT.&PEX
e	I MAASHBAOOK	0	I HATTiPDhl
. 9     I  .MAA.SHa.l"l.C	C	I      HATUNUCK
5   I MARSHOALEo  DRAINED 0   C	I  MAU
..   I ....RSHl"IELD	1!'/DI ......ueJLA
e	I MAPS ING	! I ""UDE
a    I M•oT	e	I ,..t.UDLIN
 
Cl        I     lolCc.A ..MON
0   I MCCANN
C      .J    HCC.t.liEY	c
C	I NCCARR•h
0       I    HCCJ.RTHY
c	I "'CCASH
c   I ..CCLAVE	c
l"     I MCCl.EAR't'	0
e	1     f"ICCLELL•N
c	I 1occ1.ouo	c
 
MALO
 
80  I' ..AR!!:LEMDUt:T.
 
c    I lo!.AATEL	D   I MAUGHAN
 
HALOTEAPE HAI.OTT
HA LOY
 
0    I  CMANNEAY
8   I lolAP(ADD
8     f·. lolAPC!LINAS
 
. I ....ATl!LLA	c	I AUKEY
D     I MART IN	C	I MAUMEE
D      I· ..... TIN PE .....:	D       I f"IAUN.t.80
 
c	I   ..CCLURE	c
../DI  "'CCDfN	0
D     I MCCOLi:.	0
 

M•LPAIS
 
8   I H.t.RC!LLDN
 
C	f   Ill.I.PT INECK	D
 
,1.  H.AUPIN
 
c	I .-cccLLUM	'
 

lolALSTAQ ..
 
'!  I _lol.t.AC!TTA
 
·I ..ART J""EZ
 
0     1  ...AUAEP.AS
 
I MCCONNEL
D
 
MALVERN
MA MALA
MAotOU
 
c  I lolAIU::IAL
0	lo'APC"LAY
c	..ARCOLA
 
0      f   """'°' INI	8      I     MAUAEPTOWN
t'	f   MAPT J/\ISBUAG	e'	f     "'AUAICE
C	I lolAAT INSOAL!:	.8	I  "'AUAY
 
I    .,CCOJ"NEI. •  FLOODED
[-!	I JoiCCOOK
e·  I MCCOR'NICK	c
 
·MANAHAA
 
c      ' NAPCO/\II
 
c	I    fril:APTJ°NSO	C·    I
 
MAUVA IS
 
C	I MCCCIR' T.	•
 

MA"IAHAWI( IN
 

MARCO.TT
 
c	I M.t.RTlN YILLe	e	I lolAVCO
 
C	J    MCCOY.	c
 
0    '·
<    '
 
NAPCOU
 
e    .1   MARTINTON.	"t;     I
 
lol"VEPIClt MA'llF
 
C	I r.('CREE
fl/DI  MCCA,OPY	0
 
l<IANARO
MANAAOo    GRAVELLY
 
0   l MARCUM
C      ·1   HARCUS
 
c   I MART Is	e	I
S/DI  MAATISCO	e/ol
 
).4A11Af
 
.a.	I ..ccROSKET
 
sues TR.t.TUM
....,.,..ss.a.     • MANASSAS
MANAS TASH
 
I ....Ar:use:
C	I fllAHCY
B	I MAADIN
C	1 •   NAAENGO
 
D	I ""PT Y	B	I N.AW'ER
0  . I lolARUHSCO	c	I
C     I M.ARV.AN	D     I MAXCREE1'
C/D/   lo!AAVELL	8	I MAXEY
 
e	r MCCULLOUGH
8	I MCCULL 'J	c
e/of 1o1ccu...BER
C	I. MCCUNE	0
 
MANA TEE
 
B/ I M_AA!·SUA
 
e       1   1o1ARVIN	c	I
 
MAJCF IELD
 
B/DI  1o1CCURD'f	c
 

MANA TEE o OEPAESSJONAL
MANA TEE o. FLOOD.ED
 
0  I ':"AAG•TC:
I M•PGE UM
·o  I ""-'PGIE
 
e/CI  ....RvvN	e	I MAXTON
8    I "ARY	C	I lolAlCV ILLE
C·   I ....PYSLAh?	8/0 I ·MAXWELL
 
e	I ...cc·uTCHEN	0
6.   I NCD&OE	c
D	I MCDANIEL	'
 
NCTES:    TlllO  HVDROLOGIC  SC ·L GROUPS  SUCH  AS  6/C  IN.cilCATES  THE  !lR.t.INEO/UNOR ..AINED  SITUATION.
MODIFIERS  !>HOVN ••G •• 8.EDf:OC-K   SUBSTRATU)f•   IEFER" TO  A   SP!.ClFIC  S0.1L  SERIES  PHASE  FOUND  ,,,.  s"o1i..  MAP  LEGEND

(210-VI-TR-55, Second Ed., .Ju1ie 1986) 	23
 


TABLE A-5 CONTINUED	Hydrologic soil groups for United States soils


"ICOE:•HIQTT	• I Ml!CICLEN'9lJRG	c    I ttl!FllOl!N	0	'ftlC fl•h   •fT	c	I J.lfNNfOSA	a
MCOOL£
 
MCDON•LO
 
c   I "'EOA
 
•	I MERl!TA	c	.w110::.u.o	c   I
 
MINNE QUA	c
Ml_,,.e;TONICA	0
 
HC!JONALOS Vt LL I!'.	f./OI   Ml!:DANO	0     I "fRGEL	•	MILACA	c	I
"4COUFF	c    .r  Ml!:O.o.PY
 
MfNNl!!TONK.Ao
suesTAATUlol
 
SILTY
 
C/O
 
,	I MINNIECE
 
c	· "'f08U'RN	' I "'!::RIND	•	MIL!"URY	•c   I Ml"INl!WAUl(.I
 
A{C
 
MC L"'C
•	•
 
•	Mll,8Y	'
 
MCELROY
 
6	"'fDCC	0  .
 
M!J;Kl!L
 
0	Mil.CAN
 
c   I MINNIEPEAIC	•
 
MCfliE
 
MEOl"OR.D
 
I MEf:lL J't
 
•.,. MJLe:S
 
c  I MJNNlfPf.U( •
OVfR8LOWNo
 
MCFA00 "
 
"''!t'f'IJA
 
I "'l!Fi:MENT AU
 
MILOPl!O
I
 
HCFA It.	c	J'EDICl"ll!:	' I MCPHILL
0
 
•	"ILFORO
 
e.101     G.RAVELLY
I loll IN If PEAK•
 
"'l!OLl!Y
 
I M!'FNA
 
MCl".C.ALAt.C
MCFAUL
 
'c	MEDLIN
 
I M"POS
 
14(1..HA#;>
c
 
"4CGAll"f'E't	•	MEOQMAK #	0    I "'ERR JCK
 
I
I M1NNIEVILLE
 
MCGARR
 
c	1-le'.OC!RA	•  I MF.RR ILL
c	Ml!ONAY	' I M!.PQ ILL.AN
 
MILITARY
MILL  HOLLOW
MJLLAOORI!
 
c•  I
•
 
OVER81.0WN
Ml,,,NIJolAUCI	c
c
 
MCGARVEY
MC AAY	c	ME!Gl!RNOT
c
 
fl'l!RR IMAC	A
Mf'PR I TT	c
 
M   ILLA'RO
M    JLLSORO
 
I Mli'iNI rH
,_H NYf'
•
 
CGEHf.E
 
...t:!GERO
•
 
c
I "'INOCCUA	!?/D
 
MCGILVEl+Y	0	,..i!f.HA ..
 
MCRR1TTs   CLAYEY
 
"'tLLBROOIC
 
MINOA
 
MCGINNIS
 
·c	·EEJ!,.S
 
SU'!ISTRATIJ ;	Mlt.LeURNI!!
 
M!l!:TEl!TSI!	0	C-RAtNl!O	MILLER	0
c	Mf'GALO'l	"	lol'l!RIJITTo   OQ.tl D
 
I HJl'of!Q	0
c
 
!<tC'ilNT·Y
,..C(olAlt
 
•	MU.L.ERLAltf
 
I NJ".lfO
D     I	0
 
"'CGIRIC•   LOW	0	)oll!GGl!TT	0	MERSHON	c	H ILLl!RLUX
 
"'' r..eu
0
 
PRECIPITATION	M!;GONOT	c	Nl!PTC1,,,.
 
MILLERTON	0    I Hr ..v..1.1.E
 
.,. MILLETT
 
I "'IN'lli:"LLS	c
 
MCO:OOWA"I	•	lo'l!GUJ..,	•	lol!RTZ	c	._,JLL!RVll.LI!	A•,l!J   I       "'IN'V "'O.
MCGREW	•  I lo'e:IKLE	0	)ol!SA	•	MILLGROVE	e..-o I "'l0"1	'
 

MCGUIRi:
 
I JolEICINOCK	0	MESCAL	c	M ILLHI	0     I MIR.AB.AL	c
 
lolCHENRY	" I l>'!LA1t'11t	c	M!SCAL!RO	c
 
MILLl-'CPPl!R
 
•	I ""!QACLE	'
 
i.	ttLLICH	0    I Mt RAGE	c
"'lLLIC:OMA	c   I
"'CINTY E	• I Hl!:Lf!Y	• I ""t.SSER	c	..tLLJG.tN	c    I MlqANO.A	0
 

!ofCl VEY
 
c   I  E.LD·	c   I •ET
 
•	M.ILLING	0     I
 
:itCXAM IE	0    I !' Ol!P	• I METAMO A	•	MtLLIN'.OTON	9/01 ,.111e:s
 
"'CK•Y	·-   I Hl!LGA	0     I METCALF	0	MILLIS
 
lolfRICWOCO	0
 
lotCK.E	0    I ...!;Ll-tO"'ES	0    I lo'!.1!A	•	MILLPAlf	' I ..rARCR	c
"(C'CELYll""	•  I l> l!LLi!.NTHIN	0     I "1l.TJGOSMI!	•	MILLR:AC!	• I Ml ROA  LAICE
 
MCKENNA	0    I MELLOR	0    I kf:TQL JU	•	MILLPOCk	•  I
 
,.ISAO	'
•
 
MCKENNA•  C-RAIN!D	c  I M!LLOR •  !=TRATJl""ll"C
MCK!NZll!:	0    I  5\Jl!SST::rAT\JM	I "'!TZ
 
!otCIC lNL!Y
 
•	I lilELLOTT
 
•	I "'l""XICO	..
 
ORAJNEO	c
•	I MISSION	0
 
MCKIN ..EY	c	I "'l!:LOCHI!!:	0     I !i!!'Xl!PQING	·o	!i!JLLSIT!
•	MELOLANO	c   I "°!YSTR'F.
 
•	I MISSLER
 
MCIC:NIGl"IT
 
•	... ILL VILLE
 
I ,.JSSISOUOI	•
 
MCLA:N	c   I "'ELAOSE	c   I ·"''"'(·ON	0	MILL'llOOO	0
 
MCl.Al.JP.  lfW
 
•	!ol'!LT0N	0     I MIAMI
 
14fLNER
 
' I lll"lSOULA	0
I lo' JT1=:t4 •  OARELY	c
 
lilf.AN IAN	c	"'(LOX
MCl..OUGHLJN	• I MELVIN	0    I MICANOPY	c	"'1t.i=irT.1.s
 
I M ITC
c
FLOOOEO
 
"'CMEEN	c	I ....1!...ALOOSl	c	"'ICCO	!'/OJ  lo'fLQf'.,	c	I
 
'4CMILLE
 
,•  I lol! !o!PWIS	•	M?CHl!:LSOM	•  I MILTON·	c	I "I TCl"<;"LL	•
 
MC)o!ULL IN
 
I "ll!NAHGA	•	"'ICl-tfGAM"41!	c	I l•ILVAR	c	I
 
MITl'<IA ...GA	,c
 
,.C"'1URDli:	c     I "'l!N:\AO	•	!"' IC'ti.Y	0	,.,-.e,.i::s
 
p	I "I TKOF	c
 
lolC"'1UR'l'AY	0	I ., NASM.&	0	""ICAOY	·C	MIMOSA	c    I "'f r-:oF.
MC'4UR'l'A't' •  QqAJN.tO      c    1. MEN90	c	w rri• s
MCNARY	0	I MEN&EHOIJAE	c	"'IOC'O
 
'400ER A TEL y
c
 
MC"IE•L
 
I MEHOl!LTNA	0	MICOLl'	c	MINAM	•
MJr.OLl!9URY
 
1<1J fQE
.,JTQING	c
•
 
MC,.ULL
 
'<   I "l!NOELTNA •
 
•	lo'INAT
 
'	.. ITTfN
 
t.ACUS TR I.NE	1ottODLEM& CH
... ,	•
 
Ml ..ATARE	0	"'I VIOA
"'INC ..EY	"'·' ZEL	0
lo't ...CHU,.JN'A	0.	'
 
..	Jolf ..OENMALL	•
 
J#JNCO
 
M,C,,l,'.AUL
 
I SUSSTAATU>f	M 10.0LETOifN
,	MIOOLCWO.J?	0
 
wn.i.e
•c	"'0,N'O	0
 
I
I Uf"NOI
 
0
,.JOl!L!:iHf·
 
MO.AG	c
<
 
MC')U,t,AQ IC
•
 
•	"'IDl!SSA
 
)1111NOE"li0
Jo.JNOEN
 
1<1COU'!EN	<
 
I ii!'!."NDOCJhO
 
•	MJCl"Oqlt'	•
 
.,.O.&P.A
•
 
"'C>fAE
 
•• Ml!""00N	•
 
0	)If NE
c
 
..OAULA
'	.,O!"Ai'
 
14CR•VEN	c   I )olF.NOUTA
 
MIDLAND
•
 
MJNEC!LA
•
 
"'0 EPG
 
...er .\GGA!;T
f'CVEGAS
 
I "l!NEl'!E	0	MIOMCNT
0     I NF.....Fi:iO	M ION IGHT
 
D.	M I"tER
M   INEP.U.
 
0	woeoe:E"r IE
c
 
'4CVJC.W:ERS	c   I
 
,..!...1.:::J	0	HIDO
 
c	WQ!'L
 
"IEAO	0     I ,.!NO	c	,_ lORAlll'	e	MINEPAL  HOUNf.AlN
 
ME.AO(N
 
•	r MENOic:EN	c	,_IDYALE	c	IMINEJ<SYILLI!	'	"'0 A ?OGE	'
 
MEAOOtreR:lOIC	0/0 I Jlll 'fTO	c	M fEAl-ifLL	c	titlNETA	c	I MOC.tPf"Y
MEAOOtrCR!'.:  '(	c	I M!...TOR	•	Mfl!'AUF	•	tit(NGQ	' I '°OCF-10	"
c	I MOC ..ONT	•
W!'.ANS	c	I M('R   ROUGE	•	"'IGEF"N	•	M(NICLEFI	' I· "4CC1' ILE.,E
llEAQES	0     I "'EQ(ED	D	MIGUEL	"	,.INLITH
W CAN	' I MfRCl!Ol!:S	.. D	MIKE:
 
lotECl-f.tN tCSSUPG
"ECKESV IL.LE	c
 

I "'EQCl!Y	c
 

/It lfl' '"'
 
•	MINNl!OPA
 
•	I "'C'0ES1'C'	c
 
,..OTES:	rwo  HYOROLOGIC  SO IL  GROUPS  SUCH
 
O/C INOICATl!S  T I! ORA IN!O,IUhOAA fN!;O  SITU.f:TION•
 

"C.O!FIE S
 
SHOWN•   E.G.•  "EDAOC It  SUBST" AlUfl(e    R!F!A   •• • SP!CIFIC   OIL   S!PfES  PHASE FouNo IN  SCtL  "'"'P  t.1:'.Gf"-NO.
 

24	(210-VI-TR-55,  Second  Ed., June  1986)
 
·'


'


TABLE A-5 CONTINUED	Hydrologic soil groups for United States soils

c                                        •   lilYOlolA •  ...     • MODIC IN                               c        MO'fTI!:                               •   MOr:tTENSONt C088L Y      0         MUIAIC fAIC                               p          1i1vq•                                c MOO'fON                                 c         JitONTECITO                           •   MOP VAL              •    ti'UKILTEOe    Ol"AINED      c         lil't'QTLE                                 •
MOf)JICOPll!	0	filONTl!:LLO	c	MOSCOW	c	.,ULOPOV	0	.NA&LfMU	•
MOl!PITZ	•	ll':ONTl!:OCHA	0	MOSE'·L	c	MULE TT	0	HAALfMU,   BEDPOCIC	c
140GG	0	MQffTEAOSA	b	ll(QSl!St     llOULOl!:PY	c	MULHALL	•	NABESNA	0
 
MOGLIA	c
 
c	MOSHANNON	•	MULHOLLAND	'·	NACHES	'
 
MO>iOLt,.ON	'
 
0	NACHUSA
c
 
MOGOT!:	c
MOM.t.LL
MOHAWK	•
 
' I JllOSHER
' 1· MOSHUP
 
NACIMIENTO	c
c	N.&CL JNA	0
NACOGDOCHES
o·	NADA	0
 
MULL VON	0	NADEAU
HOll!"SI!	•  I ,.ONTMORl!NCI	• I l<IOSLANDl!R	0	MULSl-IO!	c	N.f.OJNA
0
'·	MOINl!S	c	I Jl!0NTNl!YA	c   I HC!SMA""	0•	"'UL.ST.IV	c	NAO RA	0
MO.JD	c    I MONTOUR	0    l HOSDVl!T	0	"'UL Tl!:Y	•	NAF,.
 
,	MOll:!LUMNI!.	0   I
 
MONTOYA	0     I HOSROC	0	MULTNOMAH
 
NAGiTSY
•
 
140KENA	c   I "'ONTPE,LLfl!.R	c   I MCSSYRDCK	'	MULTORPOR
 
NAGLE'
 
c
-	JlfOlt INS	.o    I MOHTVAL,1!	0      I )ICTA	•	ai>UNOEL!IN	•	NA"'A	c
..	·o
MOKD	0      I MONTV!RD!	·e.1.01  ..DTE"N	c	MUNOl!N	•	NAH,\TCHE	c
fllOKUt.!IA	• I MOHTWl!L	c   I MOTLEY	•
 

MDL.ALLA
 
I MQNTWl!L•    ALKALI	• I NoTODUA	0	lllUNOT	c	NA HON
 
0
:	MOL S                               0    I MONYl!RO                               •  I MOTT LANO                             '  )UJHISlNG                              •   NAHUNTA                               c MOLfNA	•  I MOOHOO                                           •  I MCTTSVILLI!                        •   MUNI(.                                            c    I NAKAI                                       • "'DLLI CY                                       c    I MDOPfLJGHT                           ' I MOUL TRI!                        0           ,.UNSET                                    0      I NAICINA                                    .,o
MOLLY ILLE	D     I MOONS TON!"	c   I MOUNDHAY !'r'	•	ai>UNUSC0NG	&/OI NilKOCHNA	0
 

NOLLY MOLOKAI
 
.•,
 
c
MOOR!YILL!:	c   I MOIJtol PRA.[Rll!•:	0	I MURANCH	c	I NALPD	•
 
MOLSON	•	MOQSI!   RIV!R	0     I  PONOl!O	I MURDO	•  I NALL	0
MOMOLI	•	Mo0Si!LAK£	Al'DI   MOUNT  H0141!	•  I iooURl!!:N	' I "'AMF.LA	c
MOP ANA	D     I MOUNTAIN!!DY	0	lo"UDP Y	c	I NA..,UR	0
MOOUAH	I MOUNTAIN!:l!iw	c	MURRILL	I NANCY	B
 

"'ONAHAffs
 
c	I MOUNTAINVl!W	c	NURT1P
c  I MOUNTAINYILLI!
 
I NA.NJ.I.IC	0
'HANK.IN
 
MONARCA
 
0	MORADO
 
NUl;V ILLE	/DI
 
MONAST!:RIO	c	MORAl..l!S	0     I MOUNT14f'O	0	MUSCATJNE'
 
I NANNY	•
 
•	MORAN	• I "'0UNT'1"1!C•
 
c	MUSE
 
NANNY TON
NANSl!MONO	c
 
MONAVILL!
MON8UTT!:
 
c	fllORANCH
 
•	I MOO!:RAT!LY·
 
MUSl!LLA
 
•	I NANSFNE  .	•c
 
MONCHA	•	MQRAPOS	c
 
I MOUNTVJl!'lf
 
.MUSICK.
c
 
I NANSfPSEP
0
 
MONDAMIN
 
c	NORD	c	fi'OUZ.ON	0	MUSJNJA
 
HONO!T	c	"'ORl!AU	0	MOYILL!
 
MU:SKfGO	A;'Q      NA NS US
 
MARSHY	0	NANTAHALA	•
MONl!I!	D	MORl!HOUS!:	D	toiO'lf!BA	•	NUSICfGOo    CLAY   l.OAM   0	NANTUCltfT	c
MONGAUP	c	lofDRl!LANO	0
NONICQ	c	MMl!.ND	c	"'QWICH	0	MUSKELLUNGE	0	NAPA	0
NONI DA	c	MOA[T	D	MDXEE:	0	ai>USI( INGUM MONl!RCO	0	MOR EV	0	OYl!ffS	c	)IUSKOGE!
MOYl!RSO	0	)fUSOr'AR!
MONITOR	c    I MORGA LA	c	MOY I NA	0	MUSQUIZ	c	NAPP A NE I!	0
 
MON.JEAU	o·
MONOCLINI!:	c
MONOGRAM
 
MUSSEL	NAP TOWNE·
MUSSELSHELL	NARANJITO	c
MUSSEPMILL	c	NAii AN.JO	c
 
c	. MUSSEY	e.101   hAllCISSE	c
MONONGAHELA	c	I NORLING	0	VERNON	c	MUSTANG	A.IOI   NARCDDSSEf'	c
MUTNALA
MON!fOEVJLLE'	Cl'DI   MOROCCO	•	"'UCICALEE	0	MUZZLER_	0	I NAAEL
MONSl!RATE	c	I .MQROP	c	MUCCO  .	0	"'"AltlC.t..	0	I NARK	c
MONSERA TE •. THIN	0     I "'CAPH	l!l.1"01   MUl;>LA.VIA	'	CEPRESSJQNAL	I NAllLON	0

NAIJAAGANSETT
MONT AL JO	c    I MORRISTOWN	c    I MUG	0	MYL!'.RSVILLE	•  r NARRAGU I NHEP	0
MONT ARA	0	I MORROW	c	I MUGGJNS	.c	)f,.l""ORO	0	I NARROWS	0
MONTA_UK	c    I MORSI!	0	I MIJGHOUSE	c	MYLREA·	c    I MARTA	0
MONl&DRNE	c	I MORSET	•  I MUGl'IUT	c	"YOMA
NOTES;	'""o. HYOROLDG.1c·. so IL  GROUPS   SUCH   AS  8./C   IHDlCATl!S   TH•  DAAINEC'.IUNDQAJNED   SITUATIDN.
MOO II"" IERS   SHO'llN•   E .G•     l!ll!DAOCIC   SUl!llSTR.t.TUl*9   Rl!l'"ll!:R    TO   A   SPl!CIFIC   SO IL   SERIES  PHASE   FOUND   JN  SOIL  MAP   LEGEND•
(210-VI-TR-55, Second Ed., June 1986) 	25
 



 

TABLE A-5 CONTINUED
 
Hydrologic soil groups for United States soils
 


 

'llASCA	d
hliSH	.,
NASH l!AD	S
NASHDSA	C
NASHVILLE 	8
NA SHiii AUK	C
NASKEAG	C
NASON	C
 
N!HALE •   FLOODED	c
Nl!:l-IAR
hEHAR •  STONY	c
H!IBER	c
N fC
NEIL TO°"	A
NEISSENB!"r.	c
NE!(l·A	c
 

NElfAL!IN•  MUCK	0
slleSTQJ.TtJM
NE"AL81N•    PONDED	D
NEVALLA	0
tU:'lo.At#NA	C
NfWAJ<K	C
NEWARK•   PQ D D	0
ll!:lfARK•   P'JNOfD•	C
 
I N(ICAL
I NllC'!''f'
I     "'llCl"UL
I NllCISHKA
I Nll(LASON
f    NllCOLAI
I       ""ILA':..o
I ttILf.A
 
8	N00t4Af.I	D
15	NOP AH	c
f'i	NORA
!!	NOA AO
B	NOAS!"RT
ti	NORBO RN!'!:
C	NOR CAN	c
fl	NOAO	•
 

0
NASON. G AYELLY	B
NASS	0
!.tASS U	C
NASSET	A
NATAGA	A
NATAL	0
NA TANK	C
NATC·li!!:Z	9
NAJCHITDCHl!S	0
NAJHALE	C
 

NE.CICE"I
fll!l'!OMA
NFLDOrl! NELLA NELLIS
I Nl!:LMAN
I     NFLSCOTT
I Nl!LSF
I NELSON
I N!!:l;tA!iJI
 
•	COOL
NfWA ICUM	B
o	NfWAYCO	e
NEWBELL 	8
NEVSEPG	B
c   I NfWe!RG.  llfT	C
c   I NEWe PN	C
•c    I N Wl'lfRAY	C
I hEVftON	.l'I
o    I N IWCO	ll'
 
I NILRAP
I NIMeffD
I N!,..l!RICIC
I N("tMO
I NIMROD
I NIMS
J    NIMU!"
I NINC);I
I NINE.IC.I.A
I	NINI! ILE
 
B	NORDBY	''
B	NC ROEN
C	NORDIC	•
0	NOAO.tCOL
C	NORONE'  S
C	'0
NOA I" OLK
Ii	NORFORK
e	NOP GE
0     I   NORGO	D
0  ·. J    NORICA	'•
 

NATHROP'	C
NATHAOP' NONSTONY  B
NAT OP• COBBLY	9
.NATI	C
NAftCNAl	3
NATKIM	a
NATO.WAS	8
N.t,T';;!OY	0
Nit.TUPI TA	6
 
J	Nl!'MAH
I   "! MAH •. DRAINED
I    NEMICO
I Nl!!:NOTI!!
f     NEMOURS
I NENA./'fA
I    NENNO
I Nl!'QLA
I    NEVTOHA
 
D t  NfWCOM!!I
c  I N1!!"0 DAL'!
D      I    Nr.'llELL
' I NE"l!LLTON
I N[WF' tl!LDS
•	I /'fe:Wfll'l.AT
c	I Nt'WFOPIC
D   I N!':ll,..OUND
o  I Nl!WGLARUS
 

•	NINf.PIPe: Nl'll!:Y!H
N.IN  JGAll!T
0	NICeE'LL
NIOTA
D	NIOTAZ!"
c	NfPf.
c	NIP  INTUCK
•	NJPPT
 
.,,   I f:IOPl(OOL
B    I NOALANO
B      I   -..oi?NA.	0
C I NOA A.,   DRAINED	c
o      1   No11M•NGEI!:	D
C      I   NO MAHIA	e
B       J    NOROB	c
0     I N011REST	c
8     I NORQfS	D
 
N4UKATJ	0
NAUMeURG	C
u oo	a
'llAYA(A	0
NAVAJO	0
NAVAN	D
 
I     "IEPALTO
I       N!P!STA.
I  hEPMI
I     NEPONSET
I    NEOP!L
j, Nl!PTUN!:
 
A	I P:f!ilH.t.N	A
•	I N WHOUSf 	8
c   I .,,.fWI( IPIC	0
c   I NEWLAND	e
e   I NfWLANDs.   ••QM	·c
A	I NEWLIN 	8
 
NIPSUM
NI-A.a
l'itA C NIRI!' NISENf:
,_lSHNA
 
C        I     NORAISTON
6     ! NORTE:	c
c   I N6R'TEZ	c
C ·1  NOAT  POWDEQ	c
J!!	I     NCR' THSCRO	c
C/DI  NOATHCASTLE
 

,,.AYA SAN
NAY I DAO
4Ylf'fA
NAVO
 
A		Nfq.!SON NESt'!ITT NESD.t.
0	N!SH.t.MINY
 
•	I Nf NA	C
o	I NfWNATA	C
<   I NfWP.t.55	C
•	I "' WPORT	C
 
NJSHNA.  PONDED t5M0N NtSOUA.f..L'f'
NISULA
 
0   I NOf;THCDTE
0  I NOi:l'TMOALE
.a	I  Ncfi<T  JE'LO
P.   I N"oATj.IMORE
 
C/D
c
0
c
 
NAlllNl!Y NAWT r.AX ING
 
D		NESHO!A N!SllCA
NESIUS
 
i:    I    N[lfRY
a  I .NfWSIC•H
A	I    ·NflfSDN
 

A/DI
 
NITCHLY
NI TT AV
 
B	I   NORTHRUP	c
D      I   NOAT"'STAA	c
B      I    Nr. THWATER	'
 
NAYE
NAYPEO
 
ll:l"Sl(AHI
NESKOlllN
 
a    I Nf rIO'O Ck
c   I NtW TfAO
 
o	I "f " lII
c	I N(WANA
 
C      I    JOR THWOOO
e     I     NQPTON
 
O/D
c
 
-.AYRIE!
 
0	N!SO
 
D      I   N!lfTnN
 
A/OI
 
NIWOT
 
C      I   NO TONY  ILLE	c
c
 

NAZ
NAZATON
 
NESPl!'LI?°"
Nl!'SS
 
C        I     NEltTC:Nl.t.
0   I NfVTOVN
 
e	I  NIX
c   I Nl:XA
 
0   I NORWELL
C     I NOAW ICH	0
 
NIE'AOSCO NEB AGO NE5EKEA
 
c	NES·SEL
c	N!STl!'A
c	,_ESTORIA
 
9   I NE'ofUL..
c  I Nf'llVJ!NNA
C;'t. f   NEVV ILL!
 
A	I
. o	I
D        I
 
NIXON
hlllONTD"'
NI ZINA
 
8   I NORWOOD B	I     hOSRAC
A	I    hQTAL	D
OTCHEP
 
Nl!BGE'N
'llE!!JSH
"IE BONA
NE  CAN   rcu.. NE'Cl!SSITY NECHE
Nl!Ct'"IDA Nf(TAR
Nl!_,A
NEO RLAND
"4EE':tLI!
NE'EDLF.    l='l!AK
 
N!!:STUCCA
N•F•T•ART3
NETCONG
c	NETO
c	N!Tti"'A
c	N!TRAC
c	,_ETTLES
c	N!TTL.ETON
NEUBE.AT
0	"'CUNS,
c	NE.UAALIA
 
D      I   NE1GAT.
C	I     Ne'Z    PEACE
l"    I   NG.t.RD AU a  I NGAPco-. l'I    I NGATP.l.NG "'.  I NGfDE!-US
I NGl!'R UUL
D	I     hc.l'f;l•,.GQR
c    I  Nl.tGARA
a   I f:fJAPAOA
C      I    NIAPT
c   I N12es
 
c	I ,..OJU i.
c	I  NO !
NC'E'LE
I NOet.f'TON
t	I ...oeocc
•	I Ni:JBSCC!T
c    .1  ..c&UCll
o   I NCCICf"h
c	I NODAWAY
e	I NOO!:M
' I NC'Ol""f.
•	I hOfLKE
 
s   I ...
C	I    "-OTt
e     /   NOT"iEO
c     J     r tJTSPTEP
I    NOTT Alf.A
A         J    NOTTER
C      I    NOTUS
.C     I   NOTUSo    DRAINED
6      1   NOUOUE'
a.  I NOv•CAN
ft	)  NOYARIC
0      I   NOVA.RY
 
•
•
••·

D
D

D
 

Nl!EDLE Pl!AK• LO MY B
 

,._!UQALIA,   SANDY
 
8     I   Nll!ILE:Y
 
t	I tvC'GAL
 
c    I N(!VfiTCI	D
 

siJeSTRATUM
 

U!ISTR.t.TU'4
 
I NIBSCf<o
 
c	I NOHILJ
 
o
...
 
I NqvTNA	e
 
NEEDLE PEAK•	,
 
NFUSICI!
 
B       I    NIC.tNOP
 
0  t   !OIC.t.SIPPI
 
nr  NOWATA
 
.•,.
 
CICCASJCNALLY
Ft.OC!OED
 
NE.V.t.O.t.NU.E
Nl!'VAOCR
 
C        1   ,,.-ICHOLl"LA-T
I NICHCLIA
 
o	I ""!JK.4'f'
I NOICHU
 
C     I NOWl!'N
C       /    NOWOY
I
 
NEl!DLETON 	9
NEEOL!YI!	C
 
NEY.t.PC
IEYAT
 
C       I    NICHOLS
8    I  NJCHCLSO ...
 
NOL.AM
c	NOL  ICHUCIC'f'
 
NOYl!R
e   I ,.:ovies
 
·C/D
 

Nl!l!OMOPE	C
NEELEY	A
rll!:!'N	C
 

N!'Vl!!:E
"l>!'Yl!'ASINK.
f'c!YJLLE
 
6	NICHC.LVILLE
D	NICKEL
8	NICK IN
 
<	NCLIN
,..OLD
,_.Ct. TEN
 
B     I NOYD	c
I NO'f'SON
C        I     NUAHS
 
N!l!N•  l!T	D
NEEN• O AINEO 	8
N!E'llAM	C
NEfi;" 	9
NEl!SES	C
N!ESO AH 	8
NEFF	C
Nf'GlE 't 	9
NErU.t.!H	·3
 
NEYJLL!•    WIET
NEVIN "'EVIN! Nll!VKA Nl!YO'f'EA Nl!'YTAH N!:VtJ
NEW   CAM!)Q(A
hElfALOI'°'
 
C	NICKSVILL!
!J	NICODEMUS
I!	N"JCciOi;MUS•
C	NICOLAS
0	NICOLLET
(	N-100
C	h  l!LSEN
C	NIGHTH'-llllC
e.fDI  NJl-!ILL
 
c

FLOOD!:O    C

c
0
e
'
 
OlifAAA
Nt'N!'
NOflflE NC!NOAL  TON NONOPAMU NONPAll  !'  IL NC!OIC
NQOICACHANPS
ti:DOll!S.t.CIC
 
C      f  NUS'f'	D
0     I      usv. DRAINED	c
e    I   MUB'f'o    PROTECTED	c
e   I NUC	c
0     I   NUCKOLL$
0     I   NUCLA	D
C      I   NUECES	c
0      I   NUEVA
C      I   NUFF	c
 
ores:	T•O  HYOAOLOGIC     OIL  GROUPS  SUCH  AS  9/C   INDICATES   T =  OP.AfNEC/UNORA.INEO  SITUATION.
MODll"IE S   SHOWN•   !! .-c;.,  /Je'DAOCI(   SUSSTAA.TU"'•   AIEl"l!:R     TO     11    SDECJFJC   SOIL  SEA11!:S  PHASE  FOUND  IN   SOIL   lllA.P   LEGEND•


26	(210-VI-TR-55, Second Ed., .June 1986)
 
··.·;
'


 

TABLE A-5 CONTINUED
 
Hydrologic  soil groups for United  States soils

..
 

NUGENT NUKRUM
 

I     OCONALU TE!:
D   I OCONEE
 
OLD   CAMP
c	OLDENl!llUAG
 
D     I OP!NLAIC!
e	I OP!'JUON
 
D	I    OSAIC1S	Si
c	I OSSOAN	C
,
 
Nut.e:Y
 
•	I OCONTO
 
OLDHAM
 
C/DI
 
OPHIR
 
c	I OS!'OAN•  MODERATELY  0
 
NULLIGA14
NUMA	.
 
I OCOSl A
a	I ocoue:oc
 
OLDS
OL05f'l!RAV
 
I OPJt-!JIC.AO
c	I OP1. IN
 
D	I
c	I OSCAA	0
 

NUNO A
NUNl!tilAICEA
 
c	I OCQUEOC.
D     I       MOOl!RAfELV    VET
 
OLDSMAR OLOSJofAR •
 
8/DI
D	I
 
CIPP10
OPPto• .STONY
 
D	I   OSCURA	C
c	I ·OSGOOD	C
 
NUN I CA NUNN
NUNN•      MOD( AA Tl!L Y
 
c   I OCRAIG
c    J    OCTAGON
•	I OCTAVI·A
 
0	O!PAl!SSlONAL
8	OLELO
8	OLE NO
 
Ioou'AGA
•	I OoQ••UIN
 
C      I   CISHA	B
c	I OSHAWA	0
C	I    OSHKOSH	C
 

WOT
 
f   OOAS
 
0	OLfN.T ANGY
 
A./OI
 
ORACLE
 
D	I   OSHO"'IE	0
OSHTEMO	e
 

NUNNSTDN NUPAAT NUPPl!R NUAKl!Y NUSS NUTALL NUTIVOL I NUTL!Y
NUTRAS
 
c	I ODELL
D    I ODEN
0  I OD!!:NSON
I ODl!AMOTT
D       f   ODl!AMOTT•    STONY
0    I oo.e:ssA
I ODIN
c	OONI!.
c	ODO
 
!I	OLl!'"OUol
A	OLETE
0	OLEX
C	OLP
8	OLGA
0	OL I
C	OLIA GA
0	GLICAL
I!'	OLIN
 
•	I O•AGA:AN
c	ORAID
e	ORAN
D.	ORAN GI!.
.C	OPANGE9UAG
OAA"'IGll!VAL!
c	ORCAP
ORCAS
OACHAAO
 
D        I
c	I O tER	.. 1'0
a	I OSI TO	C
o	I OSK.ti	C
e	I OS UhD	B
a   I oso	c
c    I osoee	o
o	I QSOLL	0
B        I     OSOAJDGI!
 
NUTAIOSO NUVALDI!
 
.•.
 
ODDNNl!LL
Ol!LOP
 
C	OLJNOA
II	ciLJPHAAfT
 
oRcKv
'	OAD
 
e   I
o	I OSSIAN
 
:,	NUYOBe:
N'IALA
NY< NV.JACK NYNORE
NYSEAVA
_,	NV SSA
 
c	Ol!:Sf
OE5TE·A'LI!:
O  !Nl9ACHl!A
c	OFU
OGAPTY
OGl!ECHEE
c	-Oc:ie:MAW
 
l!I	OLlVl!NHAIAf
C	OLJVJl':A
C	OLJ!TO
'	OLL.E I
C	0!-LJ!:AJYAS
8/0 I  DLMI TO
C/OI  OLMITZ
 
D	OADNA
c	OAONANC!
A	OAOVAY
0	I OAl!ANA
D         J     OP!ANNA
o.   I OA!JAS
9   I ORELIA
 
050-Tf	O

o	I OSSIPEE	0
c   I OST
o    I CSTt.r;R	c
o	I OSTRANOE>l
e	I CSV.t:LO	.c
o	I OT ANYA
D      I   OTEEN	•
 

- '	NVSSA°TON
 
•	OGILVI!
 
6.ID I     OL,..DS
e
 
C	I Olll!LLA
l!/OI ORENOA
 
o	I OTl!RO
;,  I OfHELl.0
 

C/0
 
NYSWONGER
Q•l!IAIEN O•N!ILL
 
D	OGLALA OGLI! OGL.ES!IY
 
I     OLMSTED
ft	f   CLNl!:S
D    I OLNEY
 
e	I OA!Nl!.VA
p	I    CRl'"DRD
·19      I   ORHOOO
I:   I ORICTO
 
C	I
. a	I
D	I
 
QT t-SCO OTJSVILLE OTLEY
 
'•
0
,,.
 
:)AH(
CAIC    GLEN OAK     GROV! OAICALLA
 
OGRAL
CHACO CHANA
•	OHIA.
 
l!I     I OLOA·V
.C       I    OLOICUJ
c  I CtLOMOUNf
A	I OLOMPALJ
 
c	I ci:101.1.
 
a	I OTOMO
0    .I OTOOLE
•	I OTfEA
 
.c•
 
D	I    ORJF
 
OAK80RO
OAKOALI!'.
OAKO!N
 
c	·CHOP
OMSCOW
0	OlDl!M
 
c    1  al.or
19.     I   OLOTANIA.
A        ·1 ·OLPI!
 
C	I ORIGD
e ·  I ORINOCO
C      I-ORIO
 
•	·I
c  I
II.IOI
 
OTTEAHOL f
.C	l TEA SON OTTMAA
 
.•.
 
.  tl.AKl!S OAKHILL OAIC.t-iURST OAKLAND
- O.t.:KL!T
OAIC.Ll !TE.R.
 
OJA TA
t'JIBWAY.
0	OJITO
c	OJITOS
c	OKANOG"AN
c	0-XAION
 
.D	I     OLSON
C    I OLTON
C	I     OLUST!!
9    I CL\'1 C
0      I    CLYl'PIC
0    ·I  Ofi!AD I
 
o	I o_r:t.oN
C	I OAITA
9/0f  CPI ZA!IA
e   I o.RIZAeA.  QAAtNl!O
e   i DALA
!I    I QALANO
 
c  I OTfOJc.!I!
o	I OTfOSEN
c	I QlTUMVA
o	I OlWAY	D
o	I OTW!lL	c
e	I QTWIN	c
 
O   l(V.ILL! OAKWOOD OANAPUKA OASJ S OATLANOS OATMAN OATUU
Ol!IAN.
 
OKA'lll
OKAY
•	OKI!!' OK!ECH08£!
•	. OKEELA,NTA
OKE!LANTA •
D	OEPAl!.SSIONAl.
c	OJCEEt.ANTA•   T ID'AL
 
D   I 0,.AK"
II     I Ololf"GA
8    I   O,.!NA
II/DI  OMJO
.9/D.I  OMNI
0 J   OMPO
I 0"'STOfT
0     I    O LGA
 
C	I      ORLANDO
A	I iJRLlll!
l!I     I DAMAS
. e   I oitMISTON
Cl      I OAMS!IY
c   I 0Ah8AUN
C	I   ORO    FJNO
C .J  OAC. GAANOE
 
'I OU ..CHI TA	c
c	I QUA AD	c
e	I DULA	D
c	I OUPICO	c
c	I OUAAiY
OUSLEY	c
p    ' CUTEDICIAK
D	OUTLf  T	c
OUfLOOIC	D
 
Ol!IANION Ol!IARO
08EN
 
c
•i:
 
OKEELANTA•   LOODl!O
OK!ET!E
OKEMAH
 
0     I ONA
D   I ONAMIA
C      I    ONAOUI
 
E/DI
B	I
D	I
 
OAOGH!N
ORONOCO
ORD SE
 
OUTLCOICe DRAINED	c c	OVALL
QVAN	D
 
OISISPO
 
0	OKI OTA
 
0   I ONARGA
 
o	I OAOVADA
OAPAAK
 
OVANDO	•
 
08RAST
OSAAY
 
D	OKLAA!O
D	OKLAA'I(
 
I!'    I ONASON
e    1 .oNA_WA
 
0o  'I ORPHA
 
D'·
 
OVERGAARD	c
OVERLAND	c·
 

o!!IScuAJTY
 
•	OKLA"IAHA
 
B.IDI
 
ONAWAY
 
e	I OAPHANT
 
OVfRL 't'	c
 

095£AVATION
 
c	O<O
 
0      J   ONOA•A
 
B      I   0 ...	'	D
 
09URN	0
 
c   I ONfCD.
 
o	I ORA•  GRAV!:LLY
 
c	OVERTON
 
OCALA
 
c	: ;O : NY
 
.,o
 
ONt"JL
 
c  ·I
 
sues:rR TuM
 
CVIATT	•c
 

OCAMllU
OCANA
 
c	OK080JI •  PQNOEO
o	I OKOLONA
 
0	ONEONTA
D	ONITA
 
o   I OAAUll
c	I OARYtLL.I!
 
D	OVIO
c	OVJNA	'
 
occoau  N
QC CUM
 
•	I 0 .REEK
a   I OKAJST
 
0	NJTI!
ONK! YO
 
0  54
0      I    OAS!T
 

. ' I
 
QVANKA
OWEGO	D
OWEN    CAEEI:.	c
 
OCEAN!T OCEANO OCHe:Ye:QAN CHLOCKONE!!: OCHO
. OCHOCO
OCHOPEE
OCIE
 
D       I   OKTAHA
•	I OICTISl!l!:HA
B	I     OLA
o	I OLAA
D     I OLAC
c   I OLAN CHA
e.10 I OLANO
c  I OLANTA
 
ONOTA
D	ONSLOW
C	.QNfAAIO
A	ONT!OAA
0	ONflC 0
!I	ONfONAGOH
8	ONYX
8	OOICALA
 
I     ORSINO
I CATl!GA
•c  I ORTl!LLO
.I   OA11NG
0    I
DR.T.IZ
I ORTON
I ORV ASH
•	I OR'lll!T
 
' I
OVEN?	D
OWENfOWN
D	I    Q°wMI
c	I 0"11 NZA	'
OWL CAN
•	I ovosso
A.(0 I ov·sEL	'
 
OCILLA
OCl(L!Y
 
c   I OLA!iHES
a	I OLATHE
 
8	OOSEN
0	OPAL
 
o•·
 
I ORWIG
I .OPWOOD
 
e	OWYHEr':
oxeov	c
 
·acol!:E
 

B/o I OL8Uf
 
D	OPEL llCA
 
D.     I OSAGE
 
D ·.I OXCOREL	D
 
NOTES: rwo HYOAOLOGJC SOIL GROUPS SUCH AS S/C JNOICATll!S r E ORAJNEDl"UNOR .. INEO SITUATION.
MOOI,IEAS   SMOVN.  E.G ••  Bll!OAOCK   SUBSTRATUM·  RE EA   ro  A   SPll!Cll'"JC  SOIL  SERll!S  P AS!  FOUND   1N  sorL  MAP  LEGEND.

(210-VI-TR-55,  Second  Ed., June  1986) 	27
 




 
TABLE A-5 CONTINUED   Hydrologic soil groups for United States soils
 



.,.
 
OxEHOtkE	0	PAl.llC	' I PAPALOTE	c    I PAT IQ'	c   I Pl!Ll!E	•.,
OXEQ INC	c	PA,l.LS	c   I PAPJNl!AU	c.  I I= AT IT  CRl!EK	B     I PELEL!U
 

OXIO'QQO	0	P.llL"'  BEA Ch
 
•	I PAPOC.'il!
 
•	I PATlllA	B    I PELHAM
 
'' OXHEAO	•	OAL1'1A	•   I PAPA	B	I PATOS	..c•  I OELIC	0
..	c	•
OXLEY	c	ci"L".u;	0     I PARACHUT	• I PATOUTYILlf	c.  I PELION	,,
 
OXWAl.l	0	J:Al.)tAR JQ	c   I PARACISE	r.  I PATRICIA
 
I PELKtE	'
 
OYHUT	c	P4L.WER    CAhYON
 
I PARA00)(	' I .PATRICK	B    I iiELLA
 
OYLEN	c	PAL)olE:r.OAl.E	e    I P ..R /llAT	c	I PATROLE
 
I PELLEJAS
0
 
e/'DJ  PA ANAT•  ORAINEDo	I PATTANI	0     I Pl!LL ICER
'JZAP-i	0	PAl..W!TTOo	0.    I  SAL INf'	I PAiiC:C	B    I PELONCJt.LO
O'ZAUKEE	c	of'pqe:o;s1·a...At.	I P.UU1!'iOl.	•  I PATTl!NBU'IG	• I Pl!L TIE'R	c
CZIAS	0	PAL"'S •  OVl!RlllASH	A.l'CJJ   F Hl(f-o(N	0    I PATTl!PSON	c   I P!MP.IPOICE	•
 
PAAllCI	•	PALM'S.•
PAAUHAU	•	PAL,..S •
PACH.ti.PP A	•	SUBST ATU'4	I P4J:!HAT
 


0	Nti

H
 

l".101
I PE!lo#I	c	-::·.
0  I PENAPON
I Dl!HASCO
 
PACHECO
 
c	PAL!otS
 
0
•	GR.av'!!LL Y	A.tDI   PARE T	.101   J;:AULVtLLE	a• I PENCE	'•
 
11ACHECI>•
 
sues Tq.a TOM	I i:iADIATO	0     I PAU"4ALU
c	I     PAU SAUGUNT
 
I PENO OREILLE
0	PENDANT	0
 
PACIFICO	c	PALMYRA

•
 
I PARJETTl!

•
 
c   I PAUSAHT

•
 
PE. OARVIS	c
PENO EN	a
PENCE A
 
PAUWELA
 
c	c
DENOERGRASS	0
 
D,t,CKER
PACICHA"	c
 
PALOMAR IN
PAL014AS
 
I PARl\'.ALLEY
I
 
I PAVAIAI
I
I
 
D
PENDLETON
 
PACIC7RAIL
PACIC OOC'
 
PALOMlt.10
0	PALCN
 
I     PAIOl(AY
PARKC!ALE
I OAJ;:l(F
 
PAYANT
PAV'!!A PAVILLION
 
c
PENOPOY	D
e	P!UELAS	D
 
P.f.CO
 
c   I PALOPINTO	0  I PbRICEAI
 
I PAYO"
0
 
l'AC'lL T	• I·PALOS  VERDES	D     I PADKF'ICLil	c   I PAVOHROO
 
PENEY
 
0	P!..litLL Y	9'0
PACTOLUS                              ' I PALSGAOVI!:                            •   PAPKl"'1S0N                           • I PAlllHUSICA                              0         PENGR'A                                   c
PAOl'!N                                    .c   I PAM ISON                               •   =iAAkVIElf                              • I PAWNl!"E                                       0         P!NISTA.J..l                          •
PAO I NA                                  •  I PAM'JA  •                                  •    DA.PIC'olOOD                                  e.101   P.llXJ'ON                                  c       Pl!!NLAW                                  c PAORONE$                           •  I PANl!N1" Y                            •   ll'AAL l'f                             <    I PAYE TT!                             •  I PENNEICA.MP                             ' PAOUS                                            •  I P.tNAl!llA                              0         PAF,..El..E                                      c    I PAYN!                                  c    I P!NNE"Y                                        •
PAGAR J                                  • I p ...,,.......                           •   PA"MENT R                          •  I PAYSON                                 0     I PEl<fNSUCO
D
0      I PANAMINT	•	PARMLFEO	c    I P!ACHAM	0   ·1  PENO	c
 
PAGE!AOOK
 
0   I PENOYEP
•	B    I PE.,IO'OSf;	D
 
PAGlNA	c   I PANASOlll"lll"KEI!:	C•.10 I.   PA::o!NELL	C/DI      PEAC)'ILANO
 
PENS ORE
 
PAGODA	c  I p..,.,.CHEl;fl
 
I ·PAPCUAJ
 
I PEAAL
I	0	0
 
PAGOSA
 
c   I PANDO
 
I PARA
 
i:l!AAL   HAA90R'
 
0	Pl!!NTHriUSE	0
 
PAGLIA Tl!!	c    I
 
PANOOAM	c   I PAJ;A°'N	0    I P!'AASOLL
 
0	PENTZ	0
PAMOKC:E	e.iol  PANOUAA	• I PAAJ;ITA	•  I P!.lS.P!AA	0	PEt.WELL	'
P.AHRANAGA 1 • veqy	0      I PANGEIOA"	0      I .l'i'S IPDA"'IY	C.10 I   PE.llflCK	0	Cl!NZANCE	c
PAHAANGE"	c   I l?ANMANOLI!	•	PARTLO'lll	c    I PECA JONI CA	•	PEOM	0
PAHROC	0     I PANIN	a	PA.ATDI	c	I PECK ISM	0	PEOLA	c
 

F"A I A	• I A..,I TCHEN	•	PA$CO	c    I PIEOCAT	0	l'EQRIA
 
.,.
 
l>AMSIHl!!FOI	• I  A.NJOGUE•   ,.,	c	P.&SAGSHAI(	0     I PECTUAI!	•	P!01'fl!o   ORA I NED	c
 
PA·Jc_f'	0    I PAHICY
 
c	PASCO•   DA.I. (Nl!O	c• I Pl'OEE	c	PEOTON	•
 
PAtLO	•  I DA'i ...00	c	PASO   sEco
 
IP!OEANALES
 
PEP AL
 
PAll'>lf"SVILLE
 
c    I PANOC"'E	•	PA.SOl.l!TT l	0      I PEClGO	c	P!POON	0
.,
 
S:.AINT	0     I PAHOCHEo	c	111,fiSC ...ETTl•	c   I PEOLEl'OAO	c	PEPPER	0
PAISLEY	I  SALIN!:•ALKALI•	"'00EAAT!!..Y  W T	I PEDDLl
 
PAIT	• I
 
PASOUE"TTI.   ORA I NED  c   I Pl!!OAICK	B     I PEOU.&MING	'
 
PAJAAA	c   I PA.NOL..&	0	PAS::tJOfAN.X.	8.101   Pfoqo	c   I DEOUEA
PA.JUEL A.	• I i:oAPIQP.lp.tA	• I PASS AA	c    I P!!KO	0     I PERAL TA	c
c	ASTfPN	0	I PEELER	I PEPCETC!N	•
PANTANr,)	0    I PA5T IK	c    I PffRLfSS	a	I PEltCHAS	0
PALACIOUS	0	PANTEGO	13...01  FAST&AIUS	e    I PfETZ	' I PEACil..t.A	0
PALANlJSH	c	PANTHER	c	I PA.TA.MA	c	I PEl!VYWl!LL	c    I PE RC OUN	c
PALAPALA 1	•	PANTON	0     I - ATcr1N	0    I PEG,Ll!G	<    I PERCY	e ...o.
 


DALAZZO	c	PAP AA	0     I P'TENT	c    I PEKAY	c   I PEAEi.l.A •
 
...	•
 
c
PALAU	•	i.iiAOLI	• I ATft.ZICIC	0	I PEGRAM	• I PE'l:ELLA
P.11t.aOiJNE	•	PAPAC	c   I P.&J"'t:AO	c    I PEKIN	' I  MODERATELY
 

PAL INOA
 
c	PAP.&GU-	c    I PAJJLL.&S
 
•	I Pl'"LAHA TCH lE	c    I PIERHA.M	•
 
PAL I S..&.dt:	•	PAPAI	' I   PATILO	e	I P!LAN	' I PERICO	•
NOTES:	1•0 HYOAOl..OGtC $Cit. GQOUPS SUCH AS .,c INDICATES J ! DAAINEO,UHQPAINl!O SITUATIOH.
lf.00JFtfq$  SHO N•  EoGoo  SEOPOCIC   SUFISTl;iATU"'•   REFEq   ro ' SP!CtF'IC  SOIL  SERll!S  PHASI!"  FOUND   IN  SOIL  MAP  LEGEND.

28	(210-VI-TR-55,  Second  Ed., June  1986)
 


 
·J


TABLE A-5 CONTINUED
 



Hyclrologic soil groups for United States soils
 

 

PER IDGE
 

PHILO
 

•	I PlN!LLAS
 

S/ol
 

PLASKETT
 
c	POKEGE A	•
 
PERILLA P!'RINOS PEA IT SA
 
PHILOM.lTH
c	PHING
c	FHIPDS
 
D       I    PINELLJ
.o     I P INf TOP
c    I P INETUCKY
 
e	I PLATA
c	I PL.I TE.
P
 
•c	POICEW.t.N	c
POICER
c	POICEAGAP
 
Pf RI( I NS
PEAKS
 
c	PMLJSS
•	SIH0!'9E
 
o   I PIN!TUCKY.   GAAOED
e   I DINI!: VAL
 
I
·c   I
e	I
 
LATNER
PLATO PLAT DAO
 
POlC,EY
POLACCA
 
,c,
c
 
Pl!'IJLA P!!:llLOA
 
c	PMOfN 1X
0	PM¥S
 
o   I P INEVJLLE
e	I  PIN!Z
 
e   I PLATTE
e    I PLATTE•   WET
 
PCLALLIE
b	POLAR
 
PEAMA
 
'•	P IAHKES A'° ..
 
•	I PINGREE
 
o	I
B/OI
 
LATTEo CHANNELF-D   0
P_LATTVILLE
 
POLA TIS·	c
PCLA.w.t.NA	VO
 
PEIJN
PERNITAS Pl!RNOG
- .	PEIJ"ITV
 
P(.ASA
c	PIBLEA
0	PICA80
0	P IC.f.CHO
 
o    I P INl<IOOK
o	IPINJCD""
c	I PINITDS
c   I PINI( !L
 
. e    I PL.t.YCO
P	I     PLAYf"R
c	I
 
POl.,f	D
0	POLECPEEll;	0
c	I POLEPATCM
 
Pl'!lllO!JlMANS
 
0	PICANTI!
 
o  I PtNl(MA"9
 
PLAYMOOR
•	I PLAZA
 
C/OI
 
POLELJNE
 
Pf;ARE,l,U PfARJN PERRINE
t	Pl!IJAINTON
 
PICAYUNE
PICEANCE
0	P ICICAWA'f
c	PICK!hS
 
e  I PINICSTON
c   I PINNACLES
c	I PthNEBOG
D       I    P·INNCB  IE
 
e     I PL!!: A SANT
c  I PLEASANT• PONDED
PLlfASANf   GROVE
c•	PLlfASANT      VALE
 
c	I POLEY	c
o	I POLEY•  COBisLV	0
•	I POLICH	c
e	I PO Lie I NG	D
f.I     · 1   POLLARO	c
 
PEAR'Y PEIJRYPAf;K
 
0	PICICl!TT
 
c   I PINO
 
PLEASANT    VIEW PLEASANTO"I
 
I
PERRYVILLE
l='EIJSANll
PEASAVO
PERSHING
 
PlCll:FOAO
PICKNEY
c	P ICICNE Y •   l'LOOOEO
0	PICKRELL
c	PlCK TON
 
D        I
A/OI
D        I
o	I
 
PINCH.E
PINON
Pl NONES PlNAlDGE
P l !·PAING
 
0	PL!!DGEA
PLEGDMI" PLE IN!
c	i:iLEJOVJLLE"
 
B	I     PCLLA .:'.Y
0	I POL!..IJit"	c
D	I      POLLY
o.   I Po:.c.  'l'OOERATELY	c
c	I
 
i	PERSIS
 
•	PICKUP
 
·	c' I P l'"T·AS
 
•	PL!;JTC
 
SLOW  PEP'I'.
c	I POLO.  MOOE AA re	e
 
PEIJT
PEs;oU
PE1'VINA
PER•ICK
PfSCADE O
 
PICKWICK
c	PICO
PICOSA
c	PlOCOKE
0	f'.'IOl!<tEEN
 
•	I PJNTLAR 	2
s   I PINTO	C·
c    I Pl TUR•	A
o	I PINTWATf	a·
D     I   PlCIC""f	.	D
 
PLfYN• PLINCO Pt.IT!! PLO"! PLOVER
 
C	I      P A f ..!ILITY
' I J.>OLONJO	'
£o	I POLSO,,.
e	I POt.U14
C	I POMADE	0
 
P!SCAA PESH.ASTIN lll!'SMEK!!
PES"'O.
PESMCRE
 
c
·"O
c
c
 
PIE CPEEIC: P JEGOh P.IE.IUAN Pl!AkING
P J!J:::PONT
 
o	r  PIOPaLJS	C/C'
e    I PIPELINE	I
e    I PJPfr	C I
o	I Pl fSTONE	e	/
·c·  I PIPPIN	A   ·f
 
PLUCK PLUMAS PLUMMER PLUSH PLUTOS
 
c	I -POMA,,.	c
e	1"00"'•T
[l/C    POMA 1 o   ORY
PaMeLLo	c
e	I   i::io ..ERE""E"	c
 
P!SO
. PESOWYO
"PffACA
ETAL
 
.C	PIEJiliE
c	P .l!RSONTE
0	Pl!A
c	Pl!TOWN
 
o	I PIAO	8	I PLYMOUT"I PJPQCEL		f   POAL
e    I PIROUETTI!:	0   I POARCH
e    I P JRU,.	B	I PO!ll!:A
 
A .  I 00.,Fl:!ET
C	I     PC140
e	I PO'"ON.A
c     J.  PO'l'O"IA•
 

5/0
·o
 
PE TAN l:IETEETN!ET PETER#AN PETERMAN;    SANDY
SU8STAATtJM.
.ALIC.till
P!TERS
PETERSON
PETESCAtEK• STONY
 
0	PIGTA 11.
.1	.PJIHONu.4
o   I PIKE
c	,.    Pl'KEVlLLE
I PILABO
I PIL$:HUCIC
o    I PILCMUCICo
•	I PAOT!CTEO
9	I    PILINC
 
c    I PJSGA	C    I POCALLA
•	I PISHICUh	B   ./  POCAN
e    I PISMO	0   I  POCASS!T
e.  I I-' JT	0    I   POCA TELLO
e    I PITCHER	A	I PCCATY
' I PJTCO	0	I POCICFP
•	I DJTNfY	r.   I.POCOLA
I PITTMAN	C	I POCO OICEo
0	PlTT! tfL:>	e	I POCO,.OKfo
 
•	I o:'ll'"P'iESSIONAL
e' I oQ ..PANO
I .POMP•NO•
f:IEPAfSSIONAL
o' I POMPANO.  FL oooe:o	0
I
C	I    PO ..P!: 11	0
o    I PQlo'PQNIO	c
PONDl!D	8/DI P')WPTON
ORA INEO       8      .I. PQM"ROY	c
 
P!TESCAEEK•
GA4'1!LLY
P!TAU!
 
c   I PfLLllCE.N
IP'LLOT
D I PIL.LSl!UPY
 
PITTSTOWN	C	I PCC6NO
B	PITZER	C	f  PC'OEN
c	PIUTE	D  I roc o
 
PON(_A
'c   I POMCEN.t.
I PO"C ..A
 
·o•
•c
 
PETl:IOLIA
 
C/')f
 
PILOT  PE.All.
 
C	P 1YOT	A	I  ?000
 
t·     J
 
PC..CIANQ
 
Pf TAOS
PETSPRl"-G
 
D	I    PILOT    RCCK
o   I PILOTPEAIC.
 
C	PJ;l(LEY	0     I   PCOUNK
0	Pllf f	P-    .I PCO-US
 
o	I PONO	0•
c   I P0"'0  CPEEIC
 
PETTICOAT
 
e   I PlL Tt'OWN
 
8	PLACfOO	0      I
 
POE
 
c    I PO"IOER	0
 
PE.TT JGAEW
 
e/O I
 
FILfZ
 
C	PLACENTIA	0     I
 
PDGAL
 
C	I    PONIL	D
 
PETTUS
PETTY
 
c   I Pf"4A
e   I Pl ..fR
 
8	PLACf ITOS•	P    I POGANEAIS
!'"	SALINfo   OAAJNEO	I Pt'GANE ..8• CLAYEY
 
C	I    PONINA	D
0 j   PONOZZO	c
 
PEVETO
 
' I FINAL
 
0	PLACERITOS•	.	C	I
 
SU!!TAATUM
 
I    PON TO	•
 
P£1oUM0.
 
Cl'DI
 
P   l"'ALENO
 
B	f	SALINE- ..LICALI	I POC.ANl!'Alto   SALINE
 
D        I     PO'ITO TC!C	•
 
PEYTON
 
e	I PINA-.iT
 
e     I PLACfRITOSo	a	I PCGANl!:AIS •· Ml GH
 
0    I   PONZfR	0
 
Pl"E IFFER·
 
e	I  P)NAT.l
 
c   I  OOl!:RATELY   WET	I
 
A.I.	INF ALL
 
I PVOCHA.11111	•
 
PH.t.Gf:
 
•	I PINAVETES
 
A	J    PLACERITOS•   WET	, C	I POGANf.:ABo
SALINE
 
STRONGLY    0      I
 
POOICU
.O	QOLEF<	0
 
PHALANX
Pt-!ANT0"' PMA;qO·
PHAAA
 
e	I PINBIT
c	I Pl"ICHE.A
e   I .PINCHOT
e   I PINCKNEY·
 
B       I    PLACfRITOSo	e	I
C	I.   CJ:"A.  IN!:O	I
e   I PLACID	e/OI
C       I    PLACID•	D      I
 
POGA E  AS• FPEQUfNTL  Y "FLOOOl!:O
 
I
0       I     Pl")OLfYILLt.	c
I l;IOOACAL
I POORJo'A
·o
 
l'HE9A
 
c	IP{NC:ONNING
 
/Of	CE AESSTONAL.	I P_OGAN! AB•
 
D	I      POOSE
 
PMEF.N!Y
 
c    I PINE   FLAT
 
.e    I  LACIO.  FQEOUl:'NTLT  ·o   .,
 
S'LlNf"'ALICALJ  ·
 
I POOT A TUCK
e
 
o•·
 
PM!l.AN
 
o  I PINEAL
 
[I    I  FCOOO!:D	I POGUE	.
 
IPQPASH
 
PH!'LPS
PHERSON
PHJC"flfSON
 
e	I PINfBUTTE
e	I PINEC: EEK
c   I P I"IEO.t.
 
I    PLACITAS	C	I
6      I   PLACK	0	I
8/0( PLA 11'160	I
 
POH.t.KUPU
PC'IN PqINDEXTER
 
-.  I POPE
o  I POPHEliS
P	I    .POPLf
 
c•
C/0
 
PM ILB ON
 
D  I PINEO Ao
 
0     I PLAINfJELO	A	I POINSETT
 
•c    I
 
PQPLIMfNTO	c
 
"PH(LOEA
 
D	I	OEPA!SSION4L
 
I PLAISTEO	C	I P01Nl
 
I  P.OPOSH  I A
c
 
PHILIPPA
PMll..IPS8UAG
 
c	I PINEO ALE
e	I PINE.GUEST
 
9      I    PLANk	0	I
B      l    PLANKINTO	0	I
 
POI.NT    ISABEL PCIISONCREEI(
 
I PQPQTOSA
o     I POPPLETON	•
c
 
PHILLCHElf
PHILL JPS
 
B	I
c    '·
 
PlllfHUPST
PINE.ISLE
 
n	I PLANO	e	I
8    I PLANTA.TION	B/OI
 
POJO	.
POJO,QUf
 
I POCUETTE
e	I PO QUI IA	'
 
NOTES	TWO   HYO OLOGIC   SOIL   GROUPS   SUCH   AS   8/C   INOIC .. TES    THE   ORA{NfO/U DPAINEO    SJTUATJONa
WOOlfJERS   SHOWN•   E·G••   8EOAOC11;   SUBSTA .. lUM•    EFl!:R   TO   .t.  SOECIFIC   SotL  SERlES   PHASE   FOU O   TN   S IL  MAP   LEGEND.

(210-VI-TR-55,  Second  Ed,, June  1986) 	29
 




TABLE A-5 CONTINUED	I!ydrologic soil groups for United States soils


 
POQUONOCK	c	PRl!Mll!.A	•  I PUNCHBOWL	0     I QUtNt. IVl!N	c    I
 
RAMROD  .	c
0
 
POAl"']RIO	c	PAr;NTISS	.C      I PUHG	c    I QUINN	B/01 AAf.tSDELL
PORRO NI!.	•	PR!SHER	•  I PUNOHU	A	I QUINTANA	• I
 
DRA (Nf;D     c
 
RAMSEY	0
PORT	•	PRl!STO	•  I PUNS IT	c    I OUINTO	0	RAMSHOA.N
PORT l!IYAON	•	. PRiSTON	A     I PUNTA	8/DI  QUINTON	c	RANA	c
 

PORTAGE
 

0	PRl!lillTT
 
•	I F'UNT ILLA
 
I·DUI TERI A
 
•c	IU1"1Cf
 
POAT.lG!YILLE'	0	PRl!.V
 
c  I PUAC!LLA
 
I OtJJTMAN
 
RANCHOSECO
·C
 
PORTALl!S	•	PRICI!	• I PUACHl!S	c    I OU!Yl!RA	c	AAMO.i.00
c	PUAOAM	c    I QUONSl!T	A
PORT!!R,.:l!!LD	c	PR!DHAN	0     I PU DV	0	I OUOPANT	0	AANOCOA!'	0
POATl!RS	•	PA'Jl!5TLJi:K.I!.	I PUAl!TT	I
 
·	POATERYIL.LI!.
 
0
0	PAil!TA	D     I PUAGATOAV	c   I A.AB! I Tl!X	B	RANDOLPH	c
•	AA.NOS.!!URG
 
Pi:JIM	0
POR·TIA	c	PRIM!:AUX	c   I PUROi!	0•  I RABJDl!'liX
 
0
0
RANG!A	c
 
POAT I NO
 
c	PAIMe'.N	0• I P.UASLEY
 
I l?A.BUN
I
 
RANG!!:

I AANPUl""I""	0
 
PORTLAND	0	PAtMtiHAA
 
I PURVl!'S	0
 
RACE
 
POAT,.OUNT	•	PAINCl!TON	• I PUSHMATAHA	c    I AA.CINI!
 
POATNl!Ufl"
 
•	PAINl!Vll.LI!	c   I PUSTOI	• I AACICl!A	•  I
 
AANSLO	0
•
 
PORTOLA.
 
PRING	• I P\JTNAM	0    I RACD,..!H!:S
 
I RANSOM
AANSTl!"IN
 
PORTS MOU.TH	""'  PAINGLI!	0    I PUTN!"Y	•  I RACOON	C/DI
·I PAITCHl!TT	c   I PUTTSTf;'.R	c   I RAD•   LACUSTAINI!	c  I RAPA TEE
 
PORUM	0
SUBSTRATUM	I
POSEY	•  I !J CTOR	• I PUU  OPAi!'	•	PAO•   Fl.OODl!D	c    I
 
AAPl!'L.11!'	•
 

POSi!:YVILL1!
 
c    I PR'QGAl!SSO	c    I PUU   PA	•	AAODLI!	•  I RAPHO	•
 

POSIT AS
 
0     I. PROM IS.!!:	D    I PUU  PA.o   NONSTONY	'	AAD!A	0     I RAPIDAN	c
0
 
PasK !H	c   I PRQ;:/Q	D     I PUUJCALA	c	j;AQ!ASBURG
PRONG	c  I PUUONI!
POSOS	c   I PAO PHI! TSTOVN	•II/OJ  PUYALLUP	c
 
RAPLEE
R.APPAHANNQCIC
RAPSON
AAAOl!N	c
AAA JCIC
 
POST	0   I PAOSP!CT
 
I PY9UAN	D	AAQNOA	c
 
POTAMUS
 
•	I PROSPl!A
 
B	AAF'Al!'L	0
AAfl'TDN	D	RARITAN
 
POT CHUI!	c   I PAOSSl!R	c   I PYLON	0
POTl!fT	c    I PROTIVIN	c   I PYOTI!"	A
POTl!LL	• I PSl'OUt	c   I PYi:i'Alol'lD	0	R'AGLAN
 
AAS!IANO
 
POTH	c   I PAO'UTV	c   I PYRMONT	0	PA"GN&R
POTLATCH	c   I PROVIDIENCIE	c  I PVRMONT•  9IEO OC:JC
 
R&SILt.!
RAS SEA.
c	AASSl!'T	.c
 
POTOMAC	A	I PAOVIG
 
c   I SUISTAATU"4	RAGO
 
RASTUS
RATAKIE	0
 
POTOS l	A	I PAO YO	0     I PVVl!LL	0	RAGPII!	0
 
AATHeUf+	c
 
POTRATZ.	c  I PAO YO
 
D	I OUA !'NO	c	AAG50ALIE	8/0
 
c   I PROV	0     I OUAJCl!A	c   I RAGSOAL! o   OY!AW.&SH   •	RATHDRUM	•
 
POTSDAM
POTTl!R	c   I
 
PRUDY
 
•	I QUAKl!ATOWN	c	I lit,t.GTOWN
 
c	AATLAICE
·c	PA Tl,!FLA f
 
POTTINGER	•  I POU!	•  I QUA,..	e.101  RAHAL
 
A.4.lLlf'F'	•
 
POTTS
 
•	I PAUITTON
 
•	I OUAMDN	•  I RAHN	c•
 
AAISOlf	c
 
POTTSBURG	""'°' PAUNllE	D	I QUAflj;AH
 
I A.ti ...WORTH
I PAIL
 
RATON	0
0
AATTLEP	0
 
POUOAIE	0    I PAYOR
PQU.JAOI!	D	I PSUGA
 
QUANDl!R
I QUANTICO
 
•	AAILCiTY
 
A
c	AATTO	c·
 
POULSBO	0    I PTARMIGAN	c   I OUARL!S	.0	RAINBOlf
 
POUNC!:Y	0    I PUAPUA	D      I ou.\ATZBU	c
 
/1AU15	c
 
PQYl!ATY	0     I PUAULU	A      I QUARTZYILLE	•	RAINIER	c
POVOIEA	• I PUOOLIE	• I OUATAMA	c	PAINS	el'DI
 

AAUGHf
RAUVILLE	0
 
c   I P RCO	.D.
 

I QUAY
 
•	RAINS•   FLOOOfQ	0     I A.I.UZI	•
I RAVALLI• BIEDROCk
 
POWDl!"RHORN
 
c   I PUERTA	0    I QUAZO	0	AAINSBORO	c	I RAVALLI	•
 
POWOIEAVASH
 
c  I PUIEATl!CITO
 
I QUIEALMAN	c	PAINSYJLLIE
 
•	I SU9STPATUM
 
POWIEfN
 
•	I DUFl"fA	D    I OIJEDRAOA	c	AAISIO	c•
 
I RAVl!'N
 
POWl!"LL	c   I· PLie:TT	0     I OUl!ALY	0	AAIADENT
PDWl!R
 
A
RAVl!'NOALE	0
 
POVIEALJNI!"	c    I PUGl!T	0     I OUEIENY	D	RAICANI!"	c    I RAV!N!:LL	0
POWLIEY	0    I PUG!:T • PAOTl!CT!:D	c  I OUl!IETS
POVMIENT	c   I PUGS !Y	c·	Ol:E:,.AOO	c	AAI( 11!'0	c	I RAVl!'NSWODD	c
 
PQWWAHJ(fl!	• I PUHi	•	QUENZER	0	RALflGH	0	I
PDY	0     I PUIC!	c	OUl!Rl!NCIA	•	JJALLS	• I
 
RAVIA	c
RAYOLA	•
 
c	QUl!TICO	0	RALPH
POYNOR	• I PULANTAT	c	QUICICSELL	c	RALP.MSTON
 
RAW AH	c
I i;oAW(	c
RAWL!S
 
POZO	c   I PULASKI	•	QUICKS ILVe'A	D
 
A At.SEN	0     I	•
 
POZO   BLANCO	•  I PULCAN	c	OUlCICVl!RT	c    I A,t.NAO!:AO	• I
 
AA'!'LJNS
 
•	OUl!:NSA9!
 
I RAHl5LA
 
c   I RAWSON	c
 
PRAIRlfYILLI!:	•
 
'	I AA\'SUAN	D
 
I PULfXAS
 
RANSOUILLET
 
RAWSONV I Llf'
 
PRAMtSS	c   I PULLMAN	0	QUJ!:TUS	RANl!LLI	D	0
PRA THIER	c
PRATL!Y	c   I .PULS	0
RA'l'f"ORO
D	OUILCfNI!	c	RAND	c   I PA.YLAIC!	0
•	RAMONA	I RA 'l'NONOY ILl.f	•
 
PAEACHl!"Jl
 
I PULTNIEY	c	OUILLAYUTI!
 
PAEAICNf.SS	8.IDI  PUMl!L	0	QUILOTOS4	D	AA.JltONA•   HARO	c   I RAYNE
 
PRl!ATOASON
 
I PUM!L.• NDNGRAYfl.L Y  c	QUILT	0	SU8STAATUM	I	•
 
PRl!SISH	c.101   PUMP!: A	•	QUIN A
 
..	RANPART
 
AAYNl!'SF'ORO
I AAYNHAJ<I	c
A YNOLOSON
 
PRES LE	D	I PUNA	A	QUINCY	A	RANPAPTl!R
PAE LO	• I PUNA LUU	0	QUINLAN	'	-RAMPS
NOTl!S:	TWO   HYOROLDGIC   SOIL  GROUPS   SUCH   AS  15/C   JNDICATl!S   THI!  ORAINfOl'UNORAINIED   SITUATION•
 
•	I AA YOH ILL	•c
 
MOOIFI!AS   SHOWNo    f.G ••  91!'0AOCIC   SUSSTAATUMo   R!Fl!R   TO   A   SPl!CIF'IC   SOIL   Sl!Rl!S  PHASE  FOUND   IN   501.L   MAP  _Ll!GIENO•


30	(210-VI-TR-55, Second Ed., June 1986)
 




TABLE A-5 CONTINUED	Hydrologic  soil groups for United States soils

 
··.
 

RAVCl'OL	c   I A!OSTONI!	A	A!NOX	•	RICOT	c	I AJT101AN	c
••z	0	I R!DSUN
 
AAZJTO	A	I AEOTf:tA'IN!	•	AENSLO#	•	RICO	c   I AITO	'
AAZOR!IA	• I RED-VALE	c	AENSSl!LAl!R •	c	RIO!NBAUGH	0	I RITTMAN	c
D
AAZ!SUN	0     I A!DVl!Wo   WET	c	suesiA.&TIJM	AIOGEBUA't'	c	I PJTZf    ·oAAIN!D	c
 

R!AOING
 
I R!OVINE	c	Al!NTILL	•	A IOG!CA! ST	c	I AJTZCAL	•
 
•	...
 
I lflTZVILLE
•	'
 
READINGTON	c	I R!OWASH	0	A!NTON	0	AIDGEOAL! ·	•	'
 
READLYN	• I
 
'	RENTON•  DRAINED	c	AIOGELA.ND	l!l/DI  RIVAL Jl!R	'
 
. A!AG.&N	•  I AE!BOIC	0	A ENT SAC	0	R IOGELAWH
 
I Al YEA DALE
 
c	AIDGELAlilNo     •<T	D	AIY!AHEAO	•
A!AL	0    I A!l!D•  OAA lNEO	c	Al!PAAAOA	0	AIDGl!LJT!	0	AIV!IO'OAO	'
A!ALLl.S	• I R!l!Do  PROTECTED	A!PP	'
Al!:AADAN	c   I REE:Dl!A.   COOL	c	AEPUl!ILIC	•	AIDGEVILLI!:	•	Al ve:11v I !'II	•
Al! VILLE	<.    I AEfDSBUAG	AESCUf
 
;-:
 
ll'IVIl!AA	C/O
Ai!:AVIS	•  I AEl!DSPOAT	c   I A!';SNe:P	•	A ID IT	c	AIYil!:AA.
 
Al!l!!IA	c  .1  AE!DY	0     I A!'SDAT	0	AIDl.!Y	c
 
0
Dl!PAESS ION AL
 

AE!IEL
 
•	I Al!!FR JOG!	0     I Al!SOTA	A	RIDOTT	c	AtY I.fRA •
 
LJ M!STDNE
 
"'"
 
c    I REST ING	c	All!DEL	c	SU6STAJ,TUM	.o
Rl!CIC	0    I A!fPO.	c   I A!"STON	0	All!DTOlllN	c
 
A!CLUSI!
 
I A'!!SE	c  I RET	0	AJEP!	c
 
AJV1EAAo    LIM!STONE
SUl!ISTAATUN,
 
AIEO·BA't'
 
·&'·    I Al!!Sl!A	.c   I AF.Tll JEYl!A	0	RIESEL	c	O!Pll'l!SS IONAL
 
A!D  l!ILUl""I""	c   I Rl!l!SVILLf	c   I Al!TRCIP	c	fifl!Tl!IAOCK ·	c	I AIVAA
••o BLUFl""o	• IA"fl!:Y!S	•  I AETAYDE	c	All""Lf
 
0
. : c
c
 

GA4Yf:LL.Y
 
REFLECT ION	• I REVA	D	fiflGA	0      I AIXCN
 
:	Rl!O. ltUTTE	• I R·EFUGE	c   I AtYEL	c
 
RIGDON
0
 
Rl!·O   HILL	•
 
I REGAL	l!l.l"DI  AE'll!NTON
 
I RIGGINS	0	I AJZNO
0
 
-	A!D  HOOIC	c   I Al!G ..N	B.l"ol   RfYl!AE	B/DI   RIGGS	0     I AJZOZO
 
RED  AOCIC
 
I AEGl!:NT	c   I Al!YJT	c
•
 
. I RIGLEY
 
•	I ROAN!	c
 
I Rl!GGAD	A	I AE.lilAAO	' I RIGOLe:TTI!	•c	I ROANMIDE	c
 
SPUR
Rl!OAIUIOV
 
.1	I Al!GGEAR	0    I R!·X!URG	..•  I A.lLl!V
I Al!GGl!A •   Coo1.;	c	REXf'OAO	c	I RtLi. ..
 
I AOANOICI!	0
•	•r:otO•AAING
 
Al!OBANll;·
REDSfLL
 
c
I AOl!IANA	e
 
•	c	Ae:)lj11QNT
 
I
' ·I
 
Rl°LLJNO
 
POY
 
Rl!Dl!IJAO
 
I Rl!GNAPS
AEGNll!A	0	Al!)IOA
 
AILLJTO	•
 
RfDl!IOW
 
c	Pl!H6UAG	c	Rl!Ylte
 
I AIMl!A	c   I ROl!!l8S	0
AOl!ICO	c
 
Rl!OCAl!ll!Ro"N ·	0	AE:HFll!LD	c	Rl!YNOSA	• I RJ"IAOCIC	0     I AOe!FR	c
 
Af OCAN	0	REHM	c	Rl!YWAT	0      I FllMTON	c   I
REDCAP	•	Rl!I Cl!SS	•	A!ZAYI!	I
 

ROl!ll!RTSYILLI!	0
 
AEOCHll!I"	c	REICHEL	'	RHAME	• I RINCON	c   I AOl!IIN	•
 
AEOCLIFF	·c.	Al!ll'F	•	RHEA	•  I RINDA	0    .J
 
ACllt JNl!TTE
 
0     I P lf-IDGE	0     I ROBINSONVILLE
 

R!'DCLOUO
 
•	REILLY	A
 
RHINEl!IECK
 

I RINDGE•
 

OAAtNEO
 

c    I R0150ZO	•
 
Al!OCO	0	REI"NA
 
0	R'MOACIES	0	•
 
REOCRl!l!IC	0	PEtNACH	•	PHOAMI!	c    I AJNl!.AASON
 
I ROltPODST
 
•	REINE A	'	AHOAJitETT	c	I RINEY	• I A09SON	0
 
...
 
•	I RINGLE
 

I ROCA	0
c
 
Al!DOALI!
A.EDDI CK
 
.,0  Rl!li:.OP	0	RMOAMETT • STONY
 
•	I RING	c•  I AOl!Y	c
 
Al!DOJNG	0	REL AN	'	.'P:HONE
•	•	l!li'OI   RINGLING	A	I ROCHI!	0
 
Rl!Ol!'i'I!
 
RELAY
 
c   I A.INGO
 
0    '·
 
A'OCHELLE
 
AEOl""l!4TMl!A	0	Al!L IA.NCI!	<	AJ8!AA
AEOl""ll!LO	'	ELIZ	0	R Il!IH ILL	I
 
•	I ROCHl!R
 
REDP'IELD • WET
 
c	RELi.EV	•	AJCCO	0	I A INKER	c   I
 
AOCHl!STE}i'	A
ROCIO	c
 
Rl!Dl"LAME
 
. Al!t.508
A!LUCTAN	c	RJCECROSS
•
 
•"'°
 
•••o•	0      I
 
AAAJ8A
 
0   I ROCK
 
Ci:JEEJC	0
 
Al!DHOUSE
 
c   I
I AOCICAS IN	c
 
Al!DJG
 
lll!_>dll!AT	0	AICl!:RT
 
•ID OIAl!ILO
•ID
 
AOCIC

I
 
AIVl!R

c
 
Al!OJNGTON
Al!OLAK!
 
0	Al!Jlll!OiciS	c	RICETON
0	Al!Mt.AP	c	AIC.l!Y ILLE
 
c	AID.
c
 
GRANDE
LA.JAS
 
AOCJCAWAY
•	I ROCl;CrlAIDG!
 
REOLA NOS	'	Al!JllLllC	A	AiCH
 
RIO  "PIEDAAS
 
c  . I Al!..MI T	'	A JCH.   VE'f.	0	AIOl!ILANCHO	c   I AOCICCASTLE	D
 
Al!DLOOGI!	0	R!;'.Nf'OY	0	AJCHAPOS0!<-1	•	RIOCONCHO	c   I
Al!D""ANSON	•	.REMOJI!	RICHENS
 
ROCICOALE	A
AOCICDALf	'
 
c	Al!MSEN	0	R ICHl!Y	c	RION	•  I Roc11:.e:Rs	c
 
FfEDMONO
 
•	RfMUNOA	c	R.JCHFIELO
 
•	RIPl!C	0• .r, ROCJCFJe:LO	•
 
Rl!OMOUNT
AfDNll.
 
c•	A  EMUS
 
•	I RICHFORD
 
R  IPLE'I'
R'IPLfY•
 
ADCICf'ORD
c	AOCJCHOUSE	A
INCH.AIR	c
 
AEbNIK•  NONSTO"Y
 
·PENltAC	0    I A ICHLANO
 
I ROCIC
 
REDNUN	c	AENCALSON·	c    t. .AICHHOND	O·	SALJNl!-ALIC4LI    •
REDOLA	•	RENCOT	I  AJCH$UM
 
AOCJCLIN	0
 
AISDONDO	'	·REN"ICIC.	0    I RICHY Al.I!	•	RJPPLI!	' .I AOCICOA	..
"Rl!OONA	'	RENFRDV	0     I RICHT!'R	•	RIPON	• I ROCICL'I'	0
Al!"OPOP	<:	A!NISM	c    I RICHVIEW	c	RJPPOVAM	c   I ROCICTON
 
REDCIOAT.	:•	AENN!R	•  I AICHVJLLI!"	c	RI.II IE	• I AOCICVELL
AEDAIDGE	'	AEN IE	'
 
c''°
 
REDAIYe:A	c	RENNIE,   ORAi NED	c   I AICICEA	A	RISLEY	0     I ROCJCY   FORD	•
I JCKETTS	c	RISLEY•
I RICICM_AN	c	RISUi	0	I ROD.40	D
c   I R ICICMOA!	c	RISllOt.0	I ADOtLL	D
AEOSPAINGS.   GRADED  0	AENOL	c   I R ICKAl!ALL	0	AITA	0     I

,,c I NI;) IC.ATES   TH!  OAAIN!D/UNDAAINl!O    SJTU.4JION.
 
REDS TOI!
 
R00f0	D
•	PENOYA	• I AJ ti:S	A	PI TC,.,EY	.o    I RODESSA	0
 
NOTES:	TWO HYOAOLOGIC  50 IL  GROUPS  SUCH
MOOJFIER'S  SHOVN.  E.G. I BEDROCK  SUB!iTAATU"''  REFER  TO A  SP_ECJf'IC  SOIL Sl!"RIES
 
PHASE  l'"DUNQ   IN  SOIL   !!'AP  LEGE!'iD •
 

(210-VI-TR-55;Second  Ed., June 1986) 	31
 




 

TABLE A-5 CONTINUED
 
Hydrologic soil groups for United States soils
 



AOOIE A00""&N
ROOf:IO.,
 



•	I ROSENO Lt.:
RDSE ..ifALL
I ROSfV ILLE
 



C       I    RUBY
o	I  AUeYHILL
fJ     I RUCH
 
..	S.&f'ENYO
c	SABINA
SA!IHE
 


e	I SAMIHIEGO	c
c   I SAMJSH	0
' I SAMl<IAM ISH	0
 
AOEBUCI(
 
o   I OQSEWOOO
 
A/Of   t;UCJC!'R
 
SABLE
 
fl/DI
 
S.&MOIST
 

!=10eiLLEN
"OEti11!!:f:l POE TEX AOFISS ROGAN POGl!RSO!ll RCGERi OGAU8E AOGU!!: ROHAN
R(;HNl!R't' ILL!"
AOHOhOA
 
o'  I R'JSC'llOOO•  !#ET
c	I ACJSEWORTH
I ROSHE SPAJNGS
a	I ROSH!   SPA JNGS o
'3'   I Dfi·AINfD
O     I ROSMOL T
0     i.A"CSINE
!!'	I ROSITAS
·a	I ROSJTAS•   CLAYe'.V
0    I  sues T A TUM
o	ROSITAS•
c.
 
0   I AUCKL!"'S
Cl	I       PUCL·ICK
D     I Ro.JOO
c  I Pt.iCDLEY
J     RUDE!:
e   I Rucv.i.Ro
e  I RUEOLQFI"'
A	I A.UELL..&
C      I    Ru'l"'US
I AUGAR
C      I   AUGG
RUGL!'S
 
0	s.c
c	S.&CH!l!N
0	SACHE TT
0	SACO
<.	S.&CRAMEHYO
0	SACTU"l
SACUL
s·.&OOLI!
0	SADOLfe!ACIC
c	SADDLE GAP
SAOOLEAOCIC
S.ADl!R
 
e   I SAMOA
SAMPSEL
I SA!o!DSON
o	I SAMS IL
0	f    SAHSULA
0    I SAN  ANOP!AS
C       I    SAN   ANTON
C    I SAN  ANTONIO C/Oj  S N  AACACIO
8    J    SAN 8!NITO
0     I   S,t.H   l!:fl'JGOIO
D        I
 
0
0.•,.,.
'c
c
•
 
...
 
SAN   GER.-AN	0
I	ISABEL
c   I
 
ROHAl!RSYILL!'
ROIC RO.JO AOLETTE­ ROLf"E i'IOLIE ROLISS ROLLA
ROLL l GS TON!
ROL:JC POL!Jl"I" ROMBl!RG ROMBO RO,_.
RO"t'!::O
 
o	IROSJTAS•
o   I qQSL. YN
c  I P'J JofAN
c	I RllSNEV
c	I ROSS
o	I ACSS8UOG
;;t/01 ROSSI"' I ELD
c  I RD'iSMOOR
c	I POSS"IC1Vf\;f
o	I i:oswELL
c   I P'JSY
•	I RDTA"li!!:A C	I ROTAN
6  I 'IOOTMICAN
o   I .'llOTHJE ...A'I'
 
C	RUHf
B	PUIC'CSO
"!"	PVINPOIHT
e	RUIZ	.
S	RUIC.0
9	AUL!
8	RU,.l!LECAl!:EIC
S	At.:,."'O
C	AUMl"'OPO
A	PU•!LEV
B	A('"'"l!"'f
I!'	Rt;fl'PAH
C	Rl:,,.PLE
8	.PlJ,.UhG
C	RUN!.
 
0         SADIE'
c        SADLER
SAFFELL

o   I S.&GANING
e   I :£&G.t.SEl:t
e    I S.&GI!
c   I S.IGECRl!!'.IC
o	I SAGE DAL!
e	I S.&GEl-'fLL c	I AGE",..OOi:! o	I S..Gl!'RS
c  I SAGEPTON
c   I SAGL!!'
c   I SAGO
 
C	SA"I
SAi(  JOAQUIN	0
. J   SAN  JON	c
B    I SAN  JOSE
A/0 I SAN  JUAN
fl    I SAN  LU1 S	c
0    I   SAN   "'"TEO
fl    I SAN  ldJGU L	D
·	C	I SAN   SABA	0
e    J's.&N   SEBASTIAN
S     I SAF.I  Sl"1EON	0
8    I  SAN   TIMOT!O	c
C	I SAN  YSlDFl'O	0
C     I SAHCl-il!Z	0
0   I SANCLl!:UfNTE	0
c
 

$;Ql'4!':RO
 
o	I ROT ...S.&Y
 
!!'	PUN!'El!:lrG
 
C.l'DI
 
S.&GOUSPI!
 
C ·  I SANDALL
 
PO.,.GAN
011::..r A
O\IJlNE ROMfNl!'LL
 
c  I 14'0TINO..
a	I P!lTO
9     I    "OTTUL=E
c  I A-OU!' 101!!:.&U
 
F.-	PUNGE
C.	ROI'-"'
C	CJUPL!"
C	CJ\,'PLEY
 
' I S..&GOUSPI! •
o	I SAGUAC!tle!:
t	I !:AMAL·JI!:
S.&HUARfTA
c   I
 
e  I SANOeR.&NCH
8     I   SANC'CRC"f:1'
B	I   SA"IO! SON
e    f   SANOHILL
 
ROMNl!LL
 
C/DI
 
OUEl'f
 
C	I   RUSCC
 
SAID
 
I!!	I $.&NOi•
 
RO"l TOCIC. ACMUt..US RC"IAN
P0-.0
PON:>l!'AU AON OE LL
-   PQN00111'A
;:,o NE Y l>ONSEL
RO"SOlll ROONl!:Y ROOSF.T CIOOSEYEL T ROOT,
OOTF.L
 
e  I AOUGHCRE!:JC
o   I 0Uti11LOCIC
.o  I POUG11...0UNT
c   I ROUND  BUTT!'
A/0 I IHIUNO&eour
a	I IHIUNOl'/.AP
9       I    IOIJUNC...EAO
t	I RQIJNOOq
o  I J:OUfitOTOP
a	I AfJUNDUP
o    I R:OUNOV
c  I ROUSSEAU
c  I POUTOlll
9/01 POU TT
t  I POV.&L
 
p     I A sco. PO  EO
"  I Al,;SC
c I rusH
. 0    l AUSl-!,..ORE
c;:      ·I  RUS ... 1'011N
E	I      PUSHVILLC:
e.1c    RUSO
C	AU'50/lt
C	RUSS
-:;	RUSSELL
C	At..SS   IAN
A	AUSSL'!::R
0	·RlJST lCO
C	RUST IGAT!'
C.	AUSTC'N
 
o   I SAIOO
c  I SAILBC'AT
e  I SAJL!ICAT• DRAIN!'O
·	l!/OI   SAIPAN A	I SAL
C'	I SALACAR
ti	I SALACCIH
C	I SALAL
!'  I S.&L.&MATOI"'
I!      f    SALANO!R
e:   I S.t.LAS
C       I    SALCHAIC!. T
P  f    SALCO
C	I      SAL-Efll
l'I    I SALE PA lUS
 
P    . I    S.&NOOSI!:
C      J   SANDOVAL	0
&    I SA NOP !OGE
B       I    5.&"IOSDP,1 NG
0    ·1  S.&N0UN
D       I    SANDUSKY	D
0      J    SANOYJE'tt	•
C     I SANOV.&S·H
D   I 5.&"IO"lClt
".'. I SA ...ELI
C     I SANLSOAO
e    I    SA ...Gl!:P
8     I    S.&,.GO
B  ) SANHfOIJlN
C  .I SANlflEL
 
ROPER
 
8/0 I
 
dwoEh
 
C	PIUSTY
 
8      I    SALl! NO
 
6/0 I    SA,. IL AC	•
 
ROSAL  IE ROSAM0"40 AQSAWONci•
SALJNE-ALKALJ • FLOODED
ROSANE:
AQS.&NKY
ROS.&Ol 10
 
a   I POWOY
o	I RQWE'
t  I "ROWEL
I PCVl!:NA.
I ROi.LANO
o	I ROWLC:Y
t	I t:IO:tAL
C        I     ROlfA"'A
 
!!	!;'UTA
C·	PUJE'.RSV  ILL!
0	PUTMfPl"'OAD
C:	PL'TLANO
C	PUTLEl>f
C	RV.&N
0	RY.&H PACJI(
!!	RY.f.PIC   .
 
" I S.&LG.&
c     I    5.t.LIOA
C	I SALINAS
c.  I SAL rseUR'Y
!#'Of   S·.&Llll
0      I    SALl(U"
IS	I        SALLISAW
.&	I         SALLYANN
 
C	I     SAN..!!
A	I    SA"fLOIJEN	a
8     I   SANPETE
C	I    S.&NDTTCl<I	C·
8     I    S.&"tDO IL	0
fll	I   SANS.&RC	0
e	I SA/rltl'A	0
c   I SANY&	c
0
 
ROSCO!
 
O	I     RClft>U"V
 
&        J   CJVCO-
 
c	I S.&Lfl'O
 
C/DJ
 
S.& T.l
 

RCSCOMMCh RCSE    CREEK
 
A/0 I    RO:tER
t:   I Rl"XTON.
 
I i:voe:
t'     I    PYCEP
 
C       J  SALNOh
C	I    S.&LONll!
 
•	I SANTA   IS.&a!t.	0
o   I SANTA   LL'Cl.t.
SANT&   N.t.PTA	·c
 
ROSE   CREEJC·o
 
B       I    AOY
 
S        I    AYO!JLP"4
 
C	I   S.&L T   CHUCK	' I	0
 

ORA  fN!D ROSE  VALLEY RCSEB!"'iRY
ROSEBLOOM
 
I AO'l'Al,;
o	I ROYCE
0     I   RO'l'GORGE o     f  AOYOSA
 
e      I     R'l'!G.&re C     I    RYf'LL
C'       I RYCLL•   SALIN
..      I    PY!'PATC!ot
 
·c       I    S&LT   L.&11:1!
9	J       S.&LTAIA
10	I   SAL TEA
C.	I. SAL Tl!:PY
 
o	I SANTA  YNfZ
0	SANTANA	0
SANTAN!LA
0		S.& ... TAOUIN SANTARDS A
 
ROSEBOROUGH
 
B       I    A'O'l'ST
 
C       I    RYE.A
 
·C ·   I S.&L T!SI!'	0
 
ROSE6UD
 
•	I PO'l'STON!'
 
E"	I        AYKliP
 
S  .I  SAC:.TtNf
 
c	5.&NT!'E	•
 
ROSEBURG ROSEOHU
 
8      I
a/0·1
 
A'3ZA POlELL'IILLE
 
C     j' AVM&t;
e   I t:.vl)AP
 
C	I     S.&L TOH
C	I     SALUDA
 
SANTIAGO
c	SANTI AM	c
 
ROSEGLEh ROSl!:HAVf'H AOSEH  ILL ROSEL ANO ROSl!:LLA ROSl!Ll<IS
 
•	I AOlETTA
o	I  ROZLE!'
0     I    f:'U.&"Alt
9	I     PU81CON
10	I     PU810
0     I   R:U'9$0N
 
B   . f   RVPOC'
C      I    AYUS
1:/0 I    SA.&CJ
•	I   s AaAti.&
C/OI  !..&eAH.t.  secA
·1  S.&t'!'
 
e   I S.&LVISA
e	I S.&LZEA
c  I S.&l..ZEF1 • PRQTl!'CTfO
c	I S.&,.l!I.&
·c	I £.&HSPITO
e	I SANDAY
 
c	S.&N10	•
0	SANTO T0"'4.t.S
C	SANTONI
0	SAN WELL
8	SA PEHA
0	SA PELO	0
 

NOTES;	TWO  HYOCJOLOGIC  SOJL  GROUPS  SUCM  AS  8/C  lHDICAT!S  Tri! OR.&JN!O./UNDPAJNl!'O  SITUATION.
- OOIFlf'RS  SHO•""·  E: ..G ••  BEO OC!i:  SUBSTRATUl•h   Rl!:F!'.A   TO  A   SP!Cll"'IC  sCfL  SEFlll!'S '•PHASE  FOUND   IN   SOIL  ,.. ..R  LfGEHOo

32	(210-VI-TR-55, Second Ed., .June 1986).
 



TABLE A-5 CONTINUED   Hydrologic soil groups for United States soils

 
.,
SAP INERO
 


•	I SA.lilTOlllN
 

c	SCOTCH
 

D	I SEITZ
 

c	I SHAKER	c
 
SAPKJN SAPPHIRE SAPPltiGTON
 
c   I SA.lilY!"R
c   I SA.XBY
•	I SA.llON
 
c	SCOTCD
D	SCOTIA.
SCOTT
 
'I S!.JITA
e	I SEX.IL
o	I SEICt·u
 
o.    I
o    I
D I
 
SHAKESPEARE
SHAJl;OPE!	c
SHAL4KE	c
 
SARA SARAGOSA SARAHSVtLL!
S RALEGUI
 
D      I   SAT
o  I SA.YBROOll:
D	I      SAYOAB
•	I SA.Yl!AS
 
SCOTT   LA-K!
SCQTTCAS
c	SCOTT l!S
•	SCOTTSVILLE
 
•	I SP"LA"
e	I  S!LBIT
SFL0°£H
c	I  S!LEVIN
 
c   I SHAL.t.KO	D
e   I SHAL9A	D
c	I SHALCAR	0
D	I    SHA-LCAR.     DRAINE!:>	c
D
 
SARANAC
 
c.101
 
SA.YLl!S
 
D	SCOUT
 
. ' I SEL,..RIDGI!
 
e	I SHAL.CLEAV
 

SARANAC, GRAVELLY
 
c I SA.YLl!:SYlLLE
 
c	Sf;:RA8BLEAS
 
' I SELIA
 
c	I $.HA.LET	0
 
sueS·TAATUH	.
 
I SA.TNl!A
 
•	SCA.ANTON
 
AIOI
 
SELIGMAN
 
D.	I SHALON A.
 
•o·
 


·'1
 

SARA PH
SARA TON
 
D   I SA.YPO.
c   l SA.Z 1
 
c	SCRAYO
c	SClilBA ..
 
e	I Sf.LICUUI::
.c    I Sf-LL!:
 
c  I SHALPER
o   I SHAM
 
SARA ZAN
SAiUIEH
SAACILLO
S.l.ROINIA
 
I SCALA
I SCA.LAD!"
D   I SCAL,-AR
c  I SCALLEY
 
SCAl!HEA
SCAIY!A
SCROGGIN SCULLIN	.
 
c  I SELLERS
e	I S!LJllA
c	I S!LMAC
c	I S!"LON
 
a.10-1
·a.10
•
 
SHAMBO
SHAMEL
SHAMOClt	c
SHANAHAN	•
 
'·	SARDIS
 
c	SCAMMAN
 
SCUPP'EAN.ONG
 
D	I     SELTI.
 
•	SHANDEP
 
9/0
 
-	SARGEANT
SAA ILDA
SARITA
 
D	SCA.NOA.JM>
c	SCANT IC
SCAPOHIA
D
 
D
c	SEA.BAQOIC
D	Sf"Af"  U!:LD
SEAFORTH

D
 
c   I S!:LWAY
'e   I SEHi AH,.00•
 
D
ORA lNEO   C
 
SHANI!"
SHANGHAI
SHANGHAI•  DRAINED
 
D
.•.
 
SAAICAR
SARNO SA
 
SCA.A
SCARBORO
 
SEAGATE
Sf:AGCYl'LLE
 
A.IOI
D	I
 
SEMINOLE
Sf;MPEA
 
SH&NICLEA
c	SM ANO
 
SARONA
 
SCAR IBOU
 
SEALY
c	SEAMAN
 
•  1 •••
 
SH-'NT-'
c
 
5.t.RPY
SAR'TELL
SAAUc;HE
 
SCAAP_l!:A
SCATLAKE SCA.YI!
 
D	Sl!·AMAN • STRDNGL Y
c	SAL JN!
 
·c•
 
SENC!-IEAT
S[N!CAYILLE SENSA!AUGH
 
sHu:iaTIJ\l.	e
SHAR!SNOUT	c
S!"ARK!Y	D
SHARL.4.ND
 
SASAl!llf
SASALAGUAN. SASCD
 
D
c
.•.
 
S0tA.fl'l"£NAK!A
SCHALLER SCHAMl!9!A
 
S!.:A..M,AN•   OOERATELY   C
c
c
 
S!OUATC!"flE
S!OUl)t SEOUOJ.t.
 
SHAl:!Oh
c	SHARONOALE
 
SASKA
·sASJ.)A CO SASSAFRAS· SASSER
SA!'AG-0.
 
.•.
D
 
SCHAMP
SCHAPYJLLI! SOtATTl!:L SCHAU SON
. SCHAWANA
 
SEAOU!ST
SEAP
c	SEAR ING
c	Sf"AALA
SEAAL!:S
D	SEARSPORT
 
SEAO[N
!i!AEN! S!ADCO
c	SERPl!:Po
D	SEAP!NTANO Sl!RPOO
 
c•
c• ..
•c
 
SHARPS	c
SMARPSeuRG
SMARROT.T	0
o;HAR'VAhA SHA SER
SMASKIT	c
 
SATANIC.A
SATANTA SAT,-,TTON SAT!LLIT!'
SAT ILLA
SA.TIN SATSOP SA.TT SATTLEY SATTAE SATURN S.t.TUS
SAUCEL SAUCIER SAUD!
S'AUGA lUCK
 
SOtEN'CO
SCH!ARA-AO
D	SCHL!Y
c	sOotUTZ
·D	SCHN!l!9LY
SCHNl!JO;!A SCH  t"PP!A SCHNOOASOk SCHNOReUSH SCHQOSON SCHD!NS
SCHD' lE..LD
D	SCHQHAAI!
SCHOLL£
SCHOO DIC
c	CHODLCAA.,T
 
D	SEAASVILL!:
SEASTAANO
S!.tTON
•	S!ATTL!
SEATTLE•  OR IN!:D
c•	S!.t.Yri:RSON SEA.WILLOW
SE9AGC Sl!:BA.STIAN
c	SE!ASTOPot.
SEeEw.t..
c	SEE>ltE!
c	SEBPJNG
5-fl!!UD
SfCCA
SECESH
 
D.	SERRA.NO
! S!JiYJLLETA
D	I      SE'SAME
C	I    SESPI!:
0    "l.Sl!!StDNS B	I S!SSUM
D	I   SEJ
c   I S!:TH
C       ·I    s"ETT!:RS
f/01 SETTLEMENT
C	I SETTLEMEYEA
e.tDI  SETTLEM!YEA.
8 I SALINE•ALK.t.LI
·c I se:TTLEMl!:YER.
B	I FLOODED
COOL
 
D	SHASTA
D	SHA.ST I NA
c	SHA.TRUCE	c c	SHATT A
c.	SHA.TTUCK
D	sW.t.USDPo
c	SHAY ANO	6
c	SHAV.t.-S ..
D	SH.I.VEA
D	SHAWJI	•
c	SHAWANO
D	S"AWMUT
SHAV	D
D	'SHAVLA	D
SH!AA	c
D     I   SHEAY ILLE	0
 
SAUGUS
 
SCHOOLEY	D
•
 
SECONDS£  T
 
c     1 ·se:TTLE,. YEA•
 
e	I SHEl!l.t.NG	D
 
SAUIC
 
SCHOOL!Yo.OAAIN!D"       C
 
SECRET  CRf'.e;IC.
 
a	ISETTLEMEYERo
 
SA.ULICH."
SAU"4
SAUNDERS
 
D	SCHOOLEY•
PROT!CTED
D	SCHOOLHOUSE
 
c	S!CliPITY
S!D
SEC ALE SEC'GE,.ll!LO
 
c   I  cHANNf:LED
c	I SEVAL
D       I    SEYE'NMILE
C	I     SEVl!AN
 
I SMEISEON	c
c	I SHEOADO	. c
e.  I SHEOO	c
o	I SHEOHORN	0
 
SAUR IN

S,Auvr_e:.
 
c	SCHDONE-R	D

C	·SCHRl!!A.	•
 
E	I SE'YtEA

D    I SEVY
 
D	I      SHl!:!CJIL
•
 
SAUTER
SAUVIE"
 
D
"'00EAATELY
•
 
SCHRADER
SCHAAP

SCHROCI(
 
SfDGWAY
SEDILLO SEDMAR SEDROWOOLLEY
 
I!'      I SEYILLE
c  I S!"llANfE
c	I 5£11'.t.RD
 
D     I SHE EGE
e	I SHE EK
o     I SHEEP   CREEK	c
o	I  SHfEPCAN
 
SAUVIEo PROT!CT!D
 
SCHROON
 
'	SEDWELL
 
D    I SEW£L:.i.
 
c    I SH!EPHEAD	c
 
SAUVOLA
.SAUZ
SAVAGE
SAVAG!.TON
 
SCHU!LKE SCHULINe: SCHUMACHER
D	SCHUSTER
 
c	SEEOSIC401!1!
Sf.El.EZ
SE!:LOVERS
SE!LYEVILt.!
 

A	I SE:XTDN C     I   SEYMOUR Al'DI      SEZN.t.
 

c.101
D        I
D        I
c	I
 

SHEEPROCK SHEEPSCOT
SHEET TRON	c
SHEFF IELO	D
 
S YAHNAH
 
c	SCHUYLER
 
$EfL Y!V ILL£•
St.OPING
 
0   I SHAAIC
.  I SHAISL JSS
 
D       I    SHEfF 1T	D
 
SAVE AC
 
c	SCIO	'
 
Ei	I StfA(IC
 
o	I SH!FFLEIN	•
 
SAVO
SAVOIA
SAVONA
 
c  I ·SCJOTOVILL£
e   I SCISM
c	I  SCITICO
 
c	SEEPRlD
c	SEES
c	SEE"lll!E
 

C	f    SHAD!LAHD
" I SttADELEAI'
 
c	I SHELBI ANA.
c	I SHEL!URNE
SHE;.BY.
 

c,.
 
SA WA.BE
$AWA TCH
 
D	I        SCITUATE
91"0 I SCLOME
o
 
c	Sl!f"f'"Nl!:R
SEGIDAI.
S·fGND
 
C	·I SHADOW
D	I SHAOYGROVE
c	I SHA,..FTON
 
o    I
c	I SHELBYVILLE	•
' I SH ELD
 
SAWBUCK
 
I SCOAP
c
 
c	SEGUIN
 
S    I SHAFTER
 
·D       I
 
SHELL	•'
 
SAllCAEEJ;
 
I SCOBEY
 
D	I $HAGEL
 
D	I    SHELL.l6.t.AGER	B
 
SAWOUST
SAW .. ILL
SAWTELL
 
o	I SCQGGI N
Bl"DI  -SCOON
c	I SCOOT!Nl!Y
 
SEGURA
SEHDME SEHORN
 
c  I SHAGN.t.STY
D   I SHAJC:ANAIC
c	I SHAK.t.N
 
c	I SHELLBLUF"F
c	I SHELLCREEIC	c
c	I SHELL DRAKE	•
 
SAW TEL.PEAK
 
D        I    SCORUP
 
c	SfIS
 
NDTE-S:	T"llO   HYOROLDGIC   SDlL   GROUPS   SUCH   AS   9./C   INDICATES   TH!  ORAINEP.t"UND"RAINl!:O   SITUATION.
MODIFIERS   SHD No   EeG•o    BEOPOCK    SU8STRATUM•    Rl!'Fl!'.A    TO   A    SPl!:Cl.FIC   SOIL   Se:RIES   PHASE   FOUND   IH   SOIL   NAP   LEGEND·

(210-VI-TR-55, Second Ed., June 1986) 	33
 




TABLE A-5 CONTINUED	Hydrologic soil groups for United .States soils


c	c
SHl!l1'1.t.O INI!	0     I SHOTlf!LL	0    I SJHC!NA.	0     I SICYl(OMISH	• I lo!DDERATELY  WET
SHl!LOCTA	•  I SHOUNS.	• I. SIJ.I01'1tN
D
c    I SHOllU1L TEFf	c    I SIMONTON	• I S.ICYLINI!	D       I SNOWLJN
I SNOWSJ-101!
SHENA	0    I SHOWAL Tl!R •  STOPO'	•  I SIMPAAIC	i>    I SKYMOA	D     I SN0'•040RI!	•
 
SHl!NANDOAH
 
SHOW LOW	c   I SIMPATICO	I SKYROCK
I SICVYILLA'GE	0	I
 
SHENicS	°"'I SHRl!I!	e  I SIMPSON
Shl!"ION	I SMAl!WOl!R	I SI"'S
 
•	I $NOWVILLE	D
 
Stiei'NYAL	•  I SHRl!:VSBURY	C/OI  SINA I	c    1. SLAB	D      I SNUl""P"UL	c
 
Sl11!P	•  I SHAIN	• I SINAMOX	•  I SLAl!TOWH	• I
 
SOAKP.&IC	•
 
SH!!. PAN	c    I ·SHROI!	c   I S JNCLA IR	c   I SLACKS	c   I SOAPCRl!EIC	c
SHEPPARD	•  I $HROU'rS	0    I s iNGA rse::	0     I SLAGLE	c   I SOAPLAKE	D
 
.....	I
 
.. I SOBOL	c
 
SHEPS Tl!A
 
D     I SHUr.UTA	c   I S JNGERTON
 
•	I SLAP.JACK	• I SOAR	D
 
SHl!RANC.O
SHl!AA.R
 
I
c  I SHUK4SH
 
S INGLl!TRl!I!
I SING.SAAS
 
SLATERV	c
SLAUGHTE'1	c
c	SLAUGHTl!R\l ILL!
 
I soer.:GA
I SOP.I OBA
 
SHl! CURN"E
 
c  I SHUICSAN
 
c	S INKl!R
 
•	SLAVl!N
 
c	S09RANT!	•
 
SHl!AIDAN
 
I SHULE	c	SINfi:SON
•	I SHULLSl!IU.li!G	c	SJNLOC
 
c	SLAW	c	soesoN	c
SLAVTON	D	SOCORRO
 
SHl!RL!SS
SHl!qLDCK	I SHU.-,LA	SUtNJCE
 
..,
 
SHl!qlot	D    I SHUMl!l'AY	D	SJtiNIGA,.	0
 
SLE:l!Pl!A	c	SODA	•
 
SHERM DAI!	•  I SHUPl!AT	c	SINTON	•	SL!!°TH	c	SODA   LAJCE	c
 
SHEAIJY	91'0  I
•
 
SHURL.l!Y
 
•	INUIC	0	.SLICKAOCJC	•	SODA  LA E o	•
 
SH!RAY.   STONV	0     I SHUSTE:R	c	SION	•	SLIOECRl!EK
 
sooAa.a.v
 
I SHUTTLE	•	SIOUX	•	SLJDl!LL	c	SODA.SPRING
 
SHl!RAYL
 
•	•	SLIGHTS	c
 
SHl!AVCOO	• I SI	c	S IOUllON
 
•	SLIGTtNG
 
SODl!RVILLI!
c	SODHOUSE	D
 
SHl!VL IN	c   I SI6ELIA
 
SIPPLI!
 
SHIOLl!:A	D      I sraLl!:Y	e	SIPSl!Y	•·	SL I KOK	0	SODUS	c
c   I Sl9Ll!YYILLI!	•
 
SHll!LDS
 
'	SOl!LSEl?G
 
SNIF="l'ER	c    I src·KL1!5	9;-01  S IRI	•	SLINGl!A	•	SO!N	c
SHILOH	e;'OI   SIDDOWAY	• I s IAAl!F	0	SLIPfo'A	•	SOl'TSCAABl!!LE	c
SH·l'4140N	c   I S IOI.AKI!'	c   I SISK	c	5L1JCAVE	0     I RAR LY  FLOODED
SHIN&AAA	0    I 51!9.l!N	•  I SISSETON	•	!LUIC!	c   I SOGN
 

SHINDLER
 

c   I SU!l!ll!RT
 
•	I S ISSDN
 
•	SLUKA	c    I SOGO	•
 
SHI"fl!R	c   I Sll!CHI!	c   I SISTfPS	•	SLY	e	I SOGZII!	•
SHl,,,GLfMILL	0     I Sll!ROCLJl"'I"'	c   I SITD OWN	•	5..ALL	c   I SOJUR	0
SHINKl!I!	c    I Sl!ARAVILL!	• I S l•l!LL	c	lo!AlfTS	• I SOLANO
 

SHINNPl! K
 

D    I SIESTA	0
 

I s u:eEACOM
 
•	SM.AUG	•  I 501..0ATNA	c•
 
SHINAOCK	c   I Sll!Y!!RS	c   I S IXN ILE	c	Sf'l!OLEY	0    I SOLD JER
SHIOCTON	c   I Sil"'TON	' I 5 IZ!R
 
S... IOYA
SHIPLl!Y
 
I s1G	I Sl(AGGS	c	Slit I LEY	8.101  SOLEDAD	•
•	I SIGNAL	c •  J    SKAE IT	c	S"'ILO	c	I SciLIS	c
 
SAL I Nl! ..ALKAL I	I SJl(!STON	Bl'D I   SIC.AHA	•	SMJTHeDAO	0     I SOLLE KS	c
c	c
SHIPS	0    I SILAS•  GR.tY!"LLY	c   I Sl(Alo'O	c   I Sli'I THNECK • OPA INED  • I SOLOMON	D
SHIPSHI!	• I SUBSTltAT'-'..	I SKANf:!	c	I SMJ TH TON	0     I SOLON A	c
Sl+IRL!V	• I. SILCOX	• I !KAT!	• I S"'ITHWICK	0     I SOM90PDORO	0
 

SHIRO
 
c· I
 
StLe:NT	0    I SKEDADDLE	D     I SMOCPE!K	c   I SOMl!R!AO	c•
 
SHlltTTAII.	•  I SILl!P	•  I SKl!:JN	0     I S/itOK£Y	c    I SOMERS	•
 

SHIVELY
 
•	I SIL!ATON
 
•	I SKL'.:LLCCK
 
•	I ,,_CLAN	c	I SOMl!PYl!LL.	c
 
SHIYtG ...Y	•  I SILHOU!:TT!	.C     I SKELON	c   [ S"'YANA	9/D.1  SOflllSl!!:N	•
 

S..IYLUM
 
I SILi	c   I SKEL fCIN	• I SNAG	• I SONAHNPIL
 
S>+OALS	c   I SILK JI!	c   I SKEAAY
 
c   I SNAHOPISH
 
•	I SONODA	•
 
•	I. Sf'IAl(f	c    I !lONLl!'f
 
St-+DAT	0    I SILSTIO	• I SK l C!
 
•	I SNAICE  HOLLOW
 
0
•	I SONOCAN
I
 
SHO!IA
 
0    I SIL VA	c  I SKJDflllORE
c
 
I SHAl(El.U,.
I SNAKIE'P	0
 
SMO!'.Pl!:G
 
ISJLVl!AI
 
I SKINNER	•
 
I SONOMA	•
 
SHOESTRING
 
I S ILYl!A   CJll!!IC	0	SKIP ANON
SIC IPOPA	0     I
 
c	I
0    I W!T,  SALJNE
 
SHOii::EN	0
 
I SILVl!RAOO
 
SN&PP
I SN!:AO
 
SONOMAo
 
MOOEA.tTEL'I'
•
 
c	SKJYOU
Slo!ONT IK	c    I SILYEA'!IOlll	0	Sfl:l'..ICOMISr4	0     ·I .SNEFFl!'LS	c    I SC'NOMAo   SAL INI! •
SHOOl'LI'-	D     I SJLVl!ACHl!I"'	c	SKCK.O)i!ISHo  OAAIN!O	I SN!LL	•
 
SHOOl't.Y	0      I SILV!RCt.11'1'	•	SKCLY	•  I SNELLING
 
I SONO,.A • STAIATIFtED 0
 
SHOOK	c     I SJLV!RO&LI!	•	SKOD Ulll	<   I SN!LLMAN	e	I   SUBSTRATUM SHORl!:E.K	c    I SILV!ATON	<	SKQ1tH!GAN		•  I SNOMOfllfSH	0      I  SLIGHTLY    $ALINE SHO::f!WOOO	c    I SIL:Vll!S
SMORiflll	c    I SINAS	c	SKULLGULC'"f	I
SHOllT  CAl!l!:IC	c   I SIMCDI!.	c	SKULL1'AK	0     I
SHORTCUT	c    I 5 Otl!.DN	SICUMP.1.H	'
SHOAT YORK	c   I SIMMONT	c	SICYfl!AG	c	I SNOW	•  I SOOL.tK!	•
SHOSHONI!'	c   I SJMOOA	c	SKYHAYl!N
DRAINl!O.IUNDRAJNED  SITUATION•
"'ODIFI!PS  SHOWNo   EoG••   ee:DAOCK   SUBSTPATUfllo   Al!F!R   TO   • SP!CIFIC  SOIL  SEPIES  PHASI!  FOUND   fN  SOIL  MAP  LEG!ND•

34	(210-VI-TR-55, Second Ed., June 1986)
 
-



 

TABLE A-5 CONTINUED
 
Hydrologic  soil groups for United  States soils
 

 


SOONAK!R SDDSAP SOP!A SOOU!L SOA!NS!N
 

c	SP.IN!KOP
c	SPtN!KOP•     SALINE.        c
c	SPINfK.OP•	c
MOOfAAT!LT   W!T
SPINKS	c
 

STABL!A STAOV STAI'"",. ORO
STAGECOACH STAHL
 

I!'	STl!UllER
B	STl!V!NS
C	ST!V!NSON
B	ST!WAAT
C	STl!WYAL
 

STAELHAo  SILTY
suesTAATUN STR!VELL
D	STR ICKl!R
0	STRICICl.AND
c	STAINGAM
 
•
•
c.•.
 
SOA,..
S.OAR!NfO SOAT!A
 
c	SPINLIN
SPINN!'f
D	SPJA!S
 
STAKE
STALEY
D	STALLINGS
 
C	STICKNEY
8	STIDHAM
C	STIEN
 
B	STRINGTOWN
B	STRJNGTO•N•
D
 

GRADl!O    C
c
 
SORUM
si:JSA SOSTt!!N
soTrM SOUGH£ SOUL.&JUL! SOUT·HAC! SOUTHAM SOUTHf'OAK SDUTHGA T! SOUTHMOUNT s0UTHAIDG! SOUTH•ICK SO•CA.N
SO•CAN• SOMEWHAT
POi:JALY    OAAIN!O
$PAA
 
D	SPUfl  T
c	SPIRO
D	SPtY!'f SPLA•N
D	SPLfNDORA
c	SPLJT!N
SPLIT AO
SPLJTTOP
D	SPOl'"FOAD
D	SPOl'"MOA!
SPOKAN!
SPOXEL
c	SPONS!LL!P
SPOOL SPOON!R ..
SPOTSYLVANIA
D	I       SPOTTSNODD•
 
c

c c
D
D
c
0
c c

D
C/D
c
•
 
STAM8AUGH
STAMFORD STAMP STAMPl!DI! STAN STANDLl!V STANDUP ST&NEY STAN,.  I!LO STANISLAUS
STANISLAUS.   lfET
STAN.ADO
STAPALOOP ST.&PLl!S STAPLETON" STAPP
STAABUCIC
 
B	STIGLER
D	STILES
D	STILGAA
D	STILL
8	STJ"LLM&N
C	STILLWATER
8	STILS'ltlN
0	STtLSON
C	STIMCA
C	STl'4SON
0	5TJNl!S
C	STINGAL
l!I	I·  STINGDORN
11/DI  $TIP!
8     I·  STIRK
C ·   I    STIAAUP
D	J.    STIRUM
 
-STROLE
C	STROM
8	STROMAL
!I	STRONGHOLD
!I       I    STRONGHURST
0     I   $.TROUPE	c
C   .1  STROZI	c
B	I     STAYCH
!'   I   STRYIC!'A	c
D       I    STU9BL!,.IELD	c
15      I   5TU895.	c
8   I   STUCICV
D	I       STUD!BAKEP
C      I   STUK!L	D
o      I   'STUMeL!
8     f   STUMPP
e.10 I   STUMPTO'WN
 
SPAC!  CITY
SPAOI! SPAD A
SPAG!A
$PA"LDING
 
I SPA&l!IAT
I SPRAY·
I SPAEC:Xl!t.S·
.D    I SPAJGGS
D    I SPA ING
 
ST ARGO
ST AA HOPI!
c	STAAJCHICO,.
c	STARKEY
c	. STARKS
 
e	STIAUM• PQNOED
0	STISSING
·o	STJY!ASVJLL"E
C	STOCKADE  ·
c	STDCKf:!RlOGE
 
D       I    STUNN!"A
C       I    STUNT·Z	c
l'	I  STURG!ON
8.101. STURGILL	0
C	STUA.KJE
D
 

SPANA. SPANAlfA,Y
SPAN!L
 
D   I SP"AJNGDALE
I SPAJNGO·AL!.• STONY"
D    I S INGEA
 
STAAL!Y ST ARMAN
ST ARA
 
D	STOCX!L
D		STOCK LANO STDCKPEH
 
D	STUTTGART
8	STUTZMAN	c
D	STUTZMANo   WET·	D
c
 
SPANG SP&NGl!:NBUAG SPAHG!NBUAGit
POND!O
$PAHfiLER
 
I S.PRJNGl!AVILL!
c  I SPRINGP"J!LO
D I SPA INGGUL CH
·SPRJNGL&KI!
C      I    SPA INGMl!.Yl!R
 
D	STAAVEOUT STASER
ST&Tf
•	ST.&T!LINI!
STATLER
 
STOOA STOOICK STOHLMAN
ri	STOKl!S
•	T(IK:LY
 
STUTZYILLE
D	STYERS
D	STVX
D	SUAX
e	sueaco	D
C	SUBLl!TT!
 
SPAR.&NJC

SPAlllKHULE
 
D I SPAINGST!!.N.

I SPfJOUL
 
c	STATZ

D	STAVTON
 
D	STOMA st

0	STONE!IUAG
 
0	SUBLIGHA
9	SU!IWl!LL·
 
.•.
 
SPAAHA.M

SPA AMO SPARA
 
D  I SPRING•AT!A

I SPstUCl!DALI!:
c    I SPUD
 
c.	STAVE·LY

D	ST!AANS
c	STECOAH
c	STECUM
 
STONl!Bl!AGl!A

D	STONEHAM STONll!HEA.O
(	STDNll!LICIC
 
•
I!   I  SUCAA°NOOCHEE
C	I    SUCCESS	•
8	I   SUCCOR
 
SPAAfA•   S1LTV  CLAY   8     I
 
SPUOROCK
 
STEED
 
•	S_TON!'LL
 
II  .    I    SUCH!"S
 
LOAN   SIJBSTRATUM	I "SPUIC'lllUSH
•	I	c
 
SPART A. LOAMY
sueSTAATUM SPARTA•   MAAT>SO SPARTA•   MAAT<SO SPARTA.    B!OAOCK
suesTR A TUM
 
SPUR
I SPUFrGER
•	I 5p\,RLOCK"
ISQUALlCUM
•	i SQU&LL't
I SQUAW
 
S TE!r.M"&N
c	STE!OMAN •   STONY
STEEKl!E
STl!l!LI!
STEl!NS· STl!r;'.PCAN
 
D	STDN!Fr
c	STDNl!Y ILL!
c	STONl!'lll&LL
c	STCNl!W!LL
c	STONO
STDNYl"'OAD
 
8    I   SUDSURY
e	1  SUOOUTH
t;"	I      Sl!Di.l!V
&         I     SUDWOPTH
8/0i SUl!PERT
o    r suEi
C     1   SUl"'f"lELD	c
 
SPASPA!Y·
 
c  I S &WCAEEK
 
D	STl!l!S!
 
STDDKMOOA	•
 
SPEAKER SP!AKS
 
c   .J
 
SQUAW AOC&'
SQUAllT JP
 
c	STFEVl!A
c	STE,.,.
 
STORO!N
c	STCALA
 
B       I    SUl'l'""OL·K
B       I    SUG&ICOOL
 
SP!AA,..ISH
SP!AAH!AO SP!AAMAN SPEAAYILL! SP!CI!" SP!CK SP!CTACLf SP!CTEA SP!!LYAt
 
•	I
D  ·I SOUIAES
o   I ST.  ALBANS
e    I ST.  ANTHDNV
c  I ST. AUGUSTIN!
o   I ST•  AUGUSTINE•
D I ORGANIC
c  I SUl!ISTAATUM
c   I ST.  CHARLES
D     I   ST.  CLAIR
 
c	STEGALL
STEJGl!R
ST!ILACDOJl4 ST!INAUl!'i:t STl!"JNBECK.
STfJNS8UAG STl!"I 'WER
•	STELLA
D	STELLAR
 
c	STORMI TT
STOTT
c	STOUGH
STOUT
STDYHO
c	STOVI!
c	STC'lll!LL
c	STOY.
c	STAA!l!A
 
8     I   SUGARBDllL
C        I     SUGARDEI!
C	f"  SUGARLOAF
D	I    SUGLD
C      I   SUISUN	D
C	I     SUL&	'•
er      I    SULLl·Y&:N
C       I SULLY	•
C	I      SULOAf'
D
 
SP!!R SP! I GLE
SP!NARD
 
s   I ST.  !lMO	&
o	I ST.  GEORGI! 	8
o   I ST.  GEORGE•  SALIN!  C
 
STl!MeER
ST!"'ILT STEJolLl!V
 
STRAHAN
STRAIGHT
c	STAANDLJNI!
 
11         I     SULPHUP&
C	I       SULSAYAR
8     I    SULTAN
 

C.
S/D
 
SP!NCEA SP!NLO SP!NS
 
o	I 5T. GEORG!.  'llll!T
o	I ST. HEL!NS.
' I ST. JGNACI!
 
D	5Tf,.PLI!
STENDAL
D	sre:Pl-l!N
 
5 TAANDOU·J 5 T
c	STAAT
.C	STAAT,.OAO
 
8/0I SUM.AN
II	I      SUMAS
II       .I     SUMATRA
 
SPERRY SP!XAATH
 
c.101
c·  I
 
ST. JOHNS
sr. JOHNS·
 
8/DI
D        I
 
STEPHl!NVILLE
S T!PROCx'
 
STRATTON
STRAW
 
C       I    SUMINI!
a   I SUMMl!Af' r ELD	D;
 
SPHINX
SP CER
 
D	I
Bl'D  I
 
O!PAESSI ON&L
ST. LUCl!
 
I STEPSTONI!
•·  I STEPT·O!
 
STA.t.'W"N
STAl!&:TOA
 
11        I     SUMl'l!AS
!.IOI SUI04!ATON
 
SPICEliTON SPIC!VODD SP·IKE SPILLC:O SPILLVILLE SPILOC:K
 
D ·  I ST. MARTIN
c   I ST.  MARYS
8     I   ST.   NICHOLAS
8    I  ·ST. ONGE e	I ST.  PAUl.
0	I     ST.   THOMAS
 
D    I STERLJNG
s   I STERLINGTON.
D   I STEAA!TT
o  I STET SO;_, o    I STETT!R D     I STEUBEN
 
STAl!LNA
STAll!LN&•
D	LACUSTAINE SUBSTRATUM
STAl!LNAo      TILL SIJ15STAA  TUM
 
C      I    SUMM!"RVILLE	D
8     I   SUM,,.JT	c
I    SUMMITYILLE	c
I    SUMPF	D
B       I    SUNTER	c
I     S MTEAYILLE	c
 
NOTES:	TWO   HVDAOLOGIC   SOIL  GROUPS   SUCH   A&   Bl'C   INDICATES   THE   OR&IHl!OJ'UNDAAIN!D   SITUATION•
MODIFIERS   SHOWNo   e·.G.•   BEDROCK   SU8STRATUM•   REl'"EA   TO  .A  $Pl!CI1'"1C   SOIL  SERIES  PHASll!  f"OUNO  ·IN  SOIL   M.AP   L!GEN0.

(210-VI-TR-55, Second Ed., June 1986) 	35
 



TABLE A-5 CONTINUED	Hydrologic soil groups for United States soils


 

SUM YA	D
SUN	D
SUN8U G	•
 
I TE'HAMA	c
6    I T!HRAH
US	I TEIG!!:N	c
E	C/DI   TEJA
 
SUNBURST	c•
 
sw•P rswooo
 
c   I TAFf'OM
 
c• I
 
TA.HWA)(	0      I
c    ·1
 
o.
TE.JASE
n!;JANA
 
SUNBURY
 
SllARTi	0
 
I TAFCYA
 
I TAN'•All"•   DRAINED	c	'
 
SUNCJTY	0	SWASEY	0     1·  T Al"'C	c.  I TANYARD
 
I TEKENINK
 
c     I TA TO'llH	•  I TA.(JP I	•  I TEI( I SON	c
SU"l'O	·c	SlfAUll:	0     I  TAFUtU1	' I TAPCO	0     I Tf:KLANIKA	'
 
SUNO.&NCI!
 
•	SWAYNE
 
c   I TAGGA"T
 
I T.tP1 A
I TAPfCITOES
 
I T!KOA
D    I Tl!l(OA •  fXTRE)off'LY
 
suNoELL	•
 
SWE!:.ATMAN	c    I TAGl.Al(E
c   I "'i At'IJ"'A
 
•	I TARA	•  I TELA.	•
 
SUNDAY
 
'	SWl!OE
swEe
 
I TAHll\f:NITCl'f
 
I TAPPAN
 
e.101
 
STONY
 
SUNl!!V	•	S'tff!!NEY	•
 
I  TAl-IOULA	D   ·I J:.t.f;l80RD
 
' I Tl!LC'"'ER	•
 
SU"IF JELO	•	Sw!!ET	c   I TAHQUATS	•  I TARG EE	c   I TELE CAN	'	·.
SU,.,LIGHT	0	SWEET APPLE	•  I TAINTOR	Ci'OI   TARICINGTON	c	I TELEFONO	c	..
SUNNYSIDE	•	SWE!:TWA·TEF.	D    I TAK!. UC ... I	c	I T AAl(L JN	c	I Te:'.LEPHONI!
 
SUNNYVAL.E
 
c	SWl!ITBERG	c   I TAK IL"'A	• I TAALOC
 
D
'· I TELESCOPE	'
 
•	SWEITING	c   I TAKQTN4	e	I TAIHtACH	D     I TELl'"Eff
 
SUNRAY
•	•
 
I TARPLEY
 
•	I TE"LFERNl!:A	D
 
SUNR'ISE	c	S"ljf,14	c    I r.o:POCrlAO	D ·I TAANAV
 
SUNSl!::T
SUNSHINE
 
SWENODA
c	SWIFT
 
I TAI.AG	D
I T .U.A,..ANT!!S
 
I TARR
 
' I Tl!LLER	'
 
SUNSWEET	c,
 
SWIFT ·CREEK	• I TAl..ANTI!:	0     I TAIHfANT	0    .I TELL J CO	'
 
SUNUP
 
s-.JFTON
 
•	I TALAPUS
 
' I TAAA!"TI!·	D      I   Tl!;LLJ14'AN	•
 
SUNY	D	SWIMLEY	c    I TALBOTT	c	I T.l.RAYALL	c    I   TELL URA	c
SUP	•	• SllJNGLE:A	• I TALCOT	!-1'01   TASAYA .	c    I TELST.&0	c
 
SUP AN	•,
 
s·wrNGLfRo    Wl!T 0	c   I T.&LIHI"'-'	0    I TASCOSA	• I
 
Tf" AN	e
 
0    I
c	I  TEl4ESCAL	0
 
SUP!:qlOR
 
STRONGLY   SALI!-11!
 
I T.&LJ:El!TNA
 
I JASSl!L
 
re:i-eLoR	0
D
 
SUPERSTITION	'	SlflNGLEAo   •ET	<  .I  TALL.&
 
I TASSl!L"4AN
 
•	I TE ...O	c
SUPPL El!	•	SlflN(IMISM	c    I TALL.&Ol!GA.	c   I T.&T.&f	c   I Tl!"4PLE	c
SUFlfS t·ttl!	D	swrseo"	0     I   TALLE'YV ILLE	•  I   TATl!RMl!:AP	• I  TP!Jo!'YllC	•
SUQGP")f	c	SWISS.H!'.LM
•
SUA'lUF	•	SlflSSVALE	0     I TALLULA	•  I TATOUCHI!:	•  I   Ti!PfAS	c
 
SURPLUS	c
SURPRISE
 
swr T<:H..ACIC	c    I   TALLY	•  I T..&TTCN	D     I TENCl!E	D
 
SWITZERLAND	• I  T..&L,,.AGF.
 
I   TATUM	e     I TENOOV	D
 
c   I TALlrlO	I T.IUNTON	c   I TENl!Rll'l'"E	'
c	S"WOIJMV ILLF	c   -1  TALMOCN	c    I TAYARl!S	' I TENl!X
 
SURRETT
SUtfVEYIJAS
 
S"WY'GERT	c    I TAC.OJI"..&	D    I T..&WAH
 
I Tl!NINO	c
c
 
SUR'YYA	c   I SYl!!ILON	•D     I TALPA	c   I  T.AlllAS	.&.IOI    TENMILE
 
SUSA,... NA	C/!l I      SYCAMOqE.
 
I TALOU(N	l"l'DI   T..&WCAW	c   I T·E NO
 
sus.a.-.YILLE	D     I  NOOERATEL'f     WfT •	I TALUCE	0     I TAYLOR	c   I TENORIO	•
susre  ci:;ee	c    I  SALINE	I '""'"	•  I TA'ft.OR  CRl!i!IC	c    I Tl!NOT	c
 
SUSJTUA
 
•	I SYCAM'lAEo	c   I T.&M.&1-'A	D     I T AYLORSFLA T	• I TENPlf".'	D
 
SUS'lUEMANNA	0    I MOO!RATELY  WET•
 
TAMALCO	0     I TAYl.ORSFLAi'o	c  I TENAAG
TEN°s.&S	D
 
I
SurcL  1Fir	• I svi:A1otOAl!o	c   I fA.,•NEE,.,	• I 1'.&YLOF.SVILLE	c   I
 
·TENSED	c
 
..	J,o•ELY
 

SUT1-tER
 

c	I · MOD!RAIEL'f   •ET	I TA,.eA	D• I T All IN.A
 
'c   I
 
TENSLEEP	•
'D
 
SUT'""fl!'.ALANO	D     I SYCA..,OIJEo   O AINl!O	I
 
I Tl!AGUl.f"
 
·1  Tl!!'."SNOIA
•	I Tl!NVOAAO
 
c	I SYC.&M011!o   f"LOOOEO     c   I 1 "°!"LAT	D    I TEAICEAN
 
SUIHERLIN	•	•
 
I	I
I	D    I
 
T!D
Tl!OCULLI
 
••.•,.
 
SUfl(IN
 
I   SVCAMOA'E o    CLA'f
 
I TANf"0'"10
 
. Tl!ALSON	D
Tf" LWMIT
 
SUTLl!V	• I  sues TAATUM	I TAMHAhY  CREEK
c   I SYCAN	' I fAN.. (NG
 
•	I    TE:ANA•.IY
 
I T!"PETI!	D
 
SUfPMEN
 
•	I SVC:OLINC	0•
 
I TANP
I TAMPICO
 
•	Tf."APO
 
TE: QUESTA
 
surRO	c	I SYCLE
 
•	Tt;.&SOALE
 
I TEA'AOA
 
SUTTON	•  I SY!:!-tl Tf	c	TAt:• ..,,	D	fEASPOON	D    I TERl!l li!S	•
SUWANIEE	•  I SYLCO	c	TANANA  o    T'tAWEO	•	TF.lll!IS	•  I TERP' SA
SVEA	•  I S'tLYAN	•	f ANANAo   "fOO AATELY   c	TEBO	•  I TERI NO
•. I SYLVANl.&M	c	•ET	TECH.&('Q	D    I Tf'IU.AN	D•
 
SVENSEt.i
 
•	TAN.A see:
 
•	f!CHICK
 
•	I TEA'LCO
 
S"'fQPRUP	a  I S.YLVES T'f
S"WAGER	c    I SYLvi"	c	T.& 1•ZZA	'	TECO
 
•	I T!" L INGUA	D
 
I SYMCO	c	T.&Nfl.&IO!C.	c	recoLDTf
T ..NO'f	0	TECO,..AA	D
 
I TERMINAL	0
I T! lolO	•
 
SW.&l(ANI!
 
D     I SY'-!Ql:J!-t
 
SlifALEj;	o·  I s·yNAQl!P	E	JAh;:Uli'	'	TECOPA	0    I TE11Cl,.OTE
SW.&HPYOftAlll	• I SYRENE	t:ll'C I    TANGAIH	c	I TEEL	•  I  JEARA   CEIA
 
SlllALES IL VEA'	D
SWAN	D     I SY ETT	c    I T.l.NC.I	c    1  TEEL'!:ft	• I
sw.a-...eoY	D     I f.&SECHE:Of G	<   I TA1';GLE'	I
 
TERRA  C! IA•
T!"QR.&   CEI Ao
 
TlO•L
 
B/D
D
0
 
I FAEOUENfLY
; I TANN.&l'llLL		I fEETEAS	c   I  l'LDOO!O SlifANNER	D     I TASLER	0    I T•NN!A	c   I Tl!EWINOT	D   I TE'RRAO
SWANSEA	0     I T.&BOA	0     I JANNEi>.•    LO•	D      I Tl!l"TCN
 
·sw.1..,sc"'
 
I TAC.&N	•  I  PRfCJPI T.&TlON	I TfGURO	D     I TERRE TON•   S TON'f	c

O/C  IND IC.I TES   T E  ORAINEDl'UNOR.llNEO   SITUATION•
 
S"lf..&l'ffCN
 
Cl'OI   TACHI	D     I TANCE"	' I TEH.&ChAPI	c    I TERRIL	•
 
'IOT!S:	TWO H·voqoLOGIC  SOIL GROUPS  SUCH
MOOIF IEQS  SHOW"I•    E.G.•   EOPOCIC    sues TA-A IUN.   REF!  TO   A   SPECIFtC  SOIL  SEAIE.S

36	(210-VI-TR-55, Second Ed., June 1986)
 


TABLE A-5 CONTINUED   Hydrologic soil groups for United States soils


 

T!Oll!O TERll!Y
T qT
Tf'AWJLLIGl!R T!SAJO
TESSF.JV!
 

c	I THUALONI
c	I THURLOW
D	I       T.HUAHAN
c	I THUF<MO°"T
B  I TMWOOP
D	I    TI AGOS
 

c   I TIP.. TOt!
e	I TINY TOWN
' I T ICC ANO
e	I TIOGA
c  . I TIPPAH
•	I T°IPP!C.ANOE
 

' I TCl.Tf'C
I TOLUCA
o	I TOLVAR
e	I TCJilAH
c	I TON'AMAWK
e	I TOMALES
 
c	I TORS I 00	0
B   ·1  TORTUGAS	D
e	I TO RULL	D
TCSCI.	'
'	TOSSER	'c
0	TOS'TON
 

T!;Tl-IRJCIC
 
•	i T IAlt	c	I
 
c	I TO.WilSAICI
 
c	TOT AV I	'
 

TETON TETONIA.
 
c	I Tll!JAN
e·   I T 1eei TTS
 
b   I T IPPfqARY
e  'I TIPPIPAI-'
 
' I TOMilST
B	I       TOlol!IAF
 
c	TOTf'L.AICE
c	TqTi:M  .	'
 
TETONKA
 
C/D I
 
T 1.155 .
 
·c    I TlPPO
 
c	I TCM8STONE
 
•	.TOT I Er;'	c
 
r!Tti,;,v1"fW
 
o	I T.taSON
 
!'-      I· .T IPTQN
0
 
o' I
 
TOME
 
•	TOTO
 
0/0
C/O ·
 
TETONVJLLE
 
o	I T J8URONES
 
0   I llPTc;NY ILLE
 
I TOMt!L
 
0	TOTTEN
(
 
TET'!JNVILLE •
 
c	I TTCA
 
0     I   TJPTC:P
 
B    . (
 
TOMI!: RA
 
c	TOUCME·I
 

GRAVELLY
 
r TICE
 
e   I TIRO
 
.c  .., TOMERA•   CEMENTED	D.
 
TOUHEY
c
 
TETOTUM TEVIS
TE;t
 
c	I TICELi..
•	I TICHNO
c	I TICJNO
 
D	I  T JSE-URY
D	I      TISCH
{.  I T JSOALE
 
e	I
0   .,
c	I
 
sues rs:IA TUN TO,..JCHI
B/OI
 
YOULA
TOULON
TO URN	c
 

T!WA
 
B	I      T  lCKAPOO
 
0    I TISH•R
 
' I 	8.101
 
TOURN!]lilST	'
 
TEX
T!llANA
 
a	I T JC KA SON
o	I TIDINGS
 
I Tl$0NIA
6      I    TISWOATH
 
o	I TOfl'S
c	I TOHSH!R Y
 
c	I TOl:IRS
c	r lOUTLf	'
 
TEXA!!!K
 
o	I T JDWE·LL
 
O      I "TITV.S
 
E/OI
 
TO..TY
 
o	I TOUTLEo
 
FLOOOEO	'c
 
T!.XLIN! TE.Xll!OY
 
o. I TIERRA
e	I 1IERRANEGPE'
 
0      I    TITUSVILLE
f!   I TIVOLI
 
c	I TONALE.1.
' I TONASKET
 
c   I -TOVAR
e	I TQWAYf	/
 
Tl!: ZUMA
 
c	I TIE SIDE
 
O.   I
 
TJVY
 
c	I· TCN.ATA
 
D	I       TOWHEE
 
THACKER
 
D.   I
 
T  If.TON.
 
e	I TCA
 
e   ·I  TOtJCANA
 
e	I TOWNER	.•
 
THAC f Y
 
B	I    T IFl") ..Y
 
. P/CI  TC.AOL.AKE
 
•	I TONEY
 
D      ·I
 
TOWNLEY	c
 
THA l!,:i TH AGE
 
c . I rr.-roN
c     I  T IGEA    Cf.rEf
 
!J       J   TO.A.NC'
e	I TCANO
 
' I TONGUE   RIVEP
' I TONIO
 
c	I TOWNSEND	c
e	I TOllOSA ...GT	'
 
THATCHff;
 
B	I·    Tl.GERO""
 
e   I TCf"lCO
 
·A/OI
 
TONICA
 
C/O·f
 
TOXAWAY
 
0/0
 
TH•TUhA
 
c   I Tl::ilT
 
·c   I tce1N
 
•	I TONKAVAR
 
I TOY	0
 
TH.t.YNE
 
o	I T IGIVO ....
 
8	I TOl' J St'
 
c.  I
 
TC'llC.AWA
 
' I TOYAH	•
 
THE.AfS
 
•	I T IGLEY
 
f:I     I TOeLEq
 
e	I TCNIC.EY
 
8/DI
 
TO YU SK A	•
 

TJ.tEBO
 
o	I T l::iON
 
0   I T('!!QS.t,
 
t	I TONK IN
 
' I TOZE
TRA8UCC
 
'c.
 
TH!DALUlllD
 
c     I  T IGUA
 
C-	I  TCl'!V
 
·c"
 
TONll' IN.  MOOfRA TEL. V   C	I
I
 
T,..EEDLE
TME..,.t.S T!o'!OODA TMEON
T  ...ER!S.t. TM!':AJOJ THE:RfofQ	.
Ti-!EAMOPOLI
 
c   I Tl.JE AS
c   I T lit I
T.JL l!R
TILFORD
•	I TILLfOA
o	I TlLLJCUM
0      1..  Tll,;LWAN
D	I     T  ILL,,..IJ.,T
 
.e. I TCCAL
D	I      TOCA.LO"'-'
e.1c I TCCAN
·a  . J    TOCCOA
e   . I TCClt
e   I TOCCI
c	I TOC'DLER
6    /.TCDO!TAV
 
•<T
c	I TONKS


e	I Tl'NS JNA
o	I TONT-I
 
l TRJ.tto1UTE
.c	TRACK	0
TR4CIC•   DR.&INED	c
'
TRAER
TRAG
 

"THESS
 
8     I   TILLOU
 
C      I TCOD'-lLLE
 
e.	i"   .TONUCO
 
f;;&G •
 
CCCL	c
 
ThE.TFORD. Tl·-1,:'.TIS ThJJ!FAJVER THIEL    •
THIESSEN
 
·.t.      ·1  T JLflfA
B       I    TILSJT
. !5/D 1.. TILTON.
•	1  TJ!"EIAL !EH
c	I Tl!'fE"!PG
 
C     I TC'COS
C	I. TOEHf.A.0
C	I      TC>t"JA
D  . j  TOE"'
I lOGC ...A.
 
c
'c..
 
TOOLES
. T OOLESSORO TOOMES TCONf'
TOON o   LOAMY
 
D	TRAMAM	c·
TRAIL
D	TRAll.A O	0
c	TJ:AJl.CP.!:EK
•	TR& JL!-!E 40
 
THJICE
 
D	I      T  IM&EAl<'EAO
 
fi  I TCG-.oNI
 
SU!!STi:IATUMo
TOP
 
S TO""V
 
I TqA INER
I TAA fTORS	D
 
Tl-IIOICOL
 
o	I Tlfof!'-El<L Y
 
E:.      I TOGO
 

THIRST
 
D	I      TlMf!!!:RVILL ·
 
8   I TCGus·
 
0	TOPEKI
 
D      I TliA PAS	c
 
TH ISTLE.l!JURN T).tJSTLf.Df.•
 
e	I T f'fBLl·N
a	I ·T f"48UCTOO
 
0   I fC'J-IQNA
C      I    TCIMl
 
c	TOPEMAN
c	TOPIA
 
0    .,
 
TRA.WW&V
TR4NDU1L  AR	c
 
THOENY·
 
o	I T l.,.ENT\llA
 
6	I    TOINE
 
•	TOPLil"I"
 
•	I TR4NSYLVAN1 A	•
 
TMOMAS
 
l!l/OI
 
TIHHILL
 
O       I    TCJs,.;OT
 
8/DI
 
tOPONCE
 
c   I TRAPPER	'
 
Tl-IO.MHILL
 
e.   I T Jfofi-.US
 
8    I TC ISNOT,
 
CNDED
 
o	I TOPPE,,.ISH
 
0	I TRAPPIST	c
 
THOMS THORN8URGH
 
D I TIMKEN
•	I T fMMER.WAN
 
c	I TC11TABE
&    I TCltAY
 
TOPPE"fJSH• TOPPfR
 
ORAINEO    C
 
I Tll!APOS
I TPASK
 
'·'
 
THORNDALE
 
o	I T l"''f0f!S
 
a	I TClltEEN
 
c	TOPSf'Y
 
c	I TRAVELERS	0
 
THORNDllCf
 
c.101
 
ll.WPl.HUTE
 
r·    I TC'ltLA T
 
c	TOQUERVILLE
 
·O I TPAVER	'c
 
THORNOCK
 
D	I TIMPANOGOS
 
8	1  ·.TCl'"QCEW
 
D	TOOUI
 
D   I TRAVERTINE
 

THOR"ITON THOROUGi-'F AR!
 
0	I• TfMPANOGO o
e	1     "l'JDE ATELY    "'.ELL
 
c   I TC'KUL
I Tf"LANV
 
·c		roouoP re•
•
 
'. I
D	I
 
TAAVESSILLA	D
fRAVIS	.	c
 
THQRC)
THOUT
 
C.10 I
c	I
 
ORA IN Cl·
TJ"4PEP
 
I TCi..EY
n   I TOLfC'O
 
D,.
 
Tt'A!IOY
t·CRCHLICHT
TOROIA.
 
I TRAVSON	D
c	I TQAWICK
D    I
 
THOW THOWSQN
 
•	I T  lfl'UL
e	I T 1-.A
 
'I TOL ll
c	I TOLJCH4
 
TORE°X
 
.•c.
 
I TREADWAY
 
D,,,
'
 
THRA.SH
THR  .t.OGILL THREE CHOP
 
e	I  T IN4,JA
e	I T 1-....... ou
•	I T INOAH4Y
 
B	I      TCLKF.
C	I     TOLL.
•	I TCLLGATE
 
TORHUNTA
•	TORNfY
p	TOl:'P..ILLO
 
I TAf AT Y
0	I TREBLE
I TREf'LOC	D
 
THREfDilT
 
o	I TINOAHAY•    G AVfLLY    A	I TOLL.l'-OU<;
 
0	TORNfN<i
 
B	I TR!:: eOR	<
 
THREf;IC
 
,·  I .T !"If
 
I T Ct.MAN
 
D	iciAOOA
 
•	I TR!:E OR	D
 
THREE"' li.E
 
a	I T lNEMAN
 
I "t (iLN 4 ·
 
TORONTO
 
c	I TRff:.ll:OR •
 
NO'"'STONY    .C
 
THREE TOP
 
c	I Tl"IEM4'11o   wET
 
c	I TOLD
 
TORPl':OO   LAKE
 
0	I TR!:E"N	0
 

lHAOCK THUL!::P4H
 
c	I TINGEY
c	I  TINKER
 
8   . I   ·TQLONIER
C       I     TCLSIJNA
 
TORR ON
D	TCPRCON.
 

C0!8L T
 
c	I TREGO	r.
0     I	c
 
THUM8ERLAN0 IHUNCERl!JIRO
 
TINN·
·:  TINNIN
 
0	I. TOLSONA,   TILL
A	I	SUE=STRATV!
 
•	TORRES
. TCRRO
 
' I T11Elll	•
' I TPELONA	0
 
THUAGER
 
D    I Tl.'iSLEY
 
•	·I T.CLSTCJ·
 
8/0 I     TRi;MU"T	B
 

r-.OTES:	TWO  MYOP')LOGIC  sot.L  GROUP!,  SUCH  45  6/C  INDICATES  T"iE  C'PAll lli/UNQRAINED  STTU4TJON.
MOOTFl! S  SMOWNo   E.G.,  EliROC.::  SUBSTRATUM•   OEFi::ll   TO   A   SPECJl"IC  SOIL   f'?lfS PHASE  FOUND   IN  SOIL  MAP  LE-GENO.
(210-VI-TR-55, Second Ed., June 1986) 	37
 



TABLE A-5 CONTINUED	Hydrologic soil groups for United States soils


TAl!' IH.1!'5	•	TRUSCAl!!i!!IC	•  I TUASON	c	I UHLAND	• I UTA!.&
TAEHBt.f.:S •.	c	TAuSsEt.	c   I TURTON	0	I UHL JG	•  I	0
HQOl!AATELY W<T	TmJVAR	0     I TUSA YAN
TAl!:"IONA	c	TRYON	0     I TUSCAN	0     I UINTA	•  I UTICA	•
 
TR1!!:'4 E	;.	TSALi	c   I TUSCARAWAS·	c	I UKIAH	0     I
 
UTLEY	•
 
TREMPEALEAU	•	TSCHICOMA	• I TUSC-AM I Lt.A	c    I ULA	c	I urso.	•
 

TAEN,HOLM	0
 
TSOSIE	• I TUSCOSSO	•  I ULIOA	0     I
 
UVAOA
 
TRENT
 
TUB	c   I TUSCUlr!IBIA	:a· .I ULLOA
 
•	.1  UYALDI!'	•
 
TAf:NTON	0	rue c	c   I TUSl!:L	• I ULM	c   I
 
UV!
 
c
•	·C I
 
TUSIP
 
I ULRANT
I
 
I U'llALA
I
 
rRe:ciN	D	Tllal!:IU!:T	I
 
•	ULR!C
 
c	UWHAAAi.E
•
 
TA!!;P
TRll!!S   H!:RMAN0S
 
TUCANNON
.TUCICAHO,e:
 
TUSK
I TUSICAHOMA	D  I ULRICHl!A
 
I UZONA	0
0     I VAS EM	D
 
. TA1!!:54NO
 
TUCICl!R	c   I TUSKl!l!GO	C/CI   ULTRA	c
 
TRl!SED	c	TUC ER'4AN	D     I TUSLl!'A	• I ULUPALAICUA	• I VABUS	c
TRl!'TTEN	• I TUCU.MCARI	• I TUSSY	D      I ULY!SES	• I
VADA HO
TRl!:VtNO	D     I TUfl'l'tT	c   I TUSTl!LL	c	I UMA	' I VAO!;R	c
TRl!!:VLAC	•  I TlJll'ii°O	0
 
TREY	' I TUGHILL	0    I TUSTUMl!!:NA	• I UMAPINI!!:•   ORA I NED	c   I VAOO
TRI8Bl!!:Y.	c   I TUICEY	c    I TUTHILL	•  I U'°'l!A G	c   I V.AIOEN
Tl?ICDN	I TUKUHNllC
 
•.D.·
 
..	•	c
TRIO	c    I TVIC'll.fLA	0     I TUTT LI!:	c    I UMJ.AT	0.  I VAIVA
 
TRIO•   NONSTO Y
 
I TUKWILA•  DRAINED	c   I TUTU ILLA	c . I VMI.K04	' I VALBY	c
 
TRIO!LL	• I TULA	c   I TUT'll ILfR
 
I U Il.	0   I VALC'O
 
TRIGGl!:A
 
0   I Tl.11..ANA • ORA INl!D
 
•	I TUl!f!l!:P.
 
I UfllPA	I VALCAl'!EIC
C·
 
TRIGO	0     I TULANA•   NON LObDED   c   I TUXEKAN	•  I U"'PCOOS	D	I VALCIH!'ST
TRI MAO	• I TULARE
 

TAIMl!ILI!:
 
•	I TULAAGO
 
•	I Tlll!QA•  MODEA'A T!L Y
 
I UNA	0	I SUBSTRATUM
UNADILLA	0
 
c  I Tut.i.RoSA
 
• I •••
 
I
c   I UNA KA .
 
VALDEZ•  SALIN!
VALDEZ•   CLAYl!Y	c
 
TAIMNl!:A
TRINIDAD
 
0   I TUL"ASI!
 
TlillEBA•
 
DRAINl!D
 
c   I UNAKWIK
 
I
I SU!ISTPATU"'•
 
T INITV
 
0   I Tut.CH
 
I TlriEl!:OY
 
TRIO	0    I TULECAN	C· I T'll!l!:NEA	D   I UNAWl!:.!P
 
I SALIN!·
 
T IOMA	·•  I TU..!!'LAKE	D     I TWICK:	D	I uNcAS	•  I
 
VALOl!:Z.   ORA INl!:D	c
 
c    I TULIA	• I T'lllG	D     I UNCOKPAHGAE	D     I VALOOS.TA	•
 
TRIPI.·'{· TRIOLl!;N
 
•	I rut.tic
 
I• TWILI.GHT  .
c  I TWIN  CPEl!K
 
I UNOEA.Wooo
I uNousK
 
I VA.LE
I VALl!'-NCIA	•
 
TRIPOLI
 
M> I Tui.LAHASSl!:E
 
c	UWGl!AS
 
I VALENT
I VALENTIN!
 
TRIPP	•  I -TULL A·	D     I TWINl·NG
 
c  ·I	•
 
•	c   I T'lflSS!:LMAN	c   I UNiON
 
TRISTAN
TRIT·ON
 
I J LOCK
0  I .TULLY
 
c  I TWJNSI
 
UNICOI
 
VALERA	c
I	'
 
TRIX
TA OCKEN
 
I Tut.DSG	0    I T'lllSS!LMA"f•	D  I UN.IONTO'lf"'
I TUMAC	I  S.AL INl!:-ALIC.Ai. I•	I
 
VALHALLA
I VALK.AA 1A	"0'°
 
TAO.JAN
 
c	We-T	I UNISON	I V L ARI A•
I UNIUS	0   I OEP l;SSlONAL
 
TWISSl!L"4AN•   -	D
TRQNS!N	•  I TUM.BL!T_Qp.,,	c   I SALJNl!-ALll;ALI	I· UP.,, I VEGA	0   I VALL.AN

. TJJOOIC,   SALIN!	c   I TUH IOG!	c	T'lfOTOP	t	I UNS!L	• I VALLl!CITOS
TAOPAL	0     I TUNEHILL	D	TYl!O	D     I
 
TROPIC	• I TUNICA	0	TYl!'I!	o· I UPOltGAAfl'I"
 
I VALLl!RS	c
 

TROSI	0
 
I TUNIS	D	TYG.AAT	D	I UPOIKI!	,;   I VALL YCITT	0
 
TROSKY	8.(01  TUN IT AS	c	TYGM	c    I UPSATA
 
1· VALMONT	c
 

. T OUGHS
 
O· I TUNIC
 
•	TYLl!:A	0	I UPSHUll	•0	•
 
TROUP	• I TUNKHANNOCK	•	TYNDALL	c• I UPS'ON
 
I VAL MY
c	c
D	I VALOIS
 
TROUT   CREl!K
 
c   I TUNN!!'L
 
•	TYNDALL•   DRAINl!O
 
upsoN.  stoNY
I UPSPAING
 
I VALNDA	•
 
TROUT  RIVER	I TUHNISON	D	TYN!A
c    I TUOMI	TYCINEK	D
 
I UPST!l!A
 
I VALPAC	c
c
 
TROUTDALE
TAOUTEA	c   I Tl.IP.ELD	D	TVA!	Al'OI
 
UPTMOR
 
c  I VALS!TZ
0
 
TAOUTV LLI!	•  I TUPUICNUK	D	TYRON!	c	I UPTON	c   I VAL TO
D	I URA CCA	• I VALY!AO!	•
TRUAX	•  I TUABO,,TV It.Le:	c    I UANA	D      I UAl!l.ANA	c    I YAMl!A
0
TAUBl.E	c   I Tt.nUIYfl' ILL	•  I Ue.ANll'	•  I UA90	0    I VA.MONT
 
TRUCE
 
c     1.   TU!tK
 
c    I. U9AR	D	I URl!AL	D      I VAMP	c•
 
TRUCHOT	c
 
I TUAKe:Y'SPA·INGS
 
•	IueeHfl'!U!
 
c   I UPICH
 
CJ'OI
 
VAN   DUSEN
 
lRUCIC!I!	c
 
I TUfll..l!:Y	• I UBllC
 
•	I up·rPN!!
 
0    I VAN  HORN
VkN   NOST!RN	c
 
TRUCKl!:i!:o    ORA INl!O
 
I TU LIN	• I Ul!LY.	• I UAIPN!S•  GRAVl!:LL't      c   I	D
 
TAUCICJON	•  l TURLOCK	D      I UCHI!!	•  I UJllLAND	c   I )1.1.N  W.l.GON!R
 
TAUO!	•
 
I TUANl!l.ACIC	c    I tiCOPIA
 
•	I VANESS  ·	e.101  VAN.I.NOA	c
 
TAUl!'.FISSUAE	• I TURN!ULL	D     I UOAHO	• I UlllSA	c    I VANeRIJNT	c
TAUHOY	D     I .TURN!ACRfS T	c   I UOELOP!!'	0    I UATAH	c   I
 
..	..
 
VANDA	0

•	I VANDl!RCi IF T	c
 
I TUAN!RYILLE	• I UDOLPHO	!!I.ID I   UAWIL	c    I VANDALIA	0•
 
TRULA!	0
TRULON	c
 
I fURN!!'Y.
 
•	I UFP'l!NS
 
I USAL	c  I VANOAJjMI!
I VANOAM<iRE
 
TRUMAN	•  I TUAR H	c   I Ul",..!NS •  fl'LDOOED	c    I USAL•   GPAV LLY
 
TAU'.14BULL	0     I TUAP!T
 
I UG.AIC	D    I USHAR	c
 
TRUMD	0    I TORA t A	•  l UHALOI	•  I USINI!'	• I V.l.NDl!RHOfl'F
 
TAUNk	D     I TUAAIA•
 
,	c   I UHL	•  I u••	c    I VANDERLI	'
 
HOT!S:    TVO  HYOROLOGIC  SOIL GROUPS  SUCH  AS  9/C INDICATES  T ! DRAINl!OJ'UNOAAIN!O  SITUATION.
MOOl1"1£R$   SHOWN•   E.G ••  eEOROCIC    suesTRATUM.   A!,.l!:R   TO   A    SPl!Clf' IC   SO IL  Sl!Rl!S  PHASE  FOUND    IN   SOIL  MAP  !-EG!"IO •


38	(210-VI-TR-55,  Sec.ond Ed., June  1986)
 


 

TABLE A-5 CONTINUED
 
Hydrologic soil groups for United States soils
 


 

AN!PPS YAN!T YANG
 

c    I    VERDE
I    VERDEL
I Y!ADIC:c;J
 

c	VILL'f'•     DRAINED
Vil.OT
0	Vllo'Y.l LE
 

'1   •ASASSO
1    111A8A550o
Of PRESS I ONAt.
 

e.10 I     WALES•    OYE118LOWN
0	I    W4LFOAO
I WALHALLA
0	I 11',l.LKE:
 
c
B.10

c
 
VANGUARD
 
c      I.VEAOIGRlS·
•
 
.•,.
 
Vlr.iA
V  INCl!HNES VINCENT
 
.
C/O(
c    I
 
WABBASE·KA.
WA15!K WABEH
 
"  I W•LKNOLLS
6	I W.&LKON
 
.0.
 
c	VINCbflll
 
<  I WAl!IUSKA
 
c·    f
 
WALL
 
.,.
 
c
•	·O
 
YINOICATOq VINl!GAqAOON
 
•	1   WACA
c     1   WACAl-'001 A
 
8	I   WALLA    WALLA
0   I ••LL.ACE'
a
 
YANP!TtEN
VANS.JCKLE
 
•	I VERICK
I VERJTAS
•	I
 
VINE YARD.
VJ.NGO VINING.
 
c     1  •ACQTA
•	1    W_ACOUSTA

0      1
 
I WALLEN
e !) I wAt.LER
e	111•1..LtNGTDN	c
 
VANSON
VAN$TEL
 
VER..tE·L S
j.  V!RLANO
 
0"	VINiNi
 
C··    I
 
•ADAMS
WADDOUPS
 
I
8  I WALLKILL
I
 
C/O
B/O
 
VANTAGE
 
1   VEALOT
 
VINlfA
 
c	1  Ill
 
ADELL
 
fl	'!fALLK ILL•
8     I      NO  LOOOEO.
 
YA"IYOR
VANWYP!A
 
I V!AM!JO
c  I Vl!RMILLION
 
V t""..tE
c	V fNLANO>
 
'I •AO!NA
o  I WAD!'NILL
c
 
e	I W4LLOVA	c
 
VANZANDT
YAOiJEAO
VARCO
y,t,qQl!:N
 
c    I    VERNI SA
0  I VERN.t.00
D       I     VERNAL
I.	VERNAL Is·
•
 
0	VINS,l.O
0   I  VINSON
I VINT·
I VINT'•  •fT
V INTAS
 
I WAO!R  .
•	1  tiAOESPRJNGS
•	1   WADLEIGH
c	I WADM•LAW
; I ·wAOSllOPTH
 
c  I WALi.ROCK
C	I      w.,..i..LSBUPG
o.   I WALi.SON
0	I WALLUSK J
 
•
c'·
 
VAR!t.:.UM
 
I  VERNDALE 	1
 
c  I WAt.HE'TT
 
VAREi.UM.   CLAY
 
LOAM    C
 
I      VERNI A
 
•	I VlhTQt.f
 
e     1   WAG£$
o  I "WAGNER
 
a   · 1
0     I
 
·w.lLONG
WALl'-OL.E	c
 
SU8STRAlUM
 
I .VERNON
 
0
B/O
 
1    VIOLA
 
·c     1
 
WAGQN1'0X
 
0.     I   WALREES	c
 
v.1.qGAS
.VAR IC.IC
VARINA
 
c    I    V!Rt.ION l A
0   I VERO
c   I YERO•    fDRESSIONAL   0
 
1   VfPONT
VJAATCIN •
YlrtCf"N
 
...,..I
 
WAGONTIRE
WAGRAM
 
D	I· WALSH
A	I WALST!AD
c
 
VARNI. VAllNEY VARAt'
 
c    1  Y!RSHIQE	C
"V!R!.::JN	c
•	l
 
YJAGELLE VIRGIL
 
c	WAMA
WI.HA TOYA
o·	•Al-'l!I!
 
I··.lL·TERS
C    I WAL T!RS OW
D.     I    •ALT1
 
YAR.YS!IURG
.VAS ...
VASHTl
:;'ASQUEZ
VASSAL ORO
VASSAR
 
VERTl!:L.
1 . V'!RTR!!:S
1    "V'!S.
c   I    VfSE'f'.
c   I "VESP!A
0	t VESSfR
I V!SSI LA
•
 
0	YIRGJN   P AJC:
VIRGIN   RIY!R VIRKULA YIAT'U!
0	YI STA
c	IIlT A.LI!"
.D		V·ITZTMUi-1 YIUOA
 
c	•AHGUTHE
c	1a'AHIAWA
c	WAMIKIJLI
WAHK!ENA
c	"""'LUKE
WAHOO

c
 
0   I ••LUM
B      "J   \I.ALVAN
c  I lllALY.ILLE
8  . J   WAMISA
e	I WANSA.  OAA·INE
•	WAM10u·s·ic:,.
 
•
•c
•
.•.
 
VASSETT
VAST Ud!
VASTINE•
5ALINE,..Ai.KALI
VAUClUSE. YAU'iHAN VAUGHNSVJLL! VAY
VAYA
VEAL
VEATCH
 
I "VfSTA.
c   I. Yf"SfA'!UPG
.o    I  ·V1!5fON
VEfA
c	Vl!TAL
YETE.l.00
Y!YO

0	VIAN
Yl H•.E Y:IBO
 
.....c I v lVM
c  I YJ.Yf!i
·8.· l·VIVI
.,  I ¥ txe::N
c    1·v1ZCAtNo
0    I YJZCAPOJ T
I!  I VLASATY
8     I   YLECIC
A	I VLY
a	I
 
n·	WAHPETON
W,1Hltl!°ll;0•1'11 lllAHSTAi..
.   WAMTIGUP WAH YUM
D	•AHWEAP
c	lilAIAHil
c	WAl.\KOA
D	WAIAL!ALE
W:A14LlJA
•AfAWA
 
c	WAMEGO
...,..1c	8
•	WAMPOO
'	WANAGAN	'
WAN!LEE
0	WANO&.
c	WAN00
WANE.TT A
-.aNILLA	c
•	WANN	•
 
Y!ATCH•·  STONY
VEAZIE
 
c
·•"
 
v1eoR.t.s
Yl! ORG"
 
vdATS
O       I    YOCA
fo      I
 
W  AIHUN•
WAIJC"ALOA
·WAI KAN!
 
-.A,.,NACOTT
WANCGA.
WANO ... IE	c
 
Vl!:B.a.q
V!CONT VEE OUM VEET
vl!Glt.
VEGA AL TA VEGA. BAJA YEKOL
VE KOL  o     COOL
VELASCO
VELDA
 
YICEE
0	YICJ: VICKERY Y.ICK1NG
Y ICK ING.  ORY VJCkSBURG
c	1   YI CK TON
0     1   V ICl l,_.E
<   I VICTOR
I VICTIJ"IA
1   VICTORY  ILLE
 
VOOEPMAJI':°'
8    1.  VOIGHT
. c      I.VOl..ACORA;
c  I VOi.ASH
.6. I vOLSORG
I VOLC:C
VOL·!,;. TE
VOLiflllA YOLKJlfAR
0
VOLNEY VOLP IOIE
YCLTA
 
WAJl(APV
WAIKC'!MO WAJLVKU
0	•AUU!:.I
c	WAIN![
•	WA  INOLA
WAIPAMU
•AISt:A
c	WAITS
c.	WAKI!
 
WllNSEA
WANSER•   OAA INEO
WAPAL	•
wAOALo   BIEOROCK
SUBSTR.&TUM
8	WAOAl.o BEOAOC!!;
c	suesTAATU't
W.lOllTC
WAPELLO W.lPI
 
.-Y£1.DKAMP
Yl!:l,"'IA
 
•..
 
I VICTORY
1   VICU
 
VOLTAGE
c	VOLTAIRE
 
WAK!ftJ
c	WAKE.P' lf'LO
 
6	WAP IN1 TI A
ti:	W.&PP.NG
 
VEL.Jlll
VEL""A
Y!..A
 
1   VIDA·
1  VIOAURI
c	I VIORiNE
 
.<	YOLTAl·RE:o    oqAtNt'O      c
0	YOLTAIFl'E •  R°AYt::LL'f  C
c	sueSTRATU'C	..
 
WAKELAND. WAJCEPISH
WAI( ITA
 
·,·	WAPPINGER
B.	W.APPO
0   . J    lllAPSHILLA
 
YEN"ABLE
 
o    I Vl ..tA
 
.YOLU$IA
 
•c	WAICONOA
 
B       I    WAPStE
C	I WAPTVS	c
 
VEN.t.DITO.
VENANGO
 
o ·.I
c. I
 
.V	JfNNA
VIEOUES
 
YOP.-A
c	VC•NALl!I!
 
. lllAKONOA • TILL
SUl5STRA flJM     .
WAICULLA
c
 
IWAl111!1A
A	I ·WAROl'ICIAO
 
.•.·
 
VENAPASS
VENA TOR V!NETA V!NEZ_JA
VENICE
YENLO
 
I v1G.t.R
c	I VJGJA
I V IGNOLO
0   I YICiO
c	I VIGUS.
I VIKING
 
V0t.:ASQN
VOORHIES
c	YORE
0	VOSBURG YOSS
YOSS ET
 
WALCAN
WALCOTT wAt.6e1LLIG.
•A\.OECk WALOl!:"N
 
C     I WAAC.ELL
8   I WARDEN
8.  I WARDE NOT.
C	/. WAROW!t..L
0      1
 
c
c•
·••
 
V!NTRIS
 
0    I VIL
 
0	VL'LC AN
 
c.•.
 
lllALOO

111ALOPORT
 
0      1  lllAREAGLE
 
YENUf'l
 
WAAS
 
' I WA:iM   SPRl GS	'·
 
VENT.UP!:
 
0     1  VILAS
 
VYLACH
 
llAt.OOAF
 
C/DI
 
W.lAEMAM
 
VENUS V!ABOORT VEACLIFF
 
D    I VILLA
1  .v ILL.A    GROVE
0    1  VILLEGREEN
c	I V ILL 'f
 
lllABANtCA
WAn.t.SH
I·  •ASAS':!A.
 
c	lllALOR'ON
0	WALDROUP
0	WALES
 
D	I      WAR._      SPRINGS•
D	I	DRAINED•       CLAY
e	I   SUBSTR TUlo'
 
·c'
 

NOTES:	TWO  HYOAOLOG.IC  SOIL GAOUPS  SUCH  AS  9/C  IHDICATl!S  Ti.ti!::  CRAINl!C'/UNOR'AINl!D  S?TU.ATION.
JlfOblFl RS   SHOWN.   t:.G •• t;te:oHOCK   SUSSTAATV"'•   i:lfFE"   TO   " SPEC IP' JC   SOIL  SER1 ·s  PHASE   FOUND    IN   SOIL-  lolAP   LEGEt-10.
(2i0-VI-TR;55,  Second Ed., June 1986) 	39
 



 

TABLE A-5 CONTINUED
 
Hydrologic soil groups for United States soils
 

 

WARM    PR IHGS
DRAIN!Do   ALKALI
 

c    I    !:!o!.UPl!!:CAN
I
 

a   I WELD
o   I WELDA
 

C	wETTl!:AHORN
C	WETZEL
 

C	llll!IAUll
D	w ICHI TA	c
•
 
WAR .. SPRINGS•
ORA INED

If ARMAN
 
VAUQUll!::
C	I      WAUAllCA
I    WAUSEON
 
D	I
B/OI
B/DI
B/DJ
 
•!LL!R
Wl!Ll,INGTON
W!LL/ilAN
WELLS
 
C	WEYEATON
D	W!WELA
fJ	.WEWOl(A
8	WEYERS
 
WICHUP	0
lf!C.1(,Al10Nl!Y	0
c	"If f!=l':.l!: SURG
o	c
 
ttAA  SPAJNGS•  COOL  C     I   WAUTOMA
B/O I VAY!LAND
 
c..101   WICKERSHAf:I
I wtCJCETT
 
l:fARiifAN•   GRAVELL'!'
suesct1.L
 
li/O I "" ELAND.
. I. DEPAe:ss J ONAL
 
D   I Wf'LLSBOAO
I WELLSCRl!Ell:
 
C	WEYMOUTH
el	WH,tiKANA
 
o	I ttlCXH,4.H	•c
 

ARNF.KE.
 
0      I    WA\l'l!RLY
 
.B.101
 
•ELLSED
 
C	wHAt.AN
 
o	I ir ICK JUP
 
WARNE' RS
 
C/D I   WAWASEI!:
 
o   I W LLSTO'N
 
9	WHALEY
 
D  I wICKSeURG	•c
 
"WARNi:lC!C.
WARRE,,,TON
WARSAW
WARSING
Wit.Riii CK
 
e    I "'.:O INA
D	I WAX
1!1         I     WAil:POOL
o	I WAY AM
A	I \IAVGE
 
•	I Wl!LLSY ILLE
c  I W!LL TON
o	I Wl!LOY
o  I Wl!LAING
D    I Wl!l.SUM
 
8	!ifHAAfDN
B	!:'HA TCOll:
C	WHA T!L Y
0	llHl!:ATLl!Y
D	·wHfA  rA·IOG!
 
c   I
c   I
D        I
A/DI
o    I
 
WICUP
•IDl!MAN
WIOEN	c
WIOTSOE
WfEHL	c
c
 
WAS.A
 
D I WAY CUP
 
o   I WEL Tl!.A
 
0	WHEATYILLE
 
e   I wre:-t..AND
a	I 111ERGATE	c
 
WAS.t.TCH
l:IASCD
 
•	I WAYO!N
o   I WAYLAND
 
D        I
C/DJ
 
Wl!HPLI! WEN.AS
 
WHl!l!Ll!:A
0	WHfll!LEAYILLll!
 
o   I •('"'1"'0
0
 
WAS DA
 
B/DI
 
WAt'MOA
 
o	I W!NA S • QqA INEi>.
 
c	llHl!!L  ING
 
e  .I
 
Wt'GGL.EA
 
'lfASEPf
 
...
 
o	I .lfAYN!CO
 
D    I Wl!N TCH!i!:
 
c	WHll!l!LON
 
D I wlGGL!"TON
c   I
 
WASHBURN
VASHl GTON
 
D I
·'1
 
W..A.YNl!SBORD
 
o	I wENDANE
c   I W NDAN! o   O A INEO
 
c	wHl!TAOCIC;
6	f   WHETSTONE
 
wJGTOh
c  I WlLAH•
o    I	0
 
WASHINGTON•.	"c
sueSTRATUP4
 
o	I !fl!NDDV!A
c  I Wl!NDT!
 
0	I WH(CHMAN
0   I WHIOBEY
 
Wll.8ANICS
c    I wrLePAHAM	c
 
'lllASHOI!:
 
I
I  •e:•rHER O D
 
o	I Wl!ND A
 
c	I  WH(LPHANG	o	•a
 
'l#ASMOUGAL WASHT. NA'li WASll,.LA WASIOJA WASICISH WASICIJJll
WASPD
 
Wl!ASH
6
B     .  I    wl!.r.ve:R
C.10 I lll!:AVERYILLI! D   I" Wl!:lfB.
B	I      ttl!OGPIOGE
D	I      ttl!BSTOWN
c  I Vl!9fA
D       I    we:e JLe:
 
c  I WENTl!OP.T'"t
o   I dEOGUl'"ICA
c   I W!PO
o	I t!CRl!LO
c  I w!ALDG
o	I Vl!ANEA
c   I WEANOCIC
 
0       J     WH[PPllNV
c  I llHIPPLE
c	I lrHIPSTOCJC
B	I      WHIALO
c	I     WHISJCEYO  ICIC
I      WHISPERING
IWHISTLE
 
I WIL UR
C	I       WILBURTON
D	I     wtLCO	c
· c    I "w1Lcox	D
e	I WILCOXSON	c
c    I W·ILOA.LE	c
c    I· WlLOC-Al	D
'e.  I WILD!:ANESS	c
 
WASS.ire
WASS IT
 
•	1!1      I Wl!"BSTl!q
0     I    VEDl!:IC IND
 
e.101
D       I
 
W!SCONNETT
w!SDY
 
c	I wHIT
c  I W ..ITAlt"l!:R
 
•ILOGEN
c	I
c   I WILDORS	c
 
llATAll
WA TAMA WATAUGA lfAfCHASOB WATCHAUG
 
·c . I we:oe:RTZ
C   ·I  WEDGE
"   I "' OLAR
c  I we::oowe:e::
I .wl!l!:D
•e:EO.IHG
 
o	I Wl!Sf" IL
•	I wes1x
c  I Vl!SICA
•	I wl!5LEY
o	I WESQ
 
D      I    wHtTE    HOUSI!
D    I •HITE ST.ORI!:
I   lrHI TE   SWAN
I llMITECAP
•	I WHITECLOUD
 
o·  I
D	I
I
' I
 
WILDHORSE

WILOWOOO	D
WILE	c
WILEY "WILHIT!
c
 
IJ
WATCHUNG	D    I
 
D      I   WESP"C
 
D	I    WHJTl!COW
c
 
WILHOIT
o   I WILKES
 
WATERCANYON
 
is     I
 
D     I	SUBSTRATUM
 
J       9HITE°f"ISH
C    .
 
It   I WfLIC INS
 
WATER19URY

WA TE Ee'.
 
o     I  vEEDJ!fAAIC
wl! ICIWACHEI!
B   ·I  wEEICS.
 
o  I Wl!!SPA(e  SANi)Y
c  I VESSEL
 
I     9"'°1 TECROS5

I         wHJTEl"OAO
 
o	I WILKESON

IJ	I      WI.LL
 
D,,,
 
WATEIU4AN
WATERTOWN.
 
D     I   wEEICSY JLLE
A	I     wEEHA
 
e.101
D       I
 
wl!STl!l10blC
WESTBURY
 
D	I wHI Tl!HALL
c	/     WHI TEHILLS
 
c    I WILLABY	c
 
WATERVILLE
114 Tr;; INS
WAl'.11;  INS   RIDGE
 
IJ	I we::e::PAH
8   I WEl!;SA TCHE.
It     I Vl!GA
 
c  I 11ESTBUTT!!
o  I wESTCAMP
•	I Wl!"STCAEEIC
 
c   I •HITEl-IOAH
I w...ITEHOASI!
c	I WHI TEICNOl!I
 
·D      I
e    I
 
WILLACY
lllLL.&11'.ENZlE	c
•
 
WATO
WATONGA
 
a   I VEHAOKEE
D	I         WEIG.I.NG
It    I 11EIGl..E
 
D   I we:sTe:
c I WE.STEAYILLE

C.	l"D       wES.THAVEN
 
I          WHIT!LAICE
I i;iHJTEMAN
 
8   .f  WILLAMAA
8      /    wlLL.&"lfJTE
0        I     WILLAMETTE_.     WET D	I      w ILLAHCH
I WILLA.PA
 
•c
0.,.
 
•A TOOP AH
WATROUS WATSEICA llATSON WATSON   IA wATSONVILLo! WA TT
WATTON
lllATUSI
 
B      I   w£Il(ERT
B       I    we:1MEA
c  I Wl!INBACH
D        I     WEINGART
D    I ioEINGA TElll
0     I   WEIR
C     I. wEIRMAN
c   I W!IANAN•   WET
 
D        I     WESTl"QAIC

0	Wl!STHAVEN•
C	5ALIN! AL AL1
D	lll!STlr/DJAN
C	Wl!STLAICE
0	11ESTLAN0
C	WESTMOl:U :
0	wESTMOAl!t.AND
 
I WI-II TEPEAJC
I 11HI TE IYl!R
I   • WWI  TERDCK
I      w!-11  Tl!S!IDAO
C	I     WHI TESBUAG D	I   WHI TESllN B/OI         wHlTl!STONE
c   I WHITl!THOAN
I wHf Tl!WA TEA
D         J      WHITl!V"OLF
 
D      I   WILL.ARO	•
c    I WlLl.ETTE
c   I wlt.:LHILI.	c
D      I   Wl.Ll.HO	D
o    I WfLLIAHS	•
o   I WILLIAMSBU G
D      I    WILLIAMSON	c
I WILLIAMSPORT	c
 
WAUi5AY
WAUBEEK
 
o   I •EIANAN•
o    I  HONFLDOOl!D
 
.A	WESTON
Wl!:STOVt:R
 
•	I    wHITl!:WOOO
 
C.l"OJ
 
WILLIAMSTOWN	c
c
 
WAU!!ERG
 
WEISBUllG
 
•	I w I T!:WOOO•
 
'llllLLIAMSWll.t..f
I WILLIJitAN
 
wAU80NSll!:
 
D         I
•	I W!IS!A
 
C	WESTPHAL   IA
9	WESTPLAIN
 
D     1   NONl"'LOODl!:.O
 
BIOi
c   I if
 
0/0
c
 
WAUCEDAH
 
D I W!:l.SHAUPT
 
D	wl:!STPOAT
 
•	I wHITEWAJGHT
 
fl.LIS
wlLLlSTON	c
 
WAUCHULA
WAUCHUl.Ao
 
BIOi
D       I
 
Wl!ISS!NFELS
wl!ITAS
 
C	WESTPORT.       fHIN
It	SURl"ACE
C	Ve"STSHOAI!
 
I WHITING
I .WHITINGER
D	WHI JLl!:Y
 
o	I
c   I w ILLOW  CAEEIC
o	I WILLOWDALE
 
OEPRESSJONAL
 
I 'llEI fCHPEC
 
••    WHITLOCll:
 
o    I ll'ILLOllEMOC	c
 

WAUCOl!!A WAUCOMA WAUCONDA
 
D   I w!KODA
•	I WELAICA
o   I Wl!!Ll!IY
 
10	lrESTVACQ
A	WESTVIEll
B	w!ST'flLLE
 
c
WHITMAN
•	I jjHf fNl!Y
 
o   I W ILLOWNAN
c   I W It.LOWS	D
w   ILLWOOD
 
WAUKEE
 
0      I    WELCH
 
D	llESTVl!GO
 
D     I wHITORI!	e    I	•
 
•AUIC!GAH
 
o    I WE\.CH•    GllAVELLY
 
e     J   wl!SV IND
 
c	I  WHI  TSOL
 
o     I "I' fl.MA	•
D.
 
D      I	sues TAA  TUM.
 
I we::swaoo
 
IWHITSON
D	•HITTJEIOI
 
wlL.lifER
I WILNINGTON	D
 
111AULO
 
c   .1  WELCH•    AAAl!L Y
 
I     W!Tl-IERSF  !ELD
 
c   I WHITWELL	I	•
 
WAUICON

WAUMA(
 
o	I  DllAIN!D	B
o	I l"'LOOO!D • DAA INl!D
 
I WETA

I Vl!'THl!'t'
 
c	I WHOBREY
 
c	ll'TLNONT
c  I WILMONTOh
•	WILPAIOI	c
 

WAUMBEIC
 
o	I Wl!LCH• OAAIHl!D
 
C  I W!TM!'t'• OAAINED
 
•	I WHOLAN
 
I
Vil.POINT	D
 
WAUNA
 
c   ·I
 
Wl!LCHLAND
 
B     l wETMOA!
 
D	I WHORLED
 
c   I
wit.SHIR!
 
WAUPACA
 
a.101 WELC014!
 
e   I WETSA W
 
c   I ""'	•  I
 
NOTES:	TVO   HYOAOLOGIC   SOIL GROUPS    SUCH   AS   B.l"C    INDICATES    T ! OAAl EO.IUNOAAINED    Sl·TUATION•
MODIFIERS   SHOWN•   !•G••  9EDAO JC   SUSSTRATUM•  REFER   TO  A   SP!ClFJC  SOIL  SERIES  PHASE  FOUNO   IN  SOIL  MAP  LEGEND.

40	(210-VI-TR-55, Second Ed., June 1986)
 



 
TABLE A-5 CONTINUED
 
Hydrologic soil groups for United States soils
 

 


WILSON WILSONGULCH
WILSONVILLE
 

o	I WISHARD
•o	I WISHBONE
I WISHEVLU
 

C	I     •COOS     CROSS
8  I WOODSEYE
C	f      WOCDSf'   I ELI>
 

WYNOOSf
0	"llYOCENA
..YOMING
 

o	I YfGEN
e	I YfGUAS	'
'e   I	•
Y!:L.JACK
 
WILSOA	.
 
B    . I
 
WISHICAH
 
D     I   WOODS IDE
 
WYAfN!
 
I V!LLOW8AY
 
WfLST
 
c   I WISHICAH•   DRAINED
 
C        J     WOOOSLUCE
 
0	wYSOCKING
 
C/'Of
 
YELLO"llHOUNO
 

tffLTON
 

•	I WISK4N
 
C        I     WOODSON
 
0	)IANA
 
e	I YELLOVAOCW::
 
WI NADA VTNIH!RRY
 
c  I WJSK.IFl,.AT
c   I WISNl!:R
 
8     I   WOOOSTOCIC
9/0 I  .lllOOOSTOV"I
 
C/D
c
 
'llANAOl.i lfAYfEFP
 
6      I
8·   I
 
Y!"!.-LOWSTONf	0
YELU	c
YE,.ASSFi:	<
 
iilJNCHl!:STEA WINCHUCK VIND .RIYl!'A 'llfNOCOAT.
'llJHD!R
 
' I WISTER
I WIT!ll!CI(
B	I     •ITEF!:l.S
o	I WITHAM.
t11JTHEE
 
. C     .I  'llOOCITELL.
e/OI WOODVILLE
B	I      vooo.W•RO
.o   I lfOOOWEST
C      f  "ll'OOFUS
 
D	XENIA
0		Xl!:ND. XERTA
c	XERXES
0
 
e	I
e  . I vE·,;,·cf'	c
c	Y!NLO
0	VENAA8	•
c	YfOMAN
 
0
WJNOl!'R•
DEPAl!:SSIONAL "IHNDHA"'
WINOICRfEI:
 
0	w1THl!R1!1E! 'llJTNl!Al!:LL
lllTH.!AS
WITT
 
A.ID I WOOl.Pl'::R
0   I WOOLSEY
c  I "llDOLSTALI"
&       f   WOO.LSTED
 
JC.&
c	XINI!"	c
XIPE	0
•IPE. MODERATELY	c
Wf.'T
ll.,AN
YACOLT
 
Ye;OPIM
YEA INGTDN Yl!:l;'MQ 'fESUN
•
 
WINDMILL
WJND OR WINDTHORST
ti INDW'HJ"STLI!
Wl DWHISTLf•   WARM WINDY
.wINOY PO INT
Wt NEG WIHE"'A
 
•c
c

•c·
 
.wJTTEN
WITTIEN8EAG
If l.T ZEL.
VIX
lflX0"4
WOCKLE"!°
wao•
WODEN
"llOOSKOW
 
Cl	I  WOONSOCKET
8     I    wODSL!'Y
D     I WOOS TEA
C    I WORCESTE!i
A	I WORDEN
c   I "llOAF
O     I VORFKA
9·        J     WCIA,.MAH.
c  I W'DAFSTONI!"
 
'c
c	YAGO
c	YAHANA
c	YA.HARA
0	YAH"IE
VAHOl.A
0	YAHOO
c·	Y.&1 ...AX
 
C	VETTfM
8	'ffTULL
C	YtGD
C	YJPOA
·.C	YLIG	c
C	Y08f.	c
e	Yocl-iu,..	c
0   l YOC.KEY
B	f    'fOOER	•
 
WJH!,TTI WINl!'VADA WINFALL
II'   INFIELD WING WJNGATI!'. WINGER "INGJNAW WINGVILLE
WINll'"AIED
 
•	I woosicow.  o • INED
c   I WOMLY
•	I llOLCD
e	I WOLCOTT
o	I WOLOA"LE
•	I WOl.DALE • OAA 1N!O
B/O:I   wOL•
o	I WOLF  POINT
o	I WOLFC.i'.'EElt
c	WOL.1"1!50 ...
 
! I wo1n:
e	f    WORK•      GR4Vl'i:LLY
c   I :oRLAND
!!'/DJ. WOAl.:E'I'
0      ·J   1"0AMSER
C	WOAD CK
e	'If DASH AN
'C	VO  T"'
9	WORTHEN.
C	WORTHING
 
YAIC'I
YAIC IMA
c	YAKU5
10	YAICUTAT
c	·Y•LIElAICe:.
YALe:SVILL!
0	T'Al.LAN 1
c	V.AL'°'ER
YAMAC
0	YAMHILL
 
O	I     YODY
l!I      I YOMUl<IT	c
0     I   'l'OK.&.YO"	0
:..	I 'l'O.ICOHL	D
e   I ,YOK-UT
C     I YOLLABCLL 'r	0
B       1   YO.LO
B	J    VOLOGO	0
fl     .•   Y0 ..8A
c	I Y.OMO"'T
e   I Yo'..,GES
 
llllNI(
lflNICEL
Ill INK LEMAN WINICLEMANe. WET
WJNICLIEll
 
I
o	I V0L,.E50Ne Vl!T
o	I VOlf'!Y
c   I "llot..FPEN
o	I WOLl'"T!VEA.
o	I "ltOl.LARO
 
0	lllCPT,.AN
C.	WCRT,.ANo  SANDY
•	wovoK•
C	WRANGELL
C	lf  ANGO
 
0	UNO
·	YAMSAY
c	YANA
0	YANCY
VANl:I!:!"
0	VANKTON
 
·	0	I YONNA
e   I. YOAeA
D	I    V('IAIC
0     /   VOl;'KTO•N
8    I    YORIC TREE.
 
0
0
·o ..
<
0
 
WrNLEA
llllNLO llllNN
WINNE!IAGO
'lllNHl!'CONNE WIN.NECODIC
 
o	I WOLLE NT
o   I wot.. OT
c  I "110l.YERINI!
o	IWOMACK
c    I woo
c   I WOO•  -QvERllASH
 
·	wR.t.YHA
WAEDA.H WREHC.OE
c	VA!,..JllAN
litlii'ENTHAJll
c	WA1GHT
c	wPJGHT  ..ANI
 
YAp,jUSH
0
c	YAPO.t.H
c	VAOUI
c	VAOUJNA
c	YAQUJNAe      ORAINtD
 
B	I   YOAKY ILLE	0'
B	I    YOST	c
B	f    YOST'•    DRAINED	c
B	I    YOUO	0
C:	I       YOUGA
C	J. YCUGA •. SAN'OV
 
llllNN!'"MUCCA
 
a	I woo. w!:T-
 

WINNESHJl!:IC WINNETT WINN590RO
WIN014
 
a	I   . WOOD   "A JVEA" D        I    WOObBEC:IC.
0     /   WOOOBJNE
wooO!IA I OGE
 
.0,
•c
 
lllf1GHTS!IORO WAI GMT Sii' lLLf WPIGHTWOOO_
WUKOK I
 
c	VARCO YAlfDL!!i:Y
YARTS Y•TAJ.l0Nl!"'Y
 
D	I	S  8STRATU ..
c   I 'l'OU.JAV	0
o	I YOUMAN	<
c	I YOUNGS TON	'
 
0
0	llOOO!IURN
 
c	WUKSJ
 
VATAHONfY•    STONY
YA1!5
 
o	I YOU,..GSTON•   WET	c
 
WINONA
WINOOSKI
 
B	WOODBURY.
 
0	111ULFERT	0
 
D	I         VOURAME
 
WINOP!!i:E
llllNRIOGE
.WINSHIP WINSPfCT
WINSTON
 
B	WOODCOCK
D	WOODFORD
C	..OOOGULCH
9	lfOOOHALL
8.	WQOOHUAST
 
WUNJfY
10	WUPA TKI
.•	lfUANO
c	WURS TEN
c	WURTSBORO
 
vAuco
Y.AUHANNAH
c	YAUPON
YAWOIM
c	YAWHflE
 
c	I YCIUTLKUE
e	I YQYIMPA
o	I  YPSI	c
o	I YRI BAl_:lAEN
o	I YS IDORA	<
 
WINT
 
0	WOODIN
 
c	WYALUSING
 
0	YAWICE'r
 
•	.I
 
YTUA810f
 
WINTl!:Rl'"1ELD
 
Al'D   I       WOOD.1,..GTON
 
91'01
 
WYANCIO.TT!
 
0	YAJCON
 
' I YTUAQ' J A
 

WI H T.f AHA VEN WINTE   IO   I! VINTI!: AS WINTl!AS!IURG WINTERSET
•INTHADP WINTLE WINTON"
_Wt,..TONEA WINU
 
B        I" WOODIN'.'#'ll.LE
B	I        wCOOINVILLE• C      f     ORA INl!D
c·      I      ..ooDLAw"' C      I    wOOQLEAF A      I   WOODLY
B         I     WODOL YN
c      I     WCiOOM.ANSIE B	I      WOOOMEqf
!=          J      WOODMONT
 
o	I WYANT
c   I WYAJ:D
I WY IRNO
o	I WYATT
"llYCOLO
o	I
o	I ..Yt.tST
e   I WY£TM
e    I ..vevlLLE
c  I wYICK
 
c	V!AGfR'
Yl'"AAY	c
VEATl!"'S   HOLLOW
c	Yl!"'A T·f'S    HOLL·OW,	<
c	LOAMY       SU!ISTAATUMo
SToNr
c
•	LOA Y  SU8$TAATUN
Yl!"A Tl!"'S   HOLLO II'•	c·
STONY
YEATES    HOLLOW•	C
 
I YU!SA
YUKO	0
YUr.ON
YUL EE	0
YUNES	0
YUNOUI!:	<
YUR.M
YUTAUE	0
YUVAS
.ZAAA	'
 
. "ll'IHZ
 
0      I     WOODPASS
 
6      I   wVICEl>'AM
 
.z	,1.e.4	'
 
WIOTA
WJPPLI!!" WIRT
wrscow
WISE WISEMAN WJSFLA·T
 
8    I   WOOOlii'OCK
c    I   "llOODRU"ll
.e  I ..oooi:1ow.
0      I	SALINE•ALKALI
C.        l     WOODROW•
A	I	OCCASIONALLY D       f	FLOODED
 
c  I WYICQFF
e   I WYMAN
c	I WYWCPE
I W:YND,.EAE
c   I WYNN
I WYNNVILLE
I "llYNONA
 
NONS'rONV
YEATl!"'!,HOLLOWo    D Y YfATES   HOLLOW.	C
coeei..v
Y!ATOl!i
c	V·l!:CROSS	A
c	Vl'"DI.. 1CK	B
 
ZACA
ZA"CHAAIAS	e
ZACHARY	c
ZACK
ZAOOC	UD
ZADVAA	>.
ZAFAA
 

NOTES:	Two  HVDAOLOGJC  SOIL  GROUPS  SUCH  •s B/C   JNOIC•TES·THE  OA.llNEO/'UNDA•fNEO  SITUATION.
MODl,.IERS  SHOW ....  E.G.·.  91!0ROCK  sue.ST!iATUP.h  A!,.EA   TD   ..  SP!Cll'"JC  SOJL  Sl!"IHES  i:tM•SE .l"'OL!NO   IN  SOIL  MAP  LEGE ....o.

· (210·VI.TR-55, Second Ed., June 1986) 	41
 




TABLE A-5 CONTINUED	Hydrologic  soil groups for United States soils



ZAGG	c	ZOHN!'A	D     I
Z HILL	c	ZOLA	c     I
ZOLl"'O	c    I
ZAID'I'	c,·	Zot.;T Y	c   I
 
ZAKHE
 
i.ttOIC	c.101
 
ZALCQ	ZOOICo   SILTY	c    I
ZAL A	D	SUBSTRATUM	I
 

·zAM<lAA
 
ZOAAAVIST.l	.. I
•
 
ZALLA	4	zo RA	o·  I
 
ZAMSCAN
 
:zov FJ	• I
 
ZANl!IUR.
 
•	zun·e:R	c     I
 
ZANI!	•	ZUfi'!LT	.C     I
 
ZANl!:IS
 
•	I ZUK AN	• I
 
ZANl!SVILl..I!:	c   I ZULCH	0    I	I	,,
ZAPA	c   I ZtNAN •. PFJOT!CT!'O	C/OJ	I
c   I ZlJMISAO	I	I
ZAAK	c   I ZUMV ..LT	c    I	I
Z.l rov ILL!:	c   I ZUNDl!LL	c   I	I
ZAU	c   I ZUNHALL	c   I	I
?AVCO	c   I ZUR ICH	• I	I
 
ZAYANie
 
I ZWICKl!'A	c   I	I
c   I
I	I
 
ZAZA
 
I Z'dlt'.l"'EL	I
 
Z!'ALI!:	• I l)UNGLI!	0
?!CANYON	c   I ZYM!:A	• I	I
Ze:l!:ICA	c    I ZYNS.11.A•   TILL	c    I	I I  SUl!ISTIJATUM		I
Zl!'l!SIX	c   I ZY?LACf	D    I	I
Zl!iSRIGHT	• I ZYZZI	D     I	I
ZEH	c    I	I	I
Zl!HDA	c  I	I	I
Z!:HI	c   I	I	I I
Zl!NITH.	• ·I	I	I
I	I	I
Z!"NOR	•  I	I	·I	.1
z.e	:no" tA	c    I	I	I	I
ZE0"4CNT	I	I
Zl!OHA	•  I	I	I	I
Zl!P.,,AN	c   I	I	I	I
Zt:PHY'f	0    I	I	I	I
ze:PP	• I	I	I
•	I	I	I	I
Zl!RIC	I	I	I
I
 
Zl!RK!'A
 
I	I	I	I
 
Zl!YAOE.Z	c    I	I	I
I
 
Zl4
 
I	I	I	I
 
ZJBAT!'	0    I	I	I
ZJ!G£Nfl'U$S	I	I
c   I	I
Zl!GL!A
ZILA.80'f'	•  I	I	I
ZILLAH• OR.&INl!'D	c   I	I	I
ZILLMA'f	I	I
Zl '4!AMAN	I
ZING	c   I	I
ZINZ!"• SA.LIN!'	c    I	I	I
ZION	c   I	I	I
ZIPP	D     I	J
ZJPP!L	0.101	I
ZIR.&N	D     I	I	I
I	I
ZITTAIJ	c    1.	I	I
ZDA"	c   I	I	I
ZO.&T!	D     I	I	I
za•	D    I	I	I
ZD!:S T .&	0     I	I	I

NOTl!S:   TWO HYOAOLOGIC SOIL GROPPS SUCH AS !.IC INOIC.&T!S TM! DPAIN!O.IUNOAAIN!O SITUATION• ODlfl'JE S SHOWNr !.G•• BE  OCK sueSTRATUM· R!fl'!A	S !Cil"IC SOIL SERI-I!'.$ ·PHAS! l"'OUNO

42	(210·VI-TR-55; Second Ed., June 1986)
 
BASIN BERM CONSTRUCTION  REQUIREMENTS

1.	Site preparation - Areas under the embankment and any structural works shall be cleared, grubbed, and the topsoil stripped to remove the trees, vegetation, roots or other objectionable material. In order to facilitate clean-out and restoration, the pool area will be cleared of all brush and excess trees.

2.	Cut off trench - A cut-off trench will be excavated along the centerline dam on earth fill embankments. The minimum depth shall  be two feet. The cut-off trench shall extend up both abutments to the riser crest elevation. The minimum bottom width shall be eight feet but wide enough to permit operation of compaction equipment. The side slopes shall be no steeper than 1:1. Compaction requirements shall be the same as those for the embankment. The trench shall be kept free from standing water during the backfilling operations.

3.	Embankment - The fill material shall be taken from selected borrow areas. It shall be free of roots, woody vegetation, oversized stones, rocks or other objectionable material. Areas on which fill is to be placed shall be scarified prior to placement of fill.

The fill material should contain sufficient moisture so that it can be formed by hand into a ball without crumbling. If water can be squeezed out of the ball, it is too wet for proper compaction.

Fill material will be placed in 6 to 8 inch layers and shall be continuous over the entire length of the fill. Fill material must be compacted to a minimum of 95% of Modified Proctor Density as established by ASTM D-1557. Compaction testing by a certified soils engineer/geologist must be completed as directed by the Township Engineer to verify adequate compaction has been achieved.
 
APPENDIX B RIPARIAN FORESTED BUFFER
 
RIPARIAN FORESTED BUFFER	VEGETATIVE  BMP.s

APPENDIX B
J

,• .,  ..
;,,., ..·•






















 
_,.. -"'---	--.ti..
Zone1
Undisturbed
Forest
 

Streembottom/Channel
 

Zone 1 Undisturbed Forest
 

Zone2
Managed Forest
 

Zone3
Grass if needed
 
Figure 2. 3-Zone bufferfor riparian forest buffer.

An accepted standard for riparian forest buffers is called the 3-zone buffer is illustrated inFigure 2 (USDA, NA-PR-07-90). The w!dth of each of the zones may vary depending upon the size of the stream and its topographic setting. However, 85 feet is sufficient inmost small and medium-sized streams to incorporate the funct;ions of the three zones.

3-Zone Buffer

Zone 1starts from the top of stream bank and typically is 15feet wide, or wider: Vegetation in Zone 1generally consists of trees and woody shrubs. Vegetation in the zone provides shade and detrital nutrients for aquatic organisms and stabilizes banks. Stabilization also may require additional techniques described in the STREAM BANK STABILIZATION BMP. Minimal disturbance is recommended for this area; however, vegetation structure must be maintained.

Zone 2 typically is 60 feet wide. The function of Zone 2 is to provide necessary contact time and material for buffering and filtering processes. Zone 2 cannot mitigate concentrated flow, therefore, for the buffer to be effective, only sheet or subsurface flow may reach this area. Vegetation inZone 2 consists of trees and shrubs. Suitable nutrient filtering species are listed in Appendix H, Plant Lists for Wetland Management. The Pennsylvania State University's The Agronomy Guide should be consulted before establishing riparian forested buffers.	·

Zone 3 typically is 20feet wide. The function of Zone 3 is to filter sediment, take up nutrients, and convert concentrated flow to sheet flow. Specifications for designing buffers inZone 3 are discussed in the FILTER STRIP BMP.	.





NOVEMBER 14, 1997

Reference: Pennsylvania Handbook of Best Management Practices for Developing Areas
 
APPENDIXC PLANT LISTS FOR WETLAND MANAGEMENT
 
APPENDIX C
PLAI' T LISTS FOR WETLAND lVIAP...JAGEMENT

'Table C-1 References to Wetland Ecology and Habitat lnfcirmation
Author/Year		Title		Descripiion Dennison and Berry, eds. (1993)	Wetlands/ Guide to Science, Law,	Regulatory definitions; general
and Technology	wetland ecology; types of wetlands;
delineation; mitigation; risk assessment
Hammer (1992)	Creating Freshwater Wetlaqds	Handbook on. types of wetlands,
wetland structure and function, wetland creation, and operation and maintenance
Kadlec and Knight (1996)	Treatment WeUands	Includes chapters on wetland ecology
including water quality, soils, vegetation, and fauna
Majumdar et al. eds. (1989)	Wetlands Ecology and Conservation:	Collected chapters on wetland
Emphasis in Pennsylvania	classification, hydrology, surface
water quality, plant and animal communities, assessment and restoration, and recreation
Marble (1992)	A Guide to Wetland Functional	Guidebook to designing wetlands for
Design	habitat creation, restoration, and
mitigation; describes wetland hydrology, chemistry, sediment interactions, foodchain support functions, and design for wildlife habitat
Merritt (1994)	Wetlands, Industry & Wildflfe	Handbook on creating and managing
wetlands for wildlife habitat in the context of industrial development
Mitsch and Gosselink (1993)	w  tlands	Complete textbook covering all facets
of wetland ecology; hydrology; biogeochemistry; biological adaptations; ecosystem-level
processes; wetland types; wetland management
Niering (1985)	Wetlands	Audubon Society nature field guide to wetland ecology; types of wetlands; descriptions and photographs of
wetland flora and fauna
Payne (1992)	Techniques for Wildlife Habitat	Guidebook to creation of wetlands
Management of Wetlands	with focus on creation of wildlife
habitat










NOVEMBER 14, 1997

Pennsylvania Handbook of Best Management Practices for Developing Areas
 
I
Table C-2  Aquatic and Wetland Plants That Can Be Used In Constructed Wetlands.
 



Vegetative
 
Growth/Spread	Growth
Plant Species	Common Name	Growth Form .	Persistence	Rate	Method	Spacing	Propagules	Habitat	Shade Tolerance	Wiidiife   Benl\fits	Water  Regime	Salinity  Tolerance
Acer nsgundo	Box elder	Tree	Perennial; deciduous  Fast; 4.5 to 6 m I 5 yrs	Container	Forested wetlands	Full sun	Songbirds; waterbirds;	lrregularto regular	Fresh water; resistant to
small mammals	inundation or saturation	salt  water
Acerrubrum	Red  maple	Tree	Perennial;· deciduous   Medium to fast; 5 to 7	Seed; whip; bare root	Fresh marsh; swamp;	Partial shade	Gamebirds; songbirds;	Irregular to seaso ally	Fresh water; < 0.5 ppt
ml 10 yrs	alluvial woods	browsers	Inundated or saturated
Acorus calamus	Sweet flag	Emergent;	Perennial;	Moderate; 15 cm/yr	Rhizome	0.3 to 0.9 m O.C.	Rhizome; bare root	Fresh to brackish	Partial  shade	Waterfowl;  muskrat	Regular to.p rmanent	Fresh to brackish; < 1O
herbaceous	nonpersistent	plant	marshes	inundation; < 15 cm	ppt
A/nus serrulats	Smooth  alder	Shrub	Perennial; deciduos	Rapid; 60 cm/yr	Container	Fresh marshes and	Full sun	Songbirds;  gameblrds;	Seasonal to regular	Fresh water; < 0.5  pp!
swamps	ducks; woodcock;	inundation; up to 7 cm
blackbirds; beaver

Carexspp.	Sedges	Em rQent;	PerenO!al;	Slow to rapid	Rhizome	0.15to1.B  m  O.C.	Seed; bare rqot plant	. Fresh marshes;	Full shade to lull sun   Rails; sparrows; snipe;	Irregularly to permanently   Fresh water; <0.5 ppt
herbaceous	nonpersistent	swamps; lake  ges	songbirds; ducks; moose Inundated; <015 cm

Cepahlanthus	Buttonbush	Shrub	Perennial; deciduous	Medium; 30 to 60	Seedling; bare	Fresh marshes;	Full shade to full sun   Ducks; deer; rails;	Irregular to permanent	Fresh water; tolerates
occldsntslls	cm/yr	rootplant	swamps; edge of	blackbirds;   muskrats;	inundation; up to 90 cm	infrequent salt water
ponds	beaver

Cerstophy/lum	Coontall	Submerged aquatiC	Perennial	Rapid	Fragrpentatf n	Whole  Plant	Lakes; Slow Streams	Ducks; coots; geese;	Regular to permanent	Fresh water, <0.05  ppt
demsrsum	grebes; swans;	Inundation; 0.3 to  1.5 m
marshblrds; muskrats
'.
Cyperus escutentus.	Chula	Emergent	Perrenlal; ·	Rapid	Rhizome	Seed; tuber	Fresh marshes; wet	Full sun	Waterfowl;'songblrds;	Irregular to regular	. Fresh waler; <0.5 ppl
herbaceous	nonperslstent	meadows	small mammals	inundation; <0.3 m

Eichhorn/a  crass/pes	Water hyacinth	Non-rooted  floating	Perenpial;	Rapid	Stolons	Whole  plants	Fresh water ponds and	Full sun	Coots; cover for	Permanent inundation	Fresh water; < 0.5  ppt
aquatic	nonperslsterlt	sluggish streams	invertebr tos and _fish

Hydrocoty/e	Water-pennywort	Emergent to	Perennial;	·Rapid	Stolons or	Bare rocit plant, whole	Shorelines; shallow	Partial shade	Wildfowl; waterfowl	Regular to pennanent	Fresh water; <0.5 ppt
umbellata	floating;	nonperslstent	rhizomes	plant	marshes	lnundation;<30 cm
herbaceous
.frls vers/color	Blue flag	Emergent;	Perennial;	Slow; <60 cm/yr	Bulb	0.15 to 0.45 m O.C.   Seed; bulb; bare root	Marshes; wet.	Partial shade	Muskrat; wildfowl; marsh Regular to permanent	Fresh to  moderately
herbaceous	nonperslstent	· plant	meadows; swamps	birds	inundation; <15 cm	brackis:h
Juncus effusus	Soft  rush	Emergent;·	Perennial: persistent	Slow; <6 cm/yr	Rhizome	0.15 to 0.45 m O.C,    Seed; -rhizome; bare	Marshes; shrub	Full sun·	Wildfowl;  marshblrds;	Regular to pennanent	Fresh water;  <0.5 ppt
herbaceous	root plant	swamps; wet meadows	songbirds; waterfowl	Inundation; <30 cm


Lemnamlnor	Common duckweed	Non·rooted floating	Perennial;	Rapid	Fragmentation	Whole plant	Lakes and pends	Partial shade	Ducks; gaillnules; ooots;   Permanent Inundation	Fresh water,  <0.05  ppt
aquatic	nonpersistent	rails; geese; beaver;
muskrat; small mammals

Nuphar Juteum	Spatterdock	Rooted  floating  .fo		Perennial;	Slow;  <6  cm/yr	Rhizome	0.15  to  0.45  m 0.C.·	Bare root plant	Marshes; SWB.f"!lps;	· Partial shade	Ducks; muskrat; fish	Regular to permanent	Fresh water to emergent;	nonpersistent						ponds			Inundation; up to 1.8 m	infrequent     brackish
.   herbaceous
Nymphsa    odorsts	Fragent water lily	Rooted   floating	Perennial;	Rhizome.	. Bare root seedling	Ponds and lakes	Partial   shade	Cranes; ducks; beaver;	Permanent inundation;	Fresh water; <0.05 ppt
aquatic	nonpersistent	mus rat; moose	0.3 to 0.9 m

Nyssa sy/vstlca	Black gum	Tr«e	Perennial; deciduous	Slow	Suckers	Seed; bare roqt plant	Forested wetlands;	Partial shade	Ducks; woodpeckers;	Irregular to permanent	Fresh water to
swamps	songbirds; aquatic	inundation	infrequent brackish furbe_arers
.
 





Table C-2(cont.). Aquatic and Wetland Plants That Can Be Used In Constructed Wetlands.

Vegetative
I	Growth/Spread	Growth
Plant Species	Common Name	Growth Form	Persistence	Rate	Method	Spacing·	Propagules	Habitat	Shade Tolerance	Wlldilfe Benefits	Water Regime	Salinity Tolerance
Ponteder/a cordsts	Pickerelweed		Emergent		Perennial;	Moderate; 15 cm/yr	Rhizome·	0.3 to 0.9 m 0.C:	Rhizorrie; bare root		Fresh to brackish	Partial shade	Ducks; muskrat  fish		Regular to permanent; up Fresh to moderately herbaceous	nonparsistent.					plant	marshes; edges of			to 30 cm	brackish; up to 3 ppt
ponds
Popu/us de/lo/des	Eastern cottonwood	Tree	Perennial; dec!duous	Fast; 1.2 to 1.5 m/yr	Bare root plant;	Forested wetlands	Full sun	.. Gameblrds; songbirds;	Seasonal inundation or	Fresh water to
container	waterfoY.i; aquatic	saturation	Infrequent   brackish
furbearers;  browsers

.
Potamogeton	Long-leaved pond	Rooted submerged	Perrenlal;	.Rapid	Rhizome	0.6 to 1.8 m O.C.	Seed; bare root plant    Streams; lakes; ponds	Waterfowl; marshbirds;	Regular to permanent	Fresh water; <0.05 ppt
nodosus	weed·	aquatic·	nonperslstent	shorebirds; aquatic	Inundation; 0.3 to 1.8 m
furbearers; moose; fish

Quercus b/co/or	Swamp white oak	Tree	Perennial; deciduous	Fast; 0.4 to 0.6 m/yr	Bare root plant;	Forested wetlands	Partial shade	Wateriowt; marshblrds;	Irregular to seasonal	Fresh water to
container		shorebirds; gameblrds;	inundation or saturation	infrequent brackish songbirds; man1mals


Ross palustrls	Swamp rose	Shrub	Perennial; decldiJous	ContaJner	Fresh marshes; shrub	Full sun	Songbirds; garneblrds	Irregular to regular soil	Fresh water; <·0.5 ppt
.swamps	saturation
Saglttsrls /at/fol/a	Duck potato		Emergent;	Perennial;	Rapid; > 30 cm/yr	Runners; tubers	0.6 to 1.8 m O.C.	Tµber; bare root plant		Fresh marshes;	Partial shade	Ducks swans; rails;	 RegiJlar to pen:nanent	Fresh water; <0.5 ppt herbaceous	no  persistent					swamps; edge of		muskrats;· beaver	inundation; up to 60 cm
ponds
Salix nlgra	Black willow	Tree	Perennial; deciduous	Fast; 0.9 to 1.8 mlyr	Suckers	. Bare root; container	Fresh marshes;	Full sun	. Gamebirds; _ducks;	Irregular to permanent	Fresh water;·< 0.5 ppt
swamps	songbirds; woodpeckers;  Inundation
aquatic mammals
Bc/rpus acutus	Hardstem bulrush		Emergent;·	Perennial; persistent	Rapid	Rhl ome	0.9 to 1.8 m O.C.	Seed; rhizome	Fresh tobrackish	Full sun	Ducks; gees ; swans;	Regular to permanent; up Fresh to brackish herbaceous							marshes		cranes; shorebirds; rails;  to 90 cm
snipei muskrats; fish
Sclrpus smerlcanus	Olney's bulrush		Emergent;	Perennial; semie	Rapid;> 30 cm/yr	Rhizome	0.6 to 1.8 m o.c.	Rhizome; bare root	Brackish and alkali	Full sun	Ducks; geese; swans_;	Regular to permanent	Fresh to brackish water; herbaceous		persistent					plant		marshes		cranes; shorebirds; rails; ln1:1ndatlon; up to 30 cm	up to 15 ppt
snipe; muskratS; fish
Sclrpus cype lnus	Wool grass		Emergent;	Perennial; persistent	Moderate; 15 cm/yr	Rhizome	0.3 to 0.9 m O.C.	Rhizome; bare root .	Fresh marshes; wet	Fl:lllsun	Ducks; geese; swans;	Irregular to seasonal	Fresh water; < 0.5 ppt herbaceous						plant	meadoWSi sloughs;		cranes;. shorebirds; rails; inundation
swamps	snipe; muskratS; fish
Sc/rpus val/dus	Soft stem bulrush		Emergent;	PerennlB.f; persistent	Rapid; > 30 cm/yr	Rhizome	0.6 to 1.8 m O.C.	Rhizome; bare root	Fresh and brackish	Full sun	.Ducks; geese; swans;	Regular to permanent	Fresh to brackish water; herbaceous						plant		marshes			cranes; shorebirds; rails;   Inundation; up to 30 cm	up to 5 ppt
snipe; muskrats; fish
Spargsnlum	Giant bur·reed	_Emergent;	Perennial:	Rapid; > 30 cm/yr	Rhizome	0.6 to 1.8 m O.C.	Seed; rhizome; bare	Marshes; swamps;	Partial shade	Ducks; s an; g_eese;	Regular to permanent	Fresh water; < 0.5 ppt
eurycamum	herbaceous	nonpersistent	root plant	pond shorelines	beaver; inus_krat;	inundation; up to 30 cm
Tsxod/um dist/chum	Bald cypress	Tree	Perennial; deciduous	Medium; 0.3 to 0.6	Seed; bare root;	Fresh water swamps;	Partial shade	Perching and nesting site Irregular to permanent	Fresh water; < .0.5 ppt
m/yr	container	pond and lake margins	for birds	inundation	·

Typha sngustllol/a	Narrow-leaved cattail		Emergent;	Perennial; persistent	Rapid; > 30 cm/yr	Rhizome	0.6 to 1.8 m O.C:	., Rhizonie; bare root		Fresh and brackish	Full sun	Geese; ducks; muskrats; Irregular to permanent	Fresh to brackish; up to herbaceous						pla.nt	marshes; pond edges		beaver; blackbirds; fish	inundation; up to 30 cm	15 ppt


Typhs /stllolla	·Broad-leaved cattail		Emergent;	Perennial; persistent	Rapid;> 30 cm/yr	Rhizome	0.6 to 1.8 m O.C.	Rhizome: bare root	Fresh marshes; pond	Full sun	Geese; ducks; muskrats;  Irregular to permanent	Fresh water; < 0.5 ppt herbaceous						plant		margins		beaver; blackbirds; fish	Inundation; up to 30 cm


Source: Adsptsd with modifications from Thunhorst (1993).
 
Table C-3  Ecological and Silvicultural Characteristics
Plant Name	Region	Wildlife Value	Growth Rate	Size	Rootina
 

c
·o;
 
c
0	.c	1ii	in
 
a:	,E, zui	:Oc>      .c	,;	;::	"'
 
,;	;::	....
 
.!!!	I-	O>	"	_0,
 
IL	'Iii
 
0	i..n..	'	0
 
Common Name	cj	a.
 
::;;     :>
 
:c	::;;
 
:>	I"L'
 
::";;	(ij
 
It)
A	It)	v
 
Arrowwood
 
+	+	+	+	+	+
 
shallow
 
Hii:ihbush blueberry               +     +            +                                                    +            +               shallow
Elderberry                            +    +    +    +                                 +                    +                     shallow
Virainia sweetspire                   +    +                   +                   +     +                  +       shallow lnkberrv                                +    -            +                                +                   +       shallow Swamp leucothoe                 +    +                               +.                           +                  +       shallow
Pinxterbloom azalea            +    +                     +                      +           +             shallow Bayberry                           +                       +                            +                  +             shallow Silkv doawood                       +    +    +                        +                        +             shallow Common ninebark               +    +                       +                  +·                              +       shallow
Red chokeberry                    +                               +                                   +                  +       shallow
Soicebush                            +    +    +    +                                                 +            +           deea lateral
Grey doawood                             +    +    +                                       +                   +              shallow
Rosebav Rhododendron      +    +    +                        +                            +     +                     shallow
Mapleleaf viburnum                      +    +          +                                 ·+     +            +              shallow
Red osier doawood              =     +    +    +    +                                                                +
Smooth sumac                                                   +                                                               +
Staahom sumac                   +     +    +          +                                                                +
Nannvberry                                 +    +           +                                                                +
Blackhaw viburnum                                            +                                                               +
 
FORBS AND FERNS
..
 
"A'
 
"''	'?
 

TYPE
 
lewelweed	+	+	+	+	+	+	annual
Smartweed	+·  +	+	+	+	annual
Roval Fem	+	+	+	+	+	fern
Sensitive Fern	+	+	+	+	+	fem
Joe Pve Weed	+	+	+		+	+	+			oerennial Swamp Dewberry	=	+	+	+		+		+	perennial
lhimbleberrv	-	+	+	+	+	+	Perennial
Rasberry	=	+	+	+	+	+	· oerehnial
GRASSES	"A'	'!'	'?
 

Switcharass	-	+	+	+	+
 
"+'
 

warm  clumo
 
E. Gamaarass	+	+	+	+	+	warm, clumo
Field Bromearass	=	+	+	+	+	+	w. annual
Fowl Meadowarass	=	+	+	+	+	+	cold, sod
Deertongue	=	+	+	+	+	+	warm, chjmp
all fescue	=	+	+	+	+	+	cold, sod
lndianarass	=	+	+	+	+		+				warm. sod Puroletop	-	+	+	+	+			+		warm, clump Bia Bluestem	=	+	+	+		+	+			warm, c.Jumo Little Bluestem		+	+	+		+			+		warm, clumo
+ charactenst1c/preferred
=tolerant
Source: Adapted with modifications from Palone and Todd (draft).
 
lj Table C-3    Ecological and Sllvlcultural  Characteristics
f	Plant Name	i	Reg!on	1  WHd!ife Value  I	GioWi:h Rate	Sile	Rooting
 

c
'iii
 
0	ui	.c	t?	,.
 
c::
 
'O	z
 
:r	.c
 
.,;
 
:;:
 
u".'
 
.,;
 
in	'	0
 
Common Name	0	a":'	I-  :>
 
r ::Q;;I
 
0
..J
 
"'	::";;'	0
 
.A..	0	"v'
 
Arrowwood                      +    +    +          +                       +            +                    shallow Hiohbush blueberry              +    +          +                                              +           +             shallow
Elderberrv                           +     +    +    +                           +                     +                      shallow Virainia sweetspire                    +    +                    +                     +     +                   +       shallow lnkberry                                  +    =                     +                                  +                   +       shallow Swamp leucothoe                  +     +                                +                             +                   +       shallow
Pinxterbloom azalea             +    +                      +                      +           +             shallow Bavberry                            +                       +                             +                   +             shallow Silkv doawood                         +    +    +                          +                          +              shallow Common ninebark                +    +                        +                    +                             +       shallow Red chokeberry                    +                              +                                   +                   +      shallow
Soicebush                            +    +    +    +                                                 +            +           deeo lateral
Grev doawood                              +    +   +                                         +                   +              shallow
Rosebav Rhododendron      +     +    +                         +                            +     +                     shallow
Maoleleaf viburnum                    +    +          +                          -+     +          +             shallow Red osier doawood             -  +    +    +·   +                                                            +
Smooth sumac                                                   +                                                                +
Staghorn sumac                   +    +    +          +                                                                +
Nannv berry                                 +    +          +                                                                +
Blackhaw viburnum                                       +                                                  .          +
 

FORBS AND FERNS
-·
 

"A'	".:',
 
.,
v	TYPE
 
Jewelweed	+	+	+	+		+	+		annual Smartweed	+·   +		+	+			+	annual
Raval Fein	+	+	+	+	+	fern
Sensitive Fern				+		+				+		+		+		fem Joe Pye Weed		+		+		+			+			+	+		oerennial Swamo Dewberry		=		+		+		+				+		+	perennial himbleberrv	=	+	+	+			+	+		perennial
Rasberrv	-	+	+	+	+	+	·oererinial
 
GRASSES	"A'
 
.,
"''	v
 
Switcharass	-	+	+	+	+	+	warm, clumo
E. Gamaarass	+	+	+	+	+	warm. clumo
Field Bromeqrass	=	+	+	+	+	.	+	w. annual Fowl Meadoworass	-	+	+	+	+		+	cold, sod
Deertonoue	=	+	+	+	+	+	warm, ch.imo
allfescue	-	+	+	+	+	+	cold. sod
lndianarass	-	+	+	+	+	+	warm, sod
>-'Uroletop	=	+	+	+	+	+	warm, clump
Bia Bluestem	=	+	+	+	+	+	warm, c.lumo
Little Bluestem	=	+	+	+	+	+	warm, clumo
+ charactenst1c/preferred
=tolerant
Source: Adapted with modifications from Palone and Todd (draft).
 
APPENDIX D STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN APPLICATION AND FEE SCHEDULE
 
RESOLUTION# O:Z- IS
HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP, BUCKS COUNTY

BE  IT  RESOLVED  THAT  THE  FOLLOWING  FEES/ESCROWS  SHALL  BE REQUIRED  PURSUANTTO  SECTION  601 OF THE HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP
STORMWATER  MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE NO.    CJ!	:

I. ·	Plan Review: (per lot fur Subdh1isiofl Applications)

 
Fee: Escrow:
 
$100.00
$400.00 for the first 5 lots plus
$100.00-for eacti additional lot over 5 lots
 

i   :
'	It	Permit/Inspection:

 
Fee: Escrow:
 
$25.00
$200.00
 

All fees a·re non-refundable. The applicant shall be responsible to reimburse the Township for all costs for ·plan review or administration/inspection which exceed the escrow amount established  by this  resolution. Any escrow remaining upon project completion will be returned to the applicant.
.	.
·BE IT. VED, by the Board of Supervisors of Haycock Township, Bucks County, tbis	day of
tJ .2002.	.	.

HAYCOCK TOWNSHIP
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS:	ATTEST:



jlf: Kathleen M. Babb airperson
$•0
Mr. Michael Lennard, Vice Chairman
 




Mr. f"lenry
 
JSliPe' .
 

APPENDIX E WATERSHED MAP
 
WATERSHED   BOUNDARY


1003  RELEASE  RATE
f:0/,.'.0j  DIRECT   DISCHARGE



STORMWATER MANAGEMENT RELEASE RATE MAP HAYCOCK	TOWNSHIP BUCKS      COUNTY	PENNSYLVANIA

0	000	JBOO

GRAPHIC   SCAIB
