MUNICIPAL CODE
Chapter AO
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
§ AO-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1601(d) of the Second Class Township Code [53 P.S.
§ 66601(d)], the codification of a complete body of legislation for the
Township of Harris, County of Centre, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as
revised, codified and consolidated into chapters, articles, and sections by
General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 13, together with an
Appendix, is hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a single
ordinance of the Township of Harris, which shall be known and is hereby
designated as the "Code of Township of Harris," hereinafter referred to as
the "Code."
§ AO-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the
prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in
full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the
Board of Supervisors of the Township of Harris, and it is the intention of
said Board of Supervisors that each such provision contained with the Code
is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such
provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed and abrogated by the provisions of § AO-3 below, and only
new or changed provisions, as described in § AO-6 below, shall be deemed
to be enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § AO-15
below.
§ AO-3. Inconsistent legislation repealed.
Except as provided in § AO-4, Legislation saved from repeal; matters not
affected by repeal, below, all ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent
with the provisions contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are
hereby repealed as of the effective date given in § AO-15; provided,
however, that such repeal shall only be the extent of such inconsistency, and
any valid legislation of the Township of Harris which is not in conflict with
the provisions of the Code shall be deed to remain in full force and effect.
AO:1
§ AO-4. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by
repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ AO-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § AO-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to January 28, 2015.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Township prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Township or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Township,
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Township or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Township or other instruments or evidence
of the Township's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Township.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-
§ AO-4 HARRIS CODE § AO-4
AO:2
§ AO-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § AO-4 and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance is hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ AO-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation;
new provisions.
way, easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines, or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Township or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or provision of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Township.
S. Any cunently effective ordinance providing for intergovernmental
cooperation or establishing an intermunicipal agreement.
A. Nonsubstantive changes. In complying and preparing the ordinances
and resolutions of the Township for adoption and revision as part of the
Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were
made in one or more of said ordinances and resolutions. It is the
intention of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be adopted
as part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had
been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
natures, as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part
hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included
in the Code. These changes are enacted to bring provisions into
conformity with the desired policies of the Board of Supervisors, and it
§ AO-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § AO-6
AO:3
§ AO-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statue, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ AO-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
is the intent of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be
adopted as part of the Code as if the legislation so changed had been
previously formally amended to read as such. All such changes and
revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the
Code specified in § AO-15.1
C. Nomenclature. Throughout the Code, references to the following
agencies or officials are updated as indicated:
(1) (1) "Department of Environmental Resources" or "DER" to
"Department of Environmental Protection" or "DEP."
(2) "Department of Community Affairs" or "DCA" to "Department of
Community and Economic Development" or "DCED."
(3) "Justice of the Peace," "District Magistrate" and "District Justice" to
"Magisterial District Judge."
(4) "Soil Conservation Service" or "SCS" to "Natural Resources
Conservation Service" or "NRCS."
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § AO-6B, the chapters, parts and sections that were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter AO, Adopting Ordinance. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, repealed) 4-11-2016 by Ord. No.
324." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
Township offices.
§ AO-6 HARRIS CODE § AO-9
AO:4
§ AO-9. Filing of copy of Code.
At least one copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Township Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copy
or copies shall be certified to by the Township Secretary, as provided by
law, and such certified copy or copies shall remain on file in the office of
the Township Secretary, available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ AO-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Board of Supervisors to be part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the postbound
book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ AO-11. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copy or copies
of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the
Township Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code
and all legislation adopted by the Board of Supervisors subsequent to the
effective date of this codification which the Board of Supervisors shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new legislation are printed as
supplements to said Code books, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
§ AO-12. Publication of notices.
The Township Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction of the Code in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Township. The enactment and application of this
ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notice of introduction, the
availability of a copy or copies of the Code for inspection by the public and
the filing of an attested copy of this ordinance with the county, as required
by law, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication
of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ AO-13. Altering or tampering with Code; violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Township
to be misrepresented thereby. Any person who violates or permits a
§ AO-9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § AO-13
AO:5
violation of this section of this ordinance shall, upon being found liable
therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding, pay a fine of not more than $600,
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the
Township in the enforcement of this chapter. If the defendant neither pays
nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation
exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officer
or agent of the Township is hereby authorized to seek equitable relief,
including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ AO-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Supervisors that this
ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not be included therein.
§ AO-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after April 18, 2016.
Chapter 1
ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT
§ AO-13 HARRIS CODE § AO-15
AO:6
ARTICLE I
[Adopted At Time OPf rAedliompitnioanry O Pfr Coovidseio (nSsee Ch. AO, Adopting
Ordinance)]
§ 1-1.1. Short title.
The short title of this Code, prepared and published for the Township of
Harris, shall be the "Township of Harris Code."
§ 1-1.2. Citation of Code.
The Township of Harris Code may be cited by section number. The approved
short form is "Code." Thus, "Code, § 13-1.1" refers to § 1 of Article I of
Chapter 13 of this Code.
§ 1-1.3. Tenses, gender and number.
Except as may be otherwise stated in any provision of this Code, the present
tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future the present; the
masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter, the feminine includes
the masculine and neuter, and the neuter includes the masculine and
feminine; and the singular includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
§ 1-1.4. Construction.
A. Except as may be otherwise specifically provided by any provision of
this Code, the Statutory Construction Act of 1972, 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1501 et
seq., shall be applied in construing this Code.
B. Effect of repeal or expiration of Code section.
(1) The repeal of a Code section or ordinance, or its expiration by
virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right
accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment
incurred, or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took
effect or the ordinance expired.
(2) When any ordinance repealing a former Code section, ordinance,
clause or provision shall itself be repealed, such repeal shall not be
construed to revive such former Code section, ordinance, clause or
provision, unless it shall be expressly so provided.
C. Saving clause. The provisions of this Code, so far as they are the same
as those ordinances and regulations in force immediately prior to the
adoption of this Code, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances, resolutions and regulations and not as a new enactment.
The provisions of this Code shall not affect any suit or prosecution
pending or to be instituted to enforce any of the prior ordinances or
regulations. Except as specifically stated in this Code or in the
ordinance adopting this consolidation, codification and revision of the
ordinances and regulations of the Township of Harris, it is the intention
§ 1-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-1.4
AO:7
§ 1-1.5. Altering Code.
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by addition or
deletion any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages
or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner
whatsoever, except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the
Board of Supervisors.
§ 1-1.6. Violations and penalties.
of the Board of Supervisors that no ordinance or regulation of the
Township be amended, revised or repealed by implication.
D. Resolutions. The provisions of this Code may contain resolutions, that
is, actions of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Harris (in
written form and designated "resolution") which did not require prior
public notice in accordance with the provisions of the Second Class
Township Code, 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq., at the time of their passage by
the Board of Supervisors. Such "resolutions" are included herein for
ease of reference and the Board of Supervisors does not intend by their
inclusion herein to require prior public notice before amending,
revising or repealing such resolution or resolutions as may have been
included herein in the future. It is the intention of the Board of
Supervisors that such actions of the Board of Supervisors that may be
included in this Code and specifically cited and designated as a
resolution shall not become an ordinance (requiring prior public notice
before amendment, revision or repeal) by the simple fact of inclusion in
this Code.
A. Penalty where no penalty provided. Whenever in this Code or in any
ordinance of the Township any act is prohibited or is declared to be
unlawful, or whenever in this Code or other ordinance the doing of any
act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided
therefor:
(1) Violations of health, safety and welfare provisions. For violations of
ordinances adopting building, housing, property maintenance,
health, fire or public safety codes; and for ordinances regulating
water services, water pollution, air pollution and noise, the
following penalty shall be provided:
(a) Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision
of the ordinance, upon conviction thereof in an action brought
before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner provided for
the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania
Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of
said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90
days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each
section of this article which shall be found to have been
violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 1-1.4 HARRIS CODE § 1-1.6
AO:8
(2) Other violations. All other penalties, except for penalties in Chapter
15, "Motor Vehicles and Traffic" (based on the Vehicle Code, 75
Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.), penalties and ordinances adopted under
the authority of the Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101
et seq., and earned income tax ordinances adopted under the Local
Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6913, should provide, generally:
(a) Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has
violated or permitted the violation of any provision of this
article, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by the Township, shall pay a judgment
of not more than $600 plus all court costs. No judgment shall
commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of
the determination of a violation by a Magisterial District Judge.
If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable rules of civil procedure, at which time, in addition to
any penalties, the violator shall be liable for any attorney's fees
and costs incurred by the Township. Each day that a violation
continues or each section of this article which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a separate violation.
B. The imposition of a penalty under the provisions of this Code shall not
prevent the revocation of any permit or license or the taking of other
punitive or remedial action where called for or permitted under the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the United States of
America. In addition, the Township may institute injunctive, mandamus
or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the
enforcement of this Code. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall
have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
§ 1-1.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-1.6
AO:9

ARTICLE II
Appointed Officials
A.
Township Manager
[Adopted 9-8-2003 by Ord. No. 238]
§ 1-2.1. Creation of office.
The office of Township Manager is hereby created by the Township of
Harris.
§ 1-2.2. Appointment and removal.
The Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term by the authority of
all members of the Board of Supervisors, hereinafter referred to as the
"Board." The Manager shall serve at the pleasure of the Board and the
Manager may be removed at any time by a majority vote of all its members.
At least 30 days before such removal is to become effective, the Board shall
furnish the Manager with a written statement setting forth its intention
to remove the Manager. The Board and the Manager may enter into an
employment agreement.
§ 1-2.3. Qualifications.
The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of the Manager's executive
and administrative abilities, with special reference to the duties of the
Manager's office as herein outlined. The Manager need not be a resident
of the Township or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania at the time of the
Manager's appointment, but shall become a Township resident within six
months of appointment. Exceptions to this policy may be approved by the
Board. The Manager shall not be employed by any other employer during
the Manager's term of office without a resolution in writing approving
same by the Board. The term "employed" shall not be construed to include
occasional teaching, writing, and consulting performed on the Manager's
time off.
§ 1-2.4. Bond.
Before entering upon the Manager's duties, the Manager shall give a bond
to the Township with a bonding company as surety, to be approved by the
Board, in the sum of $25,000, conditioned upon the faithful performance
of the Manager's duties, the premium for said bond to be paid by the
Township.
§ 1-2.5. Manager's compensation.
The salary of the Township Manager shall be fixed from time to time by
resolution of the Board.
§ 1-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-2.6
AO:11
§ 1-2.6. Powers and duties.
The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Township,
and the Manager shall be responsible to the Board as a whole for the
proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the Township. The
powers and duties of administration of all Township business shall be vested
in the Manager, unless expressly imposed or conferred by statute upon
other Township officers, subject to the right of the Board, by resolution or
ordinance to change such powers and duties from time to time. Subject
to these limitations, the powers and duties of the Township Manager shall
include the following:
A. The Manager shall supervise and be responsible for all Township
administration and work activities including, but not necessarily limited
to, roads, drainage, water system, sewers, public safety, engineering,
zoning, signs, building codes, and refuse collection and disposal.
B. The Manager shall prepare for approval by the Board personnel
regulations and personnel grade and pay scale plans and shall from
time to time make recommendations for their modification.
C. The Manager shall, from time to time, prepare for Board approval an
organization chart for the Township, which notes all positions subject to
the Manager's supervision and appointed either by the Manager or the
by the Board upon recommendation of the Manager as required by the
Second Class Township Code2 or by particular ordinances. The
Manager shall also cause job descriptions to be prepared in accordance
with the current approved organization chart.
D. The Manager shall hire in accordance with the approved organizational
chart and, when necessary for the good of the service, shall suspend or
discharge any employee under his supervision, provided that persons
covered by the approved personnel regulations of the Township or by
specific provisions of the laws of the commonwealth shall be hired,
suspended or discharged in accordance with such provisions, and,
provided further, that the Manager shall report any action taken by
authority of this subsection to the Board.
E. The Manager shall have the power to fix wages and salaries of all
personnel under the Manager's supervision, within ranges previously
determined by the Board under the approved grade and pay scale plan.
F. The Manager shall prepare and submit to the Board, before the close of
each fiscal year, a budget for the next fiscal year and an explanatory
budget message. In preparing the budget, the Manager, or an officer
designated by the Manager, shall obtain from the head of each
department, agency or board, or any qualified officer thereof, estimates
of revenues and expenditures and such other supporting data as the
Manager requires. The Manager shall review such estimates and may
revise them before submitting the budget to the Board.
2. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 1-2.6 HARRIS CODE § 1-2.6
AO:12
G. The Manager shall be responsible for the administration of the budget,
after its adoption by the Board, and shall recommend revisions therein
if they are deemed advisable during the year.
H. The Manager shall, in conjunction with the preparation of the yearly
budget, develop long-range fiscal plans for the Township, such plans to
be presented annually to the Board for its review and adoption.
I. The Manager shall keep the Board informed as to the conduct of
Township affairs; submit periodic reports on the condition of the
Township finances and such other reports as the Board requests; and
make such recommendations to the Board as the Manager deems
advisable.
J. The Manager shall submit to the Board, as soon as possible after the
close of the fiscal year, a complete report of the finances and the
administrative activities of the Township for the preceding year.
K. The Manager shall hold such other Township offices and head such
Township departments as the Board may from time to time direct. The
Manager shall serve as secretary or treasurer, or both, of the Planning
Commission and Harris Township Authority if so directed by the Board.
The Manager shall attend such regular meetings as is deemed desirable
or as directed by the Board.
L. The Manager shall attend all meetings of the Board and its committees
with the right to take part in the discussions and the Manager shall
receive notice of all special meetings of the Board and its committees.
M. The Manager shall prepare the agenda for each meeting of the Board
and supply facts and recommendations pertinent thereto.
N. The Manager shall see that the provisions of all franchises, leases,
permits, and privileges granted by the Board are observed.
O. The Manager may employ, by and with approval of the Board, experts
and consultants to perform work and to advise in connection with any of
the functions of the Township.
P. The Manager shall attend to the letting of contracts in due form of law,
and he shall supervise the performance and faithful execution of the
same except insofar as such duties are expressly imposed by statute
upon some other Township officer.
Q. The Manager shall see that all money owed the Township is promptly
paid and that proper proceedings are taken for the security and
collection of all the Township's claims.
R. The Manager shall be the purchasing officer of the Township, and the
Manager shall purchase in accordance with the provisions of the
Second Class Township Code,3 all supplies and equipment for the
3. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 1-2.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-2.6
AO:13
§ 1-2.7. Procedural limitations on Board.
agencies, boards, departments, and other offices of the Township. The
Manager shall keep an account of all purchases and shall, from time
to time or when directed by the Board, make a full written report
thereof. The Manager shall also issue rules and regulations, subject to
the approval of the Board, governing the procurement of all municipal
supplies and equipment.
S. The Manager shall properly maintain and account for all property and
equipment owned by the Township and the Manager shall not dispose of
any property without the approval of the Board, except for the normal
depletion and wear and tear.
T. The Manager shall cause a file system to be set up for the Township in
compliance with state law.
U. The Manager shall insure that all reports required by law to be filed
with various departments of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or with
the governmental entities of the United States are completed and
submitted in a timely manner.
V. The Manager shall be cognizant of regional, county, commonwealth and
federal programs in which Township participation is possible and
perhaps desirable and should bring these to the attention of the Board
with such clarifying information as it may require to determine if the
Township should participate in these programs.
W. All complaints regarding Township services shall be referred to the
office of the Manager. The Manager, or an officer designated by the
Manager, shall investigate and dispose of such complaints, and the
Manager shall report thereon to the Board.
X. The Manager, if qualified, is encouraged to participate in graduate
programs of the Pennsylvania State University in the areas related to
public administration. The Township will support such activities to the
extent of allowing time off during the day for one such course and
reimbursement of tuition if excellent grades are obtained; however,
such educational privileges will not be allowed until the Manager has
been on the job for a minimum period of four months. The Manager will
also be expected to join and participate in state and national
organizations established for the purpose of enhancing knowledge and
professionalism of municipal managers. Fees for such membership and
participation shall be authorized by the Board and paid for by the
Township.
A. Neither the Board, its members, nor its committees shall dictate or
attempt to dictate the hiring or any person to, or his/her discharge
from, municipal employment by the Manager, or in any manner take
part in the hiring, suspending, or discharging of employees in the
administrative service of the Township except as required by the
§ 1-2.6 HARRIS CODE § 1-2.7
AO:14
§ 1-2.8. Disability, absence, or vacancy.
personnel regulations or by the Second Class Township Code.4 Other
than for the purposes of inquiry, the Board or any of its members
or any of the Board's committees or their members shall deal with
administrative service solely through the Township Manager and
neither the Board nor any of its members, nor any of the Board's
committees or its members, shall give orders, publicly or privately,
to any subordinate of the Manager, except for emergency situations
where the Manager or appropriate officer is unavailable, or in those
instances when such individuals are working for the Board members by
assignment of the Manager.
B. The Township Secretary, Treasurer, Solicitor and Engineer, and other
professional persons on retainer to the Board will not be subject to the
jurisdiction of the Manager in the manner described in Subsection A. It
is expected that these persons will serve the Manager in like manner as
they would serve the Board, provided the instructions are not
conflicting. The Board will have charge or the retaining of services of
such persons and in general will have first preference in directing their
activities on behalf of the Township.
A. If the Manager becomes ill or needs to be absent from the Township,
the Manager shall designate one qualified member of the staff as Acting
Manager to perform the duties of the Manager during the Manager's
absence or disability. The person so designated as Acting Manager shall
not perform these duties for a period longer than two weeks without the
approval of the Board.
B. If the Manager's position becomes vacant, the powers and duties of the
Manager shall either revert to the Board of Supervisors and such of
their members as the Board shall direct or the Board shall designate an
interim manager until such time as a Manager shall be qualified.
4. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 1-2.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-2.8
AO:15

ARTICLE III
Commissions And Boards
A.
General Provisions
[Adopted 3-3-1969 by Ord. No. 31]
§ 1-3.1. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Planning Agencies
Ordinance" of the Township of Harris.
§ 1-3.2. Conformity to Planning Code.
The Board of Supervisors and the Planning Agencies of the Township of
Harris shall act in compliance with the procedures and requirements set
forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of 1968, July 31,
P.L. 805, as amended, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 1-3.3. through § 1-3.10. (Reserved)
§ 1-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-3.3
AO:17

B.
Planning Commission
[Adopted 3-3-1969 by Ord. No. 31]
§ 1-3.11. Membership. [Amended 2-14-1983 by Ord. No. 97]
There is hereby created the Harris Township Planning Commission. It shall
consist of seven members, all of whom must be residents of Harris
Township, and at least five of whom must be "citizen" members, which shall
mean that they are not officers or employees of the Township of Harris.
All appointments shall be made by the Board of Supervisors of Harris
Township, and each appointment shall be for a term of four years, except
that in case of a vacancy occurring during a term on the Commission, the
appointment to fill such vacancy shall be for the unexpired portion of the
term, and except that in the case of initial appointments provided for in
§ 1-3.12 below, the appointment shall be for the term therein specified.
All members whose terms expire shall continue to serve until such time
as a replacement is duly appointed. The membership, compensation,
appointment, removal and conduct of business of the Planning Commission
and its members shall be in accord with Article II of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10201 et seq.
§ 1-3.12. Initial appointments and terms.
In conformity with Article II of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, the initial membership of the renewed and enlarged Planning
Commission for Harris Township and their names and the dates when their
terms expire are as follows: ...5
§ 1-3.13. Bylaws.
The bylaws for the operation of the Planning Commission shall be adopted
only by the majority vote of all members (by four votes or more) and shall
be adopted soon after the effective date of this article. These bylaws shall
provide for officers for the Planning Commission and shall conform to the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Code and this article shall set the quorum for
transacting business at four members.
§ 1-3.14. Records.
The minutes of all public meetings shall be kept in a permanent record
book. All resolutions and motions regarding planning acts and other official
business of the Planning Commission shall be noted in the minute book.
All official planning correspondence received by the Planning Commission
shall be logged in the official Township log. When the Planning Commission
has finished action on an item, official documents for permanent record
shall be forwarded to the appropriate parties or turned over to the Planning
5. Editor's Note: Here followed the names, addresses and terms of the first appointed
members.
§ 1-3.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-3.14
AO:19
Department for filing. Working papers of value may also be given to the
Planning Department for filing.
§ 1-3.15. Public hearings.
The Planning Commission shall, where required by law, ordinance or where
good practice of public planning dictates, hold public hearings after suitable
preparation and public notice.
§ 1-3.16. Planning services.
The Planning Commission may obtain planning services from the Centre
County Planning Commission or the Centre Regional Planning Commission
or the Centre Region planning staff or any of their agencies or the Harris
Township Planning Department and the legal and engineering services
provided by the Township. Such services shall be in accord with the
planning budget and should ordinarily be coordinated through the Planning
Department of Harris Township. When budgeted funds are insufficient for
such services, the Commission or the Planning Department should request
allocation of additional funds in accord with the procedures of appropriating
Township monies. There shall be no separate fund for planning services or
in the hands of the Planning Commission. All appropriations shall be from
the Township general fund and any funds held by the Planning Commission
as of the effective date of this article shall be returned to the general fund.
§ 1-3.17. Budget.
In the fall of each year, the Planning Commission shall consider the budget
for planning activities by Harris Township contemplated for the next
calendar year and shall, with staff assistance of the Planning Department,
prepare a proposed budget request. The budget request shall be submitted
to the Board of Supervisors in conformity to the form and schedule
prescribed by the Manager.
§ 1-3.18. Powers and duties of Planning Commission. [Added
2-14-1983 by Ord. No. 97]
The Planning Commission shall have such powers and duties as are
authorized it by § 209.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
53 P.S. § 10209.1.
§ 1-3.19. through § 1-3.20. (Reserved)
§ 1-3.14 HARRIS CODE § 1-3.19
AO:20
C.
Shade Tree Commission
[Adopted 8-9-2004 by Ord. No. 248]
§ 1-3.21. Intent.
Recognizing that trees promote a positive environment, cooling in the
summer and providing wind breaks in the winter, softening streetscapes
and hiding overhead utilities, serving as a haven for birds and small
animals, the Board of Supervisors wishes to promote the proper selection,
planting, and maintenance of trees on public property and within Township
rights-of-way, and to protect the public and trees on public property from
hazards posed by trees on private property.
§ 1-3.22. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Subarticle IIIC, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
ARBORIST — The registered arborist/horticulturist contracted by this
Township of Harris, who shall be supervised by the Director of
Maintenance.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Harris.
COMMISSION — The Harris Township Shade Tree Commission.
DEPARTMENT — The Maintenance Department of the Township.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Department of Maintenance or his/her
designee.
MANAGER — The Manager of the Township or his/her designee.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Harris.
NEW TREE — Any tree planted by the Township in a public right-of-way,
except a replacement tree.
NOTICE — Written notification sent by first class mail to property owners
immediately affected, or notification posted on the affected tree.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind and includes the plural of each.
PUBLIC AREA — Any public right-of-way, park, easement or other area
under the control of the Township.
PUBLIC TREE — Any tree located in a public right-of-way, park, easement,
or other area under the control of the Township.
REPLACEMENT TREE — A tree planted in a location formerly occupied by
another tree.
TREE DRIP LINE — A line derived by the horizontal line extending along a
radius from the trunk of a tree to the outermost tips of branches.
§ 1-3.21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-3.22
AO:21
TREE PROTECTION ZONE — The three-dimensional area within the drip
line, including from the crown to the root system of each public tree.
WORK DAYS — Monday through Friday, excluding legal holidays when
Township offices are closed.
§ 1-3.23. Shade Tree Commission.
A. Creation and membership. In accordance with § 2902 of the Second
Class Township Code (P.L. 103, No. 69),6 a Shade Tree Commission is
hereby established which shall consist of five members:
(1) Members of the Commission, all of whom shall be residents of the
Township, shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors for
staggered terms of five years. The first member shall be appointed
to serve one year. The second member appointed shall serve two
years, and the third member shall serve three years. The fourth
member shall serve four years and the fifth member shall serve five
years. Thereafter, each member appointed shall serve five years.
(2) The members of the Commission shall serve without pay but may
be reimbursed for actual authorized expenses within the funds
budgeted for such activities by the Board of Supervisors.
(3) Any vacancy on the Commission shall be filled by an appointment
by the Board of Supervisors.
B. Organization, records and meetings. Members of the Commission shall
elect a Chairman, Vice Chairman and such other officers as they may
determine necessary. All officers shall be eligible for reelection.
(1) The Commission shall keep a written record of its meetings in
accordance with law. The Commission shall provide the Board with
minutes and annual or other reports of its activities, as may be
requested or required.
(2) For the purpose of taking action, a quorum of three members must
be present.
C. Responsibilities. The Commission shall have the following
responsibilities:
(1) The Commission shall advise the Director and the arborist on the
planting, maintenance and removal of trees. Such advice may
include:
(a) Recommendations of tree species for public areas.
(b) Recommendations for controlling diseases and pests damaging
trees.
(c) Recommendations for tree maintenance.
6. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 67902.
§ 1-3.22 HARRIS CODE § 1-3.23
AO:22
§ 1-3.24. Authorized activity.
The Department is hereby authorized, but is not limited, to perform the
following activities in regard to trees:
(d) Recommendations for public education and information
programs concerning the importance of and the care of trees.
(e) Recommendations on departmental rules and regulations
regarding tree planting, maintenance and removals.
(2) Street tree plan.
(a) The Commission, through the Department, shall prepare, for
the Board's approval, a plan for street trees in the Township.
The plan should include a list of existing trees (including
species and location). The plan should also include suggested
policies for the planting of trees (including suitable species for
various environments and spacing of trees). The plan may also
identify locations for new plantings, desirable species changes,
etc.
(b) In developing the plan, the Commission should consult with the
Director and arborist and may consult with other Township
authorities, boards and commissions. The plan should
recognize the benefits of a public tree program and the need to
control expenses (both in the short- and long-term) of planting,
maintenance, removals, cleanup and all other costs associated
with a tree program. The Commission shall review the plan
annually and/or at other times, at the request of the Director.
(3) The Commission may, with the approval of the Board, solicit and
accept grants and contributions within the purposes of this
Subarticle IIIC. All funds obtained by the Commission shall be
expended for the specific purpose(s) or under the stipulations set
by the contributor or the Commission with specific approval of the
Board.
(4) The Commission shall conduct all public hearings required. After
hearing testimony, the Commission may make recommendations to
the Director concerning the subject of the hearing.
A. Adopt policies, rules, and regulations. Policies, rules and regulations
may be adopted to control tree trimming, cabling, spraying, root cutting
and other work on trees by contractors, abutting property owners and/
or others.
B. Select and plant new trees in public areas. If a plan has been approved
by the Board in accord with § 1-3.23C, selection and planting of new
trees should generally be in accord with that plan. Prior to the planting
of any new tree in the right-of-way, the property owners will be notified
in advance of the planting of any new or replacement trees, and will be
§ 1-3.23 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-3.24
AO:23
given an opportunity to chose a tree from several selections provided
by the Commission.
C. Request removal of potentially hazardous trees on private property.
Trees on private property which, in the opinion of the arborist or
Director, are sufficiently damaged, infected with diseases, infested with
pests, or in such condition as to contribute a potential hazard to the
public or to other trees on public property, may be requested to be
removed, partially removed, or treated by the property owner. All costs
for such work shall be paid by the property owner.
D. Order removal of immediate hazards on private property. When, in the
opinion of the arborist or the Director, a tree or portion(s) of a tree on
private property is diseased (such as with Dutch elm disease) or
otherwise constitutes an immediate hazard to the public, the property
owner will be ordered to eliminate it. All costs for such work shall be
the responsibility of the property owner.
E. Remove potentially hazardous trees in public areas. Trees in public
areas which, in the opinion of the arborist or the Director, are seriously
damaged, diseased, disfigured, or constitute a hazard to the public or to
trees on private property may be removed by the Director. Prior to tree
removals from public rights-of-way, notice shall be provided to the
property owner(s) immediately adjacent to the tree(s) to be removed.
Notice shall also be provided to the Board, and the Manager may
request an advisory opinion by the Tree Commission.
F. Remove immediate hazards in public areas. When, in the opinion of the
arborist or the Director, a tree or portion(s) of a tree in public areas
constitutes an immediate hazard to persons or property, the arborist or
Director will remove the hazard without notice or appeal.
G. Review of land development plans.
(1) Concept plan. The Zoning Officer or designee shall forward one
copy of any concept (preliminary) plan submitted for review to the
Township to the Tree Commission for a review of the proposed land
development's effect on any public tree(s). Within 10 working days
of the receipt of a concept plan, the Commission shall provide the
Zoning Officer or designee with written comments on the effect of
said land development on any public tree(s).
(2) Final plan. The Zoning Officer or designee shall forward one copy
of any final development plan submitted for review and approval to
the Township to the Tree Commission for a review of the proposed
land development's effect on any public tree(s). Within 10 working
days of the receipt of a development plan, the Commission shall
provide the Zoning Officer or designee with written comments on
the effect of said land development on any public tree(s). If no
response is received from the Commission, the plan shall move
forward without it.
§ 1-3.24 HARRIS CODE § 1-3.25
AO:24
§ 1-3.25. Prohibited activities.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
§ 1-3.26. Violations and penalties.7
Any person violating the provisions of this Subarticle IIIC shall, upon
conviction before a Magisterial District Judge of appropriate jurisdiction, be
liable to pay costs of prosecution and a fine as follows:
A. Cut, break, climb with spikes, disturb the roots of, or otherwise injure
or destroy trees in any public area or to authorize such actions.
B. Trim trees or perform other activities on trees in a public area.
C. Cause or authorize a wire or other conductor charged with electricity to
come into contact with any tree in any public area.
D. Cause or authorize in any public area, any oil, gasoline, herbicide,
paint, brine, hot water, steam or other gas, liquid or solid substances
deleterious to contact any tree or to enter the soil about the base or root
system of a tree in any public area.
E. Interfere, cause or authorize an interference with the Township or any
of its agents or employees while they are engaged in planting,
inspecting, maintaining or removing trees.
F. Supervise or authorize construction, alterations, repairs or demolition
activities in the tree protection zone of any tree in any public area.
G. Place or maintain upon the ground any asphalt, cement, stone or other
material or substances in such manner as may obstruct or further
obstruct free access of air and water to the roots of any tree in any
public area.
H. Fasten any rope, wire, electric attachment, sign, or other devices to any
tree in any public area.
I. Plant, prune, fertilize or apply fungicides, insecticides or other
chemical substances to any tree in any public area.
J. Pile any building material or make any mortar or cement within six feet
of any tree in any public area.
K. Hitch or fasten any animal, bicycle or vehicle to any tree in any public
area.
L. Perform any work within the tree protection zone without first notifying
the arborist or Director of the intent to do so.
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 1-3.25 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-3.26
AO:25
A. The penalty for violating any section of this Subarticle IIIC shall be a
lien upon the real estate of the offender, in accordance with 53 P.S.
§ 67909 and the Second Class Township Code.
§ 1-3.26 HARRIS CODE § 1-3.26
AO:26
ARTICLE IV
[Adopted 12-O8ffi-2c0i0a8l MByapOrd. No. 282]
§ 1-4.1. General provisions.
§ 1-4.2. Establishment of controls.
A. Short title. This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Harris
Township Official Map Ordinance."
B. Authority. This article is enacted and ordained under the grant of
powers by the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of 1968, July 31,
PL. 805, as amended.8
C. Purpose. This article is enacted for the purpose of serving and
promoting the public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare;
to facilitate adequate provisions of public streets and facilities; to
improve traffic circulation; to provide for the recreational and open
space needs of the community; to provide pedestrianways and
easements; to protect and enhance water resources; to provide for flood
control basins, floodways and floodplains, stormwater management
areas and drainage easements; and to facilitate the subdivision of land
and the use of land and watercourses.
A. Official Map provisions.
(1) The Official Map, as enacted by the Ordinance, and subsequently
amended, shall identify the location of the lines of:
(a) Existing and proposed public streets, well sites, watercourses,
and public grounds, including widenings, narrowings,
extensions, diminutions, openings, or closings of same.
(b) Existing and proposed public parks, playgrounds and open
space reservations.
(c) Pedestrianways and easements.
(d) Railroad and transit rights-of-way and easements.
(e) Flood control basins, floodways and floodplains, stormwater
management areas and drainage easements.
(f) Support facilities, easements and other properties held by
public bodies undertaking the elements described in Section
301 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.9
(2) At the time of enactment of this article, all existing surveys
designating the exact location of the lines of existing public street
8. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
9. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10301.
§ 1-4.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-4.2
AO:27
right-of-way, watercourses, and public grounds, including surveys
prepared by government agencies or incorporated as part of final,
recorded, subdivision and land development plans duly approved
by the Board of Supervisors shall, by reference, be deemed an
attachment to the Official Map for the purpose of so designating
the exact location of said existing lines.
(3) For the purpose of initially reserving land on the Official Map,
property records, aerial photography, photogrammetric mapping,
or other methods sufficient for the identification, description and
publication of areas for reservation on the Official Map will be
sufficient. For the acquisition of lands and easements, boundary
descriptions by metes and bounds shall be made and sealed by a
licensed surveyor, registered in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(4) The Harris Township Board of Supervisors, by amending
ordinances, may make additions or modifications to the Official
Map, or parts thereto, and may also vacate any existing or
proposed public street, watercourse, or public ground contained in
the Official Map, or part thereof.
(5) Unless otherwise specified, all proposed public street rights-of-way
and widenings of existing public street rights-of-way shall meet the
width requirements specified in Chapter 11, Subdivision and Land
Development, for the street classification.
B. Incorporation of the Official Map. The Official Map, including all
notations, references, and other data shown thereon, is hereby
incorporated by reference into this article as if it were fully described
herein.10
(1) Certification of the Official Map.
(a) The Official Map shall be identified by the signatures of the
Harris Township Board of Supervisors, attested by the Harris
Township Secretary, under the following words: "This is to
certify that this is the Official Map of Harris Township referred
to in Section _____ of Ordinance Number _____ of Harris
Township, Centre County, Pennsylvania," together with the
date of enactment of this article. The Map shall be kept on file
with the Harris Township Secretary.
(b) Following adoption of this article and Official Map, or any
amendment thereof, a copy of the same, verified by the Board
of Supervisors, shall be submitted to the Recorder of Deeds of
Centre County, and shall be recorded within 60 days of the
effective date of the article or amendment thereof.
(2) Changes in the Official Map.
10.Editor's Note: The Official Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 1-4.2 HARRIS CODE § 1-4.2
AO:28
§ 1-4.3. Effects of controls.
(a) If, in accordance with the provisions of this article, changes are
made to the location of lines designating existing or proposed
public streets, watercourses, or public grounds, such changes
shall be entered promptly on said Map. All changes, except
those resulting from subdivision and land development plans
as specified in § 1-4.4B, shall be certified by initialing of the
Map by the Chairman of the Harris Township Board of
Supervisors together with the amending ordinance number
and date of enactment.
(b) Following any change or amendment to the Official Map, a
copy of the same, verified by the Township Secretary, shall be
submitted to the Recorder of Deeds of Centre County, and shall
be recorded within 60 days of the effective date of this article
or amendment thereof.
(3) Relationship with County Official Map. The adoption of an Official
Map by the County shall not affect the Harris Township Official
Map, except that the County Official Map shall govern as to county
streets and public grounds of the county in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.11
(4) Relationship with adjacent municipalities.
(a) If the Official Map, or amendment thereto, shows any street or
public lands intended to lead into any adjacent municipality, a
copy of said Official Map, or amendment thereto, shall be
forwarded to such adjacent municipality. The comments of the
adjacent municipality shall be made to the Board of
Supervisors of Harris Township within 45 days of such
forwarding, and the proposed action by the Board of
Supervisors shall not be taken until such comments are
received; provided, however, if the adjacent municipality fails
to provide comments within 45 days, the Board of Supervisors
may proceed without the comments of the adjacent
municipality.
(b) Upon adoption of the Official Map, or any amendment thereof,
in which any street or public lands are intended to lead into an
adjacent municipality, a certified copy of the Official Map and
ordinance adopting it shall be forwarded within 30 days after
adoption to the adjacent municipality.
A. Construction within mapped streets or public grounds. For the purpose
of preserving the integrity of the Harris Township Official Map, no
permit shall be issued for any building within the lines of any street,
watercourse, or public ground shown or laid out on the Official Map. No
11.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 1-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-4.3
AO:29
person shall recover any damages for the taking for public use of any
building or improvements constructed within the lines of any street,
any watercourse, or public ground after the same shall have been
included in the Official Map, and any such building or improvement
shall be removed at the expense of the owner. However, when the
property of which the reserved location forms a part cannot yield a
reasonable return to the owner unless a permit shall be granted, the
owner may apply to the Harris Township Board of Supervisors for the
grant of a special encroachment permit to build. Before granting any
special encroachment permit authorized in this section, the Board of
Supervisors may submit the application for a special encroachment
permit to the Harris Township Planning Commission and allow the
Planning Commission 30 days for review and comment and shall give
public notice and hold a public hearing at which all parties in interest
shall have an opportunity to be heard. A refusal by the Board of
Supervisors to grant the special encroachment permit applied for may
be appealed by the applicant to the Zoning Hearing Board in the same
manner, and within the same time limitations, as is provided in Article
IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.12
B. Time limitations.
(1) The Board of Supervisors may fix the time for which streets,
watercourses and public grounds on the Official Map shall be
deemed reserved for future taking or acquisition for public use.
(2) The reservation for public grounds shall lapse and become void one
year after an owner of such property has submitted a written notice
to the Board of Supervisors announcing his intentions to build,
subdivide, or otherwise develop the land covered by the
reservation, or has made formal application for an official permit to
build a structure for private use, unless the Board of Supervisors
shall have acquired the property or begun condemnation
proceedings to acquire such property before the end of the year.
(3) The adoption of any street, street lines, or other public lands
pursuant to this article as part of the Official Map shall not, in and
of itself, constitute or be deemed to constitute the opening or
establishment of any street nor the taking or acceptance of any
land, nor shall it obligate Harris Township to improve or maintain
any such street or land. The adoption of proposed watercourses or
public grounds as part of the Official Map shall not, in and of itself,
constitute or be deemed to constitute a taking or an acceptance of
any land by Harris Township.
C. Release of damage claims or compensation.
12.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10901 et seq.
§ 1-4.3 HARRIS CODE § 1-4.3
AO:30
§ 1-4.4. Adoption and amendment.
(1) The Harris Township Board of Supervisors may designate any of its
employees or agencies to negotiate with the owner of the land
under the following circumstances:
(a) Whereon reservations are made.
(b) Whereon releases of claims for damages or compensation for
such reservations are required.
(c) Whereon agreements indemnifying the Board of Supervisors or
Harris Township from claims by others may be required.
(2) Any such releases or agreements, when properly executed by the
Board of Supervisors and the owner and recorded shall be binding
upon successor in title.
A. Procedure.
(1) Prior to the adoption of the Official Map, or part thereof or any
amendment to the Official Map, the Board of Supervisors shall
refer the proposed Official Map, or part thereof or amendment
thereto, with an accompanying ordinance describing the proposed
map, to the Harris Township Planning Commission for review. The
Harris Township Planning Commission shall report its
recommendations on said proposed Official Map and accompanying
ordinance, part thereof or amendment thereto, within 45 days
unless an extension of time shall be agreed to by the Harris
Township Board of Supervisors. If, however, the Planning
Commission fails to act within the 45 days, the Board of
Supervisors may proceed without its recommendations.
(2) The Centre County Planning Commission and adjacent
municipalities may offer comments and recommendations during
said forty-five-day review period in accordance with Section 408 of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.13 Local authorities,
park boards, environmental boards, and similar public bodies may
also offer comments and recommendations to the Board of
Supervisors or Planning Commission if requested by same during
said forty-five-day review period. Before voting on the enactment of
the proposed ordinance and Official Map, or part thereof or
amendment thereto, the Board of Supervisors shall hold a public
hearing pursuant to public notice.
B. Amendment by subdivision plan. After adoption of the Official Map, or
part thereof, all streets, watercourses, and public grounds and the
elements listed in Section 401 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code14 on final, recorded subdivision and land development
13.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10408.
14.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10401.
§ 1-4.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-4.4
AO:31
§ 1-4.5. Violations and penalties; sanctions; appeals.
plans which have been duly approved by the Board of Supervisors
shall be deemed amendments to the Official Map. Notwithstanding any
of the other terms of this article, no public hearing need be held or
public notice given if the amendment of the Official Map is the result
of the addition of a plan which has been duly approved by the Board of
Supervisors.
A. Notice of violation.
(1) Whenever any person, partnership or corporation shall have
violated the terms of this article, the Zoning Officer shall cause a
written notice to be served upon the owner, applicant, developer,
property manager, or other person responsible for the property or
the violation, directing him to comply with all the terms of this
article within 30 days; and further, the Zoning Officer shall give
notice to the owner, applicant, developer, property manager, or
other person responsible for the property or the violation that if the
violation is not corrected, the Township may correct the same and
charge the landowner or other persons responsible and the cost
thereof plus penalties, as specified herein, for failure to comply.
(2) Such notice shall be delivered by the United States Postal Service,
first class, postage prepaid, or by certified or registered mail; or by
personal service; or if the property is occupied, by posting notice at
a conspicuous place upon the affected property.
B. Sanctions for failure to comply.
(1) The failure of any person, partnership or corporation to comply
with the term of this article within the period stated in the notice by
the Zoning Officer constitutes a violation with possible sanctions
which may be as much as $500 per day of each violation, plus court
costs, including reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the
Township as a result of prosecution of such violation. Each and
every day of continued violation shall constitute a separate
violation.
(2) In the event that the owner, developer, occupant, applicant,
property manager or other person responsible fails to comply with
the terms of this article within the time specified by the Zoning
Officer, the Township may take any actions necessary to correct the
violation. The costs for correction of the violation shall be in
addition to any penalties for the violation for failure to comply.
(3) In addition to the sanctions, costs, and penalties provided for by
this section, the Township may institute proceedings in courts of
equity to prevent, restrain, or correct or abate such building,
structure, or land, or to prevent, in or about such premises, any act,
conduct, business or use constituting a violation.
§ 1-4.4 HARRIS CODE § 1-4.5
AO:32
§ 1-4.6. Word usage; definitions.
C. Appeals. Any appeal from a decision or action of the Board of
Supervisors or of any office or agency of Harris Township in matters
pertaining to this article shall be made in the same manner and within
the same time limitations as is provided for zoning appeals in Article X
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.15
A. Language interpretations. For the purposes of this article, certain
terms and words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine
gender, and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
(2) The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of the kind and character.
(3) The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, or any
similar entity.
(4) The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory words and "may" and
"should" are permissive.
(5) The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended,
designed, maintained, or arranged to be used or occupied."
B. Definitions. Unless a contrary intention clearly appears, the following
words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this section. All
words and terms not defined herein shall be used with a meaning of
standard usage.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The Board of Supervisors of the Township
of Harris, County of Centre, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
BUILDING — A structure, including any part thereof, having a roof and
used for the shelter or enclosure of persons or property.
COUNTY — The County of Centre, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Supervisors of Harris Township,
Centre County, Pennsylvania.
MUNICIPAL; MUNICIPALITY — Harris Township, Centre County,
Pennsylvania.
PUBLIC — Owned, operated, or controlled by a government agency.
15.Editor's Note: See now Article X-A, 53 P.S. § 11001-A et seq.
§ 1-4.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-4.6
AO:33
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other public
areas including sites for schools, sewage treatment, and other publicly
owned and operated facilities, including scenic and historic sites.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two
consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in Harris
Township. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and
the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The
first publication shall not be more than 30 days or less than seven days
from the date of the hearing.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The total width of any land reserved or dedicated for
the purposes of a street, crosswalk, or for other public purposes.
STREET — A street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, alley, viaduct and any other ways used or intended to be
used by vehicular or pedestrian traffic whether public or private.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Harris, County of Centre,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
WATERCOURSES — A stream of surface water, including river, stream,
creek, or run, whether or not intermittent.
ZONING HEARING BOARD — The Harris Township Zoning Hearing
Board.
ZONING OFFICER — An individual appointed by the Board of
Supervisors to administer and enforce the provisions of the Official Map
and Chapter 12, Zoning.
§ 1-4.6 HARRIS CODE § 1-4.6
AO:34
Chapter 2
TAXATION
§ 1-4.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-4.6
AO:35

ARTICLE I
Earned Income and Net Profits Tax16
[Adopted 1-3-1978 by Ord. No. 78; amended in its entirety
11-14-2011 by Ord. No. 300]
§ 2-1.1. Definitions.
All terms defined in the Local Tax Enabling Act17 shall have the meanings
set forth therein. The following terms shall have the meanings set forth
herein:
COLLECTOR — Person, entity, or authorized representative of the tax
officer, appointed as tax officer pursuant to the Local Tax Enabling Act to
collect the tax.
DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his permanent home and
to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent. Actual
residence is not necessarily domicile, for domicile is the fixed place of
abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than
transitory. Domicile is the voluntarily fixed place of habitation of a person,
not for a mere special or limited purpose, but with the present intention of
making a permanent home, until some event occurs to induce him to adopt
some other permanent home. In the case of businesses, or associations, the
domicile is that place considered as the center of business affairs and the
place where its functions are discharged.
EFFECTIVE DATE — January 1, 2012.
ENACTMENT — This article.
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Supervisors of Harris Township.
LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT — The Local Tax Enabling Act, as set forth
in 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. while such numbering and provisions remain in
effect under Act 32 of 2008, and as set forth in 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
when such numbering and provisions become effective under Act 32, and as
amended in the future.
NONRESIDENT — A person or business domiciled outside the political
subdivision levying the tax.
RESIDENT — A person domiciled in the political subdivision levying the tax.
TCC — The Tax Collection Committee established to govern and oversee
the collection of earned income tax within the TCD under the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
TCD — Any tax collection district to which the Taxing Authority or any part
of the Taxing Authority is assigned under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
TAX — The tax imposed by this article.
16.Editor's Note: See § 13 of the Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6924.113.
17.Editor's Note: See See now 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 2-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-1.1
AO:37
TAX RETURN — A form prescribed by the Collector for reporting the
amount of tax or other amount owed or required to be withheld, remitted,
or reported under this article or the Local Tax Enabling Act.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31.
TAXING AUTHORITY — Harris Township.
§ 2-1.2. Imposition of tax.
A. General purpose resident tax. The Taxing Authority hereby imposes a
tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 0.5% on earned income
and net profits of individual residents of the Taxing Authority.
B. General purpose municipal nonresident tax. The Taxing Authority also
imposes a tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1.0% on
earned income and net profits derived by an individual who is not a
resident of the Taxing Authority from any work, business, profession, or
activity, of any kind engaged in within the boundaries of the Taxing
Authority.
C. Ongoing tax. The tax shall continue at the above rates during the
current tax year and each tax year thereafter, without annual
reenactment, until this article is repealed or the rate is changed.
D. Combined tax rate applicable to residents. Currently, the total rate
applicable to residents of the Taxing Authority, including the tax
imposed by the school district and municipality in which the individual
resides, is 1.45%.
E. Municipal tax rate applicable to nonresidents. Currently, the total rate
applicable to nonresidents working within the Taxing Authority based
on the municipal nonresident tax rate is 1.0%.
F. Local Tax Enabling Act18 applicable. The tax is imposed under authority
of the Local Tax Enabling Act, and all provisions thereof that relate to a
tax on earned income or net profits are incorporated into this article.
Any future amendments to the Local Tax Enabling Act that are required
to be applied to a tax on earned income or net profits will automatically
become part of this article upon the effective date of such amendment,
without the need for formal amendment of this article, to the maximum
extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
G. Applicable laws, regulations, policies, and procedures. The tax shall be
collected and administered in accordance with: all applicable laws and
regulations; and regulations, policies and procedures adopted by the
TCC or by the Collector. This includes any regulations, policies, and
procedures adopted in the future to the maximum extent allowed by 1
Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
18.Editor's Note: See See now 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 2-1.1 HARRIS CODE § 2-1.3
AO:38
§ 2-1.3. No exemption from tax.
Although credits and deductions against tax are permitted under certain
circumstances as provided in applicable law and regulations, no individuals
are exempt from tax based on age, income, or other factors.
§ 2-1.4. Individual tax returns and payments.
Every individual receiving earned income or earning net profits in any tax
year shall file tax returns and pay tax in accordance with the Local Tax
Enabling Act.19 Individuals who are no longer employed or whose tax is
withheld in full must file an informational tax return notifying the tax office
that there is no payment due for the specific tax year.
§ 2-1.5. Employer withholding, remittance, and tax returns.
Every employer shall register, withhold, and remit tax, and file tax returns
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.20
§ 2-1.6. Tax Collector.
The tax will be collected from individuals and employers by the Collector.
§ 2-1.7. Interest, penalties, costs, and fines.
Individuals and employers are subject to interest, penalties, costs, and fines
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act, including costs imposed by
the Collector in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 2-1.8. Purpose; amendment; restatement; repeal.
The primary purpose of this article is conform the earned income and net
profits tax currently imposed to the Local Tax Enabling Act, as amended and
restated by Act 32 of 2008, and to do so within the time frame required by
Act 32. Any prior enactment imposing a tax on earned income or net profits
of individuals is amended and restated in its entirety to read as stated in this
article. Any other prior enactment or part of any prior enactment conflicting
with the provisions of this article is rescinded insofar as the conflict exists.
To the extent the same as any enactment in force immediately prior to
adoption of this article, the provisions of this article are intended as a
continuation of such prior enactment and not as a new enactment. If this
article is declared invalid, any prior enactment levying a similar tax shall
remain in full force and effect and shall not be affected by adoption of this
article. If any part of this article is declared invalid, the similar part of any
prior enactment levying a similar tax shall remain in effect and shall not be
affected by adoption of this article. The provisions of this article shall not
affect any act done or liability incurred, nor shall such provisions affect any
suit or prosecution pending or to be initiated to enforce any right or penalty
19.Editor's Note: See See now 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
20.Editor's Note: See See now 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 2-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-1.8
AO:39
or to punish offense under the authority of any enactment in force prior to
adoption of this article. Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section,
this article shall amend and restate on the effective date any enactment
levying a tax on earned income or net profits in force immediately prior to
the effective date.
§ 2-1.8 HARRIS CODE § 2-1.8
AO:40
ARTICLE II
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting
Ordinance)]
§ 2-2.1. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance" of the
Township of Harris.
§ 2-2.2. Authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within the
Township, regardless of where the documents making the transfer are
made, executed or delivered, or where the actual settlements on such
transfer took place, as authorized by Article XI-D, "Local Real Estate
Transfer Tax," 72 P.S. § 8101 et seq.
§ 2-2.3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
Commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title of
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include
a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 2-2.2.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
Recreational activities such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
A.
§ 2-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.3
AO:41
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing, and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half-blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole-blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association, or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both. The term "person" as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof, and as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities.
B.
C. Fur farming.
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within this Township, including
without limitation, buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil,
gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower boundaries, trees
and other improvements, immovables or interests which by custom,
usage or law pass with a conveyance of land, but excluding permanently
attached machinery and equipment in an industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate.
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
A.
§ 2-2.3 HARRIS CODE § 2-2.3
AO:42
TOWNSHIP — The Township.
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
years, including without limitation an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consist of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or
possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of
30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against real estate:
Provided, That where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the "value" thereof shall be determined from the price
set forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale.
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties, or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations.
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the value
of which is not determinable under subsection 2-2.3.12.1 or 2-2.3.12.2,
the actual monetary worth of such interest.
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
D.
§ 2-2.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.4
AO:43
§ 2-2.4. Imposition of tax; interest.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording, shall be
subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof, a
tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by such
document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the Recorder of Deeds
whereon the date of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the
signature of the collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, 53 P.S.§ 6901 et seq., so that if any other political subdivision
shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same person or
transfer then the tax levied by the Township Board of Supervisors under
the authority of that Act shall during the time such duplication of the
tax exists, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate
and such 1/2 shall become effective without any action on the part of
the Township Board of Supervisors provided, however, that the
Township and any other political subdivision which impose such tax on
the same person or transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their
respective rates to 1/2 of the rate herein provided, they will impose
respectively different rates, the total of which shall not exceed the
maximum rate permitted under the "Local Tax Enabling Act."
D. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due, shall be added and collected.
E. The tax imposed under subsection 2-2.4.1 above and all applicable
interest and penalties shall be administered, collected and enforced
under the Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, No. 511, as amended,
known as the "Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq."; provided,
that if the correct amount of the tax is not paid by the last date
prescribed for timely payment, Township, pursuant to § 1102-D of the
Tax Reform Code of 1971, 72 P.S. § 8102-D, authorizes and directs the
Department of Revenue of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to
determine, collect and enforce the tax, interest and penalties.
F. Any tax imposed under subsection 2-2.4.1 that is not paid by the date
tax is due shall bear interest as prescribed for interest on delinquent
municipal claims under the Act of May 16, 1923, P.L. 207, No. 153, 53
P.S. § 7101 et seq., as amended, known as the "Municipal Claims and
Tax Liens Act." The interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate
imposed upon delinquent Commonwealth taxes as provided in § 806 of
§ 2-2.4 HARRIS CODE § 2-2.4
AO:44
§ 2-2.5. Exempt parties.
The United States, the Commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 2-2.6. Excluded transactions.
the Act of April 9, 1929, P.L. 343, No. 176, 72 P.S. § 806, as amended,
known as the "Fiscal Code," or the maximum interest rate permitted
under the Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.,
for tax claims.
A. The tax imposed by § 2-2.4 shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the Commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed or confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation which reconveyance may include property line
adjustments provided said reconveyance is made within one year
from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the Township is prohibited from taxing under
the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, Township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, Township, school
district or county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax
claim bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer or division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided the property or interest therein subject to such transfer
was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to
the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent and
child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister, and between a grandparent and
grandchild or the spouse of such grandchild, except that a
§ 2-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.6
AO:45
subsequent transfer by the grantee within one year shall be subject
to tax as if the grantor were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party; or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would
be imposed under this article. Where the document by which title is
acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that
the property was acquired by the grantee from, or for the benefit
of, his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the
property is the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if
the grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this
subsection.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
§ 2-2.6 HARRIS CODE § 2-2.6
AO:46
§ 2-2.7. Documents relating to associations or corporations and
members, partners, stockholders or shareholders thereof.
Except as otherwise provided in § 2-2.6, documents which make, confirm or
evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between associations
or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or stockholders
thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this section, corporations
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if: (i) the
grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary purpose
of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing,
publishing, research and development, transportation, energy
conversion, energy production, pollution control, warehousing or
agriculture; and (ii) the agency or authority has the full ownership
interest in the real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt status
pursuant to § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, (68
Pa. Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)) and which has as its primary
purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic,
agricultural or open space opportunities.
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
(21) A transaction wherein the tax is $1 or less.
(22) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural
gas or minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation
of the reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 2-2.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.7
AO:47
and associations are entities separate from their members, partners,
stockholders and shareholders.
§ 2-2.8. Acquired company.
§ 2-2.9. Credits against tax.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company; and of itself or together
with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Declaration of Acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as a consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
§ 2-2.7 HARRIS CODE § 2-2.9
AO:48
§ 2-2.10. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 2-2.11. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid, and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made except the state realty transfer tax, and the sheriff, or other
officer, conducting said sale, shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the
first moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale
are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
§ 2-2.12. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
amount of the tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011(6), as amended by Act of July 7, 1983,
(P.L. 40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for
the local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to Township
based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax,
without compensation from the Township.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of the taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th of each month, the recorder shall pay over to the
Township all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for use of the
county, together with a report containing the information as is required
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting collections of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The 2% commission shall be paid to
the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the recorder shall rerecord the deed or
record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the state
§ 2-2.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.12
AO:49
§ 2-2.13. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording, shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 2-2.14. Civil penalties.
§ 2-2.15. Lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying, being situated,
wholly or in part within the boundaries of the Township, which lands,
tenements, hereditaments or interest therein, are described in or conveyed
by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax imposed,
assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time when the
tax under this article is due and payable, and continue until discharged by
payment, or in accordance with the law, and the solicitor is authorized to file
a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of Delaware County,
in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and Liens Act of
1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and amendments.
and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee has been
tendered.
A. If any part of any underpayment of taxes imposed by this article is due
to fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 2-2.12 HARRIS CODE § 2-2.16
AO:50
§ 2-2.16. Enforcement.
All taxes imposed by this article together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 2-2.17. Regulations.
The Recorder of Deeds of Centre County is charged with enforcement and
collection of tax and is empowered to promulgate and enforce reasonable
regulations for enforcement and collection of the tax. The regulations which
have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue under
72 P.S. § 8101(C) et seq. are incorporated into and made a part of this
article.
§ 2-2.16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.17
AO:51

ARTICLE III
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 2-25-1976 by Ord. No. 67; amended in its entirety
11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 28021]
§ 2-3.1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency designated
by the political subdivision to collect and administer the tax herein imposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation as this term is defined in Section 13
[relating to earned income taxes] of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of
Dec. 31, 1956, P.L. 1257, 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6924.113, as amended.22
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited liability
corporation, limited liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade, or profession within the corporate limits of the political subdivision.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession or other activity, as this term is defined in Section 13 [relating
to earned income taxes] of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of Dec. 31,
1956, P.L. 1251, 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6924.113, as amended.23
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, earned on or
performed within the corporate limits of the political subdivision for which
compensation is charged or received; whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — The area within the corporate limits of the
Township of Harris.
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 2-3.2 of this article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
21.Editor's Note: This ordinance further provided: "The tax imposed by this ordinance shall
be effective on January 1, 2009, and all calendar years thereafter unless repealed or
modified by ordinance of the Township of Harris."
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 2-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-3.2
AO:53
§ 2-3.2. Levy of tax.
§ 2-3.3. Exemption and refunds.
A. For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and
assessed, commencing January 1, 2009, upon the privilege of engaging
in an occupation with the primary place of employment within the
Township of Harris during the tax year. Each natural person who
exercises such privilege for any length of time during any tax year shall
pay the tax for that year in the amount of $52, assessed on a pro rata
basis, in accordance with the provisions of this article. This tax may be
used solely for the following purposes as the same may be allocated by
the Township of Harris from time to time:
(1) Emergency services, which shall include emergency medical
services, police services and/or fire services;
(2) Road construction and/or maintenance;
(3) Reduction of property taxes; or
(4) Property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and
farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S. Ch. 85, Subch. F
(relating to homestead property exclusion).
B. The political subdivision shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived
from the tax for emergency services. This tax is in addition to all other
taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the political
subdivision. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each
calendar year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions
within which a person may be employed.
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for any
calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of
the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are
exempt from payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United Sates was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total one-hundred-percent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
§ 2-3.2 HARRIS CODE § 2-3.3
AO:54
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the political
subdivision and with the person's employer affirming that the
person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision of less than
$12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption certificate is
filed. In the event the political subdivision utilizes a tax collection
officer, it shall provide a copy of the exemption certificate to that
officer. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy of
all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment
within the political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year
for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the tax.
Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise
instructed by the political subdivision or except as required by
Subsection B(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax from the
person during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar
year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall
ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to
employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a
form at the time of hiring. The exemption certificate form shall be
the uniform form provided by the political subdivision.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the political subdivision that the person has received
earned income and net profits from all sources within the political
subdivision equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or
that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that
calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within the municipality in an amount equal to or in
excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold
the local services tax from that person under Subsection B(3).
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per-payroll
amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld
per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that
calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this subsection is subsequently
§ 2-3.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-3.3
AO:55
§ 2-3.4. Duty of employers to collect.
severed in that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any
outstanding balance of tax due, and the political subdivision may
pursue collection under this article.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or
exempting any employee from the local services tax.
C. Refunds. The Township of Harris, in consultation with the Collector and
DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of refund claims
for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption, which
procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the general municipal
law relating to refunds of overpayments and interest on overpayments.
Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or 75 days after the
last day the employer is required to remit the tax for the last quarter of
the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject to interest. No
refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a calendar year that do
not exceed $1. The Township of Harris or the Collector shall determine
eligibility for exemption and provide refunds to exempt persons.
A. Each employer within the political subdivision, as well as those
employers situated outside the political subdivision but who engage in
business within the political subdivision, is hereby charged with the
duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or
performing for him within the political subdivision and making a return
and payment thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer is hereby
authorized to deduct this tax for each employee in his or her employ,
whether said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and
whether or not all such services are performed within the political
subdivision.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax
levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of tax collected each payroll period to the nearest 0.01 of a
dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payroll-period basis for
each payroll period in which the person is engaging in an occupation,
except as provided in Subsection D of this section; for purposes of this
subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate annual rate of
the tax levied by the school district and the municipality.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
§ 2-3.3 HARRIS CODE § 2-3.4
AO:56
§ 2-3.5. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her
to an employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer
shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
§ 2-3.6. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the Collector on or before the 30th day following the end
of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 2-3.7. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engages in any occupation of profession within a primary place of
employment within the political subdivision shall be required to comply with
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed. The political subdivision shall provide a
taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the political subdivision if the
failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by
the employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of § 2-3.3B of this
article and this section and remits the amount so withheld in
accordance with this article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
§ 2-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-3.7
AO:57
this article and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the Collector on or
before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.
§ 2-3.8. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
§ 2-3.9. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the political subdivision but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
political subdivision do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
the political subdivision. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the political subdivision and an employee of a nonresidential
employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed
person, and in the event his or her tax is not paid, the political subdivision
shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee
for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 2-3.10. Administration of tax.
A. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person
working in more than one political subdivision during a payroll period,
the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in the
following order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or
her principal office is or is principally employed;
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar
year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes
prima facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
A. The Collector shall be appointed by resolution of the political
subdivision. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive
payments of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount
received by him from each employer or self-employed person, together
with the date the tax was received.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
§ 2-3.7 HARRIS CODE § 2-3.10
AO:58
§ 2-3.11. Suits for collection.
§ 2-3.12. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his or her custody and control setting forth the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his or her employment, or whoever fails or
refuses to file any return required by this article shall be guilty of a violation
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to
enforce the penalty herein prescribed may be instituted against any person
in charge of the business of any employer who shall have failed or who
refuses to file a return required by this article.
§ 2-3.13. Interpretation.
subject to municipal approval, to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the
examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this article,
the examination and correction of any return made in compliance with
this article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to
which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall have the right to appeal
consistent with the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights under Act 50 of
199824 (municipalities may detail their appeal process).
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with
interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of such
tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery of
this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
24.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8421 et seq.
§ 2-3.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-3.13
AO:59
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
political subdivision to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the political subdivision
under the Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 2-3.13 HARRIS CODE § 2-3.13
AO:60
Chapter 3
LICENSES AND PERMITS
§ 2-3.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-3.13
AO:61

ARTICLE I
Solicitors and Peddlers
[Adopted 9-12-1979 by Ord. No. 84]
§ 3-1.1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Peddlers, Solicitors and Transient Retail
Merchant's Ordinance."
§ 3-1.2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide protection of the citizens and
residents of the Township from unreliable "fly-by-night" operators, and from
individuals or organizations who temporarily come into the Township or
who live in the Township or have a permanent business address in the
Township, but set up temporary places of doing business, or who solicit
sales or contributions. The intent of this article is to require registration
of all such peddlers, solicitors and transient retail merchants so that if
any fraud or improper practice occurs, the identity of the person will
be available; and further to establish certain regulations governing the
conduct of solicitors, peddlers, and transient retail merchants while
engaged in activities in the Township.
§ 3-1.3. Definitions.25
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDDLER — Any person who shall engage in peddling as herein
defined.
PEDDLING — The selling or offering for sale of any goods, wares,
services or merchandise for immediate delivery, which the person
selling or offering for sale carries with him in traveling, or has in his
possession or control, upon any of the streets or sidewalks, from house
to house, by visitation to private residences, or by entering in or upon
private property within the Township.
SOLICITING — The seeking or taking of contracts or orders for any
goods, wares, services or merchandise for present or future delivery or
for subscriptions or contributions, upon any of the streets or sidewalks
or from house to house. "Soliciting" shall also include requesting,
asking for or collecting contributions or donations upon any of the
streets or sidewalks or while on private property from persons on any
streets or sidewalks, or by going from house to house.
SOLICITOR — Any person who shall engage in soliciting as herein
defined.
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS — Any business engaged in selling
goods, wares, merchandise or services of any nature directly to
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 3-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-1.3
AO:63
consumers of the goods, wares, merchandise or services, and which is
not conducted at a permanent address for the conduct of the business
within the Township; and which is only temporarily offering its goods,
wares, merchandise or services to consumers at the temporary location
or locations.
TRANSIENT RETAIL MERCHANT — Any person, firm, corporation or
organization, whether residing or having a permanent address in the
Township or not, and whether principal or agent, entering into,
beginning, repeating or continuing a transient retail business for the
sale of any goods, wares, merchandise, or services of any nature
whatsoever, and who temporarily hires, leases, occupies or uses any
room, apartment, store, shop, building, railway car, or other place,
structure or vehicle for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares, or
merchandise or who engages in soliciting as defined above.
B. The words "peddler," "peddling," "solicitor," "soliciting," or "transient
retail merchant" shall not mean nor apply to:
(1) Farmers or gardeners selling or taking orders for their own
produce or products.
(2) The sale of goods, wares and merchandise donated by the owners
thereof, the proceeds which are to be derived therefrom to be
applied to any charitable or philanthropic purpose.
(3) Any manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread or bakery
products, meat or meat products or milk and milk products, not
including ice cream or other frozen desserts.
(4) Organizations which solicit only within the membership of the
organization by the members thereof. The term "membership" shall
not include those persons who are granted membership upon
making a contribution as the result of solicitations.
(5) A local post, camp, chapter, or similarly designated element or a
county unit of such elements of a bona fide veterans organization,
volunteer fire company, ambulance association or rescue squad
association, provided all its fund-raising activities are carried on by
members of such local post, chapter, or element.
(6) Any person, firm, partnership or corporation or the agent or
employee of any such person or entity who is a duly licensed real
estate, insurance or security broker or salesman authorized to
engage in such activities by the laws, statutes, rules and
regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(7) Any person or entity taking orders from or selling merchandise to
dealers or merchants for resale to consumers in the ordinary
course of business.
(8) Any person or entity taking orders from or selling to commercial
farmers or other persons or entities engaged in commercial
§ 3-1.3 HARRIS CODE § 3-1.3
AO:64
§ 3-1.4. License required.
No person, firm or organization shall engage in soliciting or peddling in the
Township of Harris without first having made application for and taken out
a license as herein provided.
§ 3-1.5. License application.
Any person desiring to engage in soliciting, peddling or in transient retail
business in the Township shall first make application to the Township
Manager for a license, which shall be furnished upon forms provided by the
Township and shall include the following information, verified by oath or
affirmation issued:
farming or industry for products, supplies or equipment to be used
in such business or industry.
(9) Persons, firms, corporations or organizations who sell goods, wares
or merchandise as part of a fair, carnival, exhibition or show when
such fair, carnival, exhibition or show is conducted at a fixed
location in the Township by or organized by any bona fide civic,
charitable, philanthropic or educational group, corporation or
organization; provided, however, that such sellers have been
requested to be a part of such activity and have been approved by
such organizer.
A. Full name of the applicant.
B. Local address.
C. Permanent address and residence.
D. Date of birth and place of birth.
E. Social Security number.
F. Vehicle operators' registration number and state in which issued.
G. The nature of activities he intends to engage in.
H. The specific identification of goods, wares or merchandise in which he
deals.
I. The nature of the applicant's employment, including the name, address
and residence of the applicant's employer, if he is not self-employed.
J. A statement setting forth whether or not the applicant has applied for a
permit as a solicitor, peddler, or transient retail merchant during the
previous year in the following municipalities of Centre County:
Ferguson, Half Moon, Patton or College Townships or State College
Borough. If such a permit has been applied for, applicant shall further
state in which municipality it was last applied for, and the date of the
said application.
§ 3-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-1.5
AO:65
§ 3-1.6. License nontransferable.
No license issued under this article shall be transferable from one person to
another.
§ 3-1.7. License fee.26
Licenses shall be issued under this article upon payment to the Township
of a fee in an amount as established from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors.
K. The type and identity or vehicle to be used by the applicant, if any, and
license number and vehicle registration number.
L. A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any
crime, and if the answer is in the affirmative, the nature of the offense
or offenses and the punishment imposed thereon.
M. Applicant shall exhibit at least three official proofs of identity, such as
driver's license, Liquor Control Board card, student identification card,
etc. At least one of the proofs of identification must contain a recent
photograph; provided that, if applicant has no proof of identification
with a photograph thereon, applicant shall submit to photographing
and fingerprinting by the Township Manager or police.
N. Applicant, in addition to any other requirement, and whether or not
applicant has produced identification documents with a photograph
thereon, shall, if requested by the Township Manager, submit to
photographing and fingerprinting prior to the issuance of a permit.
O. If the applicant is personally known to the Township Manager, or is
vouched for as to identity by a person whose word the Township
Manager accepts, any requirements concerning the production of
identity documents may be waived by the Township Manager, provided
that the Township Manager notes on the application the basis for the
knowledge of the applicant's identity.
P. In the event that the applicant is a transient retail merchant, the
application shall also set forth the location or intended location of such
transient retail merchant's place or places of business within the
Township.
Q. In the event the applicant is to hire, engage or be aided and assisted by
any other persons, whether as employees or helpers, all applicable
personal information specified in Subsections A through O of this
section shall be given for each helper or employee and verified or
affirmed by such employee or helper. Individual licenses shall be
required for each employee or helper.
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 3-1.5 HARRIS CODE § 3-1.8
AO:66
§ 3-1.8. Exemption from license fee.
No license fee shall be charged to solicitors who represent organizations
which are charitable, religious or educational. The Township Manager may
require proof of exemption from taxation by the United States Treasury
Department of such organizations for charitable, religious or educational
purposes.
§ 3-1.9. Issuance of license.
The Township Manager is hereby authorized to receive applications and to
issue licenses pursuant to the provisions of this article; provided, however,
that when any transient retail merchant is required to be licensed by
the County of Centre, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the United
States of America for the purpose of engaging in activities set forth in
any application, if any permit be required to engage in such activities or
to transport such goods, wares or merchandise, or if any goods, wares or
merchandise require inspection approval prior to sale by any governmental
body or agency, no license shall be issued until such other license, permit or
proof of inspection approval shall first be furnished by the applicant.
§ 3-1.10. License term.
Licenses granted pursuant to this article shall be valid for six calendar
months after the date of such license. The license may be renewed only
upon the filing of a new license application and the payment of a new fee.
§ 3-1.11. Licenses to be carried and exhibited.
Every solicitor, peddler and transient retail merchant shall, at all times
when engaged in such activities in the Township, carry such a license upon
his person and exhibit it upon request to all citizens with whom the licensee
deals, all policy officers and all Township officials.
§ 3-1.12. Limitations of activities.
No solicitor, peddler or transient retail merchant shall engage in the selling,
peddling or solicitation for sale of any product or service not set forth
in the application and included on such license. In addition, the following
regulations shall apply to all persons:
A. There shall be no crying or hawking of goods, wares or services within
the Township.
B. No person shall park any vehicle upon the streets and ways of the
Township for the purpose of sorting, rearranging or cleaning any goods,
wares or merchandise, nor shall such person park upon such streets or
ways for the purpose of keeping or maintaining a street or curbstone
marketplace.
C. There shall be no soliciting or peddling as herein defined after 8:00 p.m.
and before 9:00 a.m. prevailing time, nor at any time on Sunday.
§ 3-1.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-1.13
AO:67
§ 3-1.13. Suspension and revocation of license.
The Township Manager may, upon proof furnished to him: that the licensee
supplied false information on license application; was convicted of a crime
involving moral turpitude after issuance of license; that the licensee was
convicted of disorderly conduct while engaged in licensed activities after
license has been issued; or that the licensee failed to comply with this
article in any manner, may suspend or revoke any license issued hereunder.
§ 3-1.14. Violations and penalties.27
Any person who shall falsify, intentionally omit or otherwise furnish
information intended to mislead the Township in making application for
any license required herein, or who shall violate any other provision of
this article, shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding in any court
of record or not of record having jurisdiction in such proceedings brought
before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner provided for the
enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus
costs and, in default of payment of said fines and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this article
continues or each section of this article which shall be found to have been
violated shall constitute a separate offense.
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 3-1.13 HARRIS CODE § 3-1.14
AO:68
ARTICLE II
Special Events
[Adopted 7-14-2003 by Ord. No. 236]
§ 3-2.1. Title.
This article shall be known as the Harris Township "Special Events
Ordinance."
§ 3-2.2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to provide for the health, safety, and welfare
of residents and visitors to Harris Township by regulating special events
which require special services provided by the Township, such as police,
traffic control, special parking requirements, ambulance, fire or emergency
services, or other special services, to provide for the health, safety, welfare,
and morals of persons attending such special events, the residents of the
Township, neighbors, and any others who may be affected by special events.
§ 3-2.3. Findings.
The Board of Supervisors of Harris Township finds and declares as follows:
A. There are many appropriate locations and occasions for the holding of
special events in Harris Township which draw large numbers of people
to attend.
B. Such special events often require the provision of services such as
traffic control, police protection, special parking regulations,
ambulance, fire safety, closing of streets to public traffic, and other
municipal, quasi-municipal, or other emergency or special services to
protect the health, safety, welfare, and morals of persons attending
such special events, the residents of the Township, neighbors, and any
others who may be affected by the special events.
C. It is necessary that the Township be made aware in advance of such
special events so that such special services can be provided and so that
the appropriate municipal, police, fire, ambulance and other services
are aware of such special events so as to provide services if needed.
D. That the provision of required or necessary services for such special
events entails costs which should be borne by the sponsors of such
special events.
E. That it is deemed expedient and necessary for the proper management,
care, and control of the Township and its finances and maintenance of
peace, good government and the welfare of the Township and its
residents to require all sponsors of special events to register such
special events, making arrangements in advance for all necessary
special services, and providing for the payment of all costs or expenses
incurred in the provision of such special services.
§ 3-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-2.4
AO:69
§ 3-2.4. Authorization.28
This article is authorized by the following sections of the Second Class
Township Code:
§ 3-2.5. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall apply:
BUSINESS — Any activity carried on or exercised for gain or profit in the
Township of Harris including, but not limited to, the sale of merchandise or
other tangible property, the performance of or offering of services, and the
rental or offering of a business facility for a public or private function.
HOST — The owner or owners of any property, or persons responsible for
the real estate upon which the special event is held or planned to be held.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, corporation, association, joint
venture, organized group, organization, or entity.
SPECIAL EVENT —
A. Section 1529, concerning nuisances, 53 P.S. § 66529.
B. Section 2201 et seq., concerning parks and recreation places, 53 P.S.
§ 67201 et seq.
C. Section 2328, concerning parking, 53 P.S. § 67328.
D. Section 1601, concerning ordinances, 53 P.S. § 66601.
E. Section 1527, concerning public safety, 53 P.S. § 66527.
F. Section 1501, concerning corporate powers, 53 P.S. § 66501.
Any of the following constitutes a special event:
Any planned or organized outdoor activity at a business
establishment, regardless of the number of participants or
attendees, that involves outdoor amplified sound.
(1)
Any activity or function which will likely draw a group of 500 or
more known or expected participants or attendees to a defined
geographic area.
(2)
(3) Any activity in which special services are required.
A.
The term "special event" shall include, but shall not be limited to,
assemblies, carnivals, open air concerts, contests, festivals, fireworks
displays, military pageants, parades, sporting events, and other similar
events held in open spaces in the Township.
B.
The term "special event" shall not apply to usual and customary outdoor
recreational activities in which no outdoor amplified sound is used and
C.
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 3-2.4 HARRIS CODE § 3-2.5
AO:70
SPECIAL SERVICES — Shall include any or all of the following:
SPONSOR — The person responsible for organizing, promoting, conducting,
or causing to be conducted a special event.
§ 3-2.6. Registration required.
which are conducted as part of the routine operation of the facility
hosting the event or activity.
A. Traffic control.
B. Crowd control.
C. Special parking or no parking signs or provisions.
D. Closure of streets for parades or other activities on public rights-of-way.
E. Police services.
F. Ambulance services.
G. Fire protection.
H. Sanitary facilities.
I. Cleanup.
J. Waste disposal.
K. Illumination.
L. Food.
M. Water.
N. Camping or trailer facilities.
O. Communications.
P. Noise control and abatement.
Any other special service, other than those listed above, which a
particular special event might require.
Q.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a special event without
registering such special event with the Township of Harris at least 30
days in advance.
B. Any person planning to conduct a special event in the Township shall
register such activity or event with the Township of Harris. The
following information shall be provided by the registrant:
(1) The name, mailing and street address, and daytime and emergency
telephone number or numbers of the sponsor of the event; the
primary contact person for the special event; and the owner or
§ 3-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-2.6
AO:71
persons responsible for the property on which the special event is
to be held.
(2) The dates and times when the special event is to occur.
(3) The exact location of the property to be used for the special event.
(4) A detailed description of all activities being planned as part of the
special event.
(5) The estimated minimum, probable, and maximum participants and
attendees expected to attend the special event. For a special event
in which tickets are sold or distributed, organizers shall notify the
Township of Harris not less than 48 hours and not more than 96
hours prior to the event of the number of tickets sold and/or
distributed for the special event.
(6) A schedule including the duration of the event, and periods when
higher levels of traffic can be anticipated.
(7) Acknowledgment that the sponsor will prohibit the use of outdoor
amplified sound, if proposed, after the hours of 10:00 p.m., Sundays
through Thursdays, and 11:30 p.m. on Fridays and Saturdays.
(8) A request detailing each special service, as defined herein, to be
provided by the Township.
(9) Proof that notification of the event has been, or will be, provided to
the following agencies in advance of the event:
(a) State College Police.
(b) Pennsylvania State Police.
(c) Boalsburg Fire Company.
(d) Alpha Community Ambulance.
(e) Centre County Emergency Communications Center.
(f) Seven Mountains Emergency Medical Services Council.
[Note: Provisions of Subsection B(9) may be waived by the
Township Manager or his designee if registrant provides
sufficient evidence that notification of any or all of the listed
agencies is not necessary to protect the health, safety, and
welfare of those attending the special event.]
(10) Copies of agreements or arrangements for payment of all special
services required for the special event.
(11) If the event is to be held in a municipal park or utilize any park
facilities, notification shall be send to the Centre Region Parks and
Recreation Department and all requirements of their large group
event policy shall be addressed.
§ 3-2.6 HARRIS CODE § 3-2.7
AO:72
§ 3-2.7. Approval of special services.
§ 3-2.8. Responsibilities of sponsor.
§ 3-2.9. EMS regulations.29
It shall be the duty of the sponsor to comply with the Emergency Medical
Services System Act, 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 8101 et seq., as amended, 35 P.S. § 6921
A. The sponsor of any special event to be held within the Township shall
submit complete information to the Township of Harris at least 30 days
prior to the special event.
B. Upon receipt of complete information, the Township Manager or his
designee shall review the information with the registrant. The purpose
of the review shall be to ascertain what, if any, special services shall be
necessary or required to protect the health, safety, welfare, and morals
of the expected participants and attendees of the event, the residents of
the Township, neighbors, and any others who may be affected by the
special event.
C. If any special services are necessary or required as determined by the
Township Manager or his designee, the registrant shall make
arrangements for the special services and shall show proof of
arrangements or shall execute an agreement and necessary assurances
that the sponsor shall pay the cost of all such services provided by the
Township.
A. The sponsor of a special event shall provide facilities and personnel to
provide adequately for the health, safety, welfare, and morals of
participants and attendees of such special event, neighbors, residents
of the Township, and any other persons who will be affected by the
event, including the traveling public.
B. In the event that special services are requested to be provided by the
Township, or after review of the application for special event it is
ascertained that special services provided by the Township shall or may
be necessary, sponsor shall be responsible for the reasonable costs and
expenses incurred in providing said services.
C. Sponsor shall provide adequate security or assurance that all costs or
expenses for special services provided to the special event shall be paid
within 30 days of said special event, or within 30 days after being billed
or invoiced for said special services, whichever is later.
D. The sponsor of a special event shall execute an agreement with the
Township which shall provide for payment by sponsor of the total cost
and expenses incurred by the Township in providing special services for
such special event.
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 3-2.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-2.9
AO:73
et seq., and the regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Health, 28
Pa. Code § 1013.1 et seq., as they are now or may hereafter be amended.
§ 3-2.10. Fee required.
§ 3-2.11. Violations and penalties.30
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default
of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section
of this article which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a
separate offense.
A. The Board of Supervisors shall have the right and authority to set such
fees for registration of a special event and administration of this article
as shall be deemed appropriate and shall authorize the collection of
such fees by the Township Manager or his designee.
B. The Board of Supervisors or its designee may waive any and all such
fees as provided for in this article in the event that the special event
being registered is being conducted by a nonprofit organization and the
special event is not expected to generate a profit.
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 3-2.9 HARRIS CODE § 3-2.11
AO:74
Chapter 4
(RESERVED)
Chapter 5
HEALTH AND SAFETY
§ 3-2.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-2.11
AO:75

ARTICLE I
[Adopted 9-W14e-e1d9 R98emBoyvOalrd. No. 200]
§ 5-1.1. Findings and purposes.
The Board of Supervisors of Harris Township finds that the failure to cut and
mow grass and weeds in residential, commercial, and industrial areas of the
Township creates a nuisance and is harmful to the health and well-being
of the residents, and is contrary to the general welfare of the residents.
Specifically, the failure to mow the grass and cut weeds in said areas:
§ 5-1.2. Restrictions.
No person, firm, partnership, or corporation owning or having a present
interest in (including renting) or occupying any real estate having one
or more primary uses which are residential, commercial, or industrial in
nature shall permit any grass or weeds or vegetation whatsoever, not edible
nor planted for some useful or ornamental purpose, to grow or remain
on such premises, including any portion of the premises occupied by a
street or alley, so as to exceed a height of 12 inches, or to throw off any
unpleasant or noxious odor or to conceal any filthy deposit or to create or to
produce pollen. All such vegetation is hereby declared to be a nuisance and
detrimental to the health, safety, cleanliness, and comfort of the inhabitants
of the Township.
§ 5-1.3. Exceptions.
This article shall not be enforced with respect to weeds, grass, or similar
vegetation as heretofore defined when they are located in the following
areas:
A. Creates a nuisance in that weeds are permitted to go to seed and
spread onto the lawns of neighbors.
B. Creates a health hazard in that overgrown lawns and weeds contribute
to the amount and spread of pollen, affecting those who suffer from
allergies.
C. Affects property values and appearances in nonagricultural areas.
D. Creates danger of crime where unkempt lawns may give rise to an
assumption that the premises are unoccupied.
E. Creates danger where tall grass and weeds near residences may hide
garbage and debris which attracts rodents.
F. Affects the public welfare by reflecting negatively on our citizens and
Township.
A. In any zoning district on properties where legal agricultural uses,
whether as permitted primary uses or as substantiated and registered
nonconforming uses, are performed.
§ 5-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-1.3
AO:77
§ 5-1.4. Responsibility.
The owner and the occupant of any such premises, in case of premises
occupied by other than the owner thereof, shall have the duty to remove,
trim, or cut all such vegetation growing or remaining upon such premises
in violation of the provisions of this article.
§ 5-1.5. Notice to owner and/or occupant to comply.
§ 5-1.6. Violations and penalties.31
Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation who or which shall fail to
comply with the requirements of this article within five days in accordance
with the notice specified herein, upon conviction thereof in an action
brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner provided for the
enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus
costs and, in default of payment of said fines and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this article
continues or each section of this article which shall be found to have been
violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 5-1.7. Township removal of nuisance.
In the event of the failure of the owner and/or occupant to comply with
the requirements of this article within five days of the date of the notice
specified herein, the Township may have the grass and weeds brought
into compliance and bill the owner for the cost thereof plus a penalty of
10%. These costs and penalties shall be in addition to fines for violations.
Penalties may be collected by summary proceedings or in the manner
provided for the collection of municipal claims or by an action in assumpsit
without the filing of a claim or by any other procedure authorized by law.
B. More than 100 feet from land owned by any other person.
C. In forested lands.
A. Whenever it shall be reported to or observed by the Ordinance
Enforcement Officer that any owner or occupant of property has failed
to comply with any of the terms of this article, the Ordinance
Enforcement Officer shall cause a written notice to be served upon the
owner or occupant or both directing the owner and/or occupant to
comply with all terms of this article within five days.
B. Such notice may be mailed by United States mail, first class, postage
prepaid; by certified or registered mail; by personal service; or, if the
property is occupied, by posting the notice at a conspicuous place upon
the affected property.
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 5-1.3 HARRIS CODE § 5-1.8
AO:78
§ 5-1.8. Legal proceedings to enforce compliance.
In addition to the fines for violations, costs, and penalties provided for
by this article, the Township may institute proceedings in courts of equity
to require owners and/or occupants of real estate to comply with the
provisions of this article.
§ 5-1.9. Penalties to be lien.
The cost of removal, fine, and penalties hereinabove mentioned may be
entered by the Township as a lien against such property in accordance with
existing provisions of law.
§ 5-1.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-1.9
AO:79

ARTICLE II
[Adopted 5-4N-1u9is7a0nBceysOrd. No. 40]
§ 5-2.1. Title; effective date.
This article shall be known as the "Nuisance Control Ordinance."
§ 5-2.2. Nuisances prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to maintain within the Township of Harris, Centre
County, Pennsylvania, any and all nuisances including, but not limited to
the following: accumulations of junk, garbage, rubbish or debris; storage
of abandoned or junked automobiles; the carrying on of any offensive
manufacture or business; buildings and structures that are unsound or
unsafe; any use of property or activity constituting a fire hazard, or
detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of persons or property.
§ 5-2.3. Maintaining or creating a nuisance; violations and
penalties.32
It shall be unlawful for any person to create or maintain a nuisance within
the Township of Harris, and any person found to be guilty hereunder, upon
conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge
in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fines
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a
violation of this article continues or each section of this article which shall
be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 5-2.4. Enforcement.33
The Board of Supervisors shall appoint one or more nuisance control
officers, and such nuisance control officers shall be empowered to
investigate complaints of nuisances either on their own initiative or upon
the complaint of an interested citizen, to determine whether in fact a
nuisance does exist, to require and give notice for the removal or abatement
of the same, to remove or abate or cause the same to be removed or abated,
and to proceed to collect the cost of such removal or abatement, together
with a penalty in the amount of 10% of such costs, in the manner provided
by law for the collection of municipal claims, or by action of assumpsit, and
to bring charge for violation before the Magisterial District Judge.
§ 5-2.5. Notice to abate nuisance.
The notice required to be given under § 5-2.4 shall be given to the owner or
person maintaining such nuisance by registered or certified mail addressed
to his last known address, or by personal service.
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 5-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-2.6
AO:81
§ 5-2.6. Violations and penalties.34
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation who or which shall fail to
comply with the notice delivered pursuant to § 5-2.4, upon conviction
thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the
manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fines
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a
violation of this article continues or each section of this article which shall
be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 5-2.7. Additional remedies; equity.
In addition to other procedures provided herein, the Township may institute
equity proceedings to abate a nuisance in a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 5-2.8. Penalties to be a lien.
The cost of removal, fine and penalties hereinabove mentioned may be
entered as a lien against property in accordance with existing provisions of
law.
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 5-2.6 HARRIS CODE § 5-2.8
AO:82
ARTICLE III
Moto[rA-Ddoripvteend R4e-1c9re-1a9ti7o2naBly VOehrdic. lNe oN. u4i9sa]nces
§ 5-3.1. Findings; purpose.
The Board of Supervisors of Harris Township find that the operation of
motorcycles, snowmobiles, and other types of recreational vehicles in the
Township have created conditions offensive to the public, nuisances,
dangers of public disorder and breaches of the peace, inconvenience and
damage to the residents of the Township; and the Board of Supervisors
find that the maintenance of peace, good government and welfare of the
Township require regulation of the use of these vehicles.
§ 5-3.2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to the terms of this article:
MOTORCYCLE — A motorcycle, including a motor scooter, with a motor
which produces not to exceed five brake horsepower, and every pedalcycle
with a motor attached.
PRIVATE RESIDENCE — Shall be construed to mean all houses, homes,
apartments, mobile homes and other permanent structures occupied by one
or more persons as their primary home and residence; but shall not include
temporary vacation housing.
SNOWMOBILE — An engine-driven vehicle of a type which utilizes sled-type
runners, or skis, or an endless belt tread or any combination of these or
other similar means of contact with the surface upon which it is operated.
The term does not include any farm tractor, highway or other construction
equipment or any military or law enforcement vehicle.
§ 5-3.3. Prohibited activities.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, cause to be operated or to
participate in the operation of a snowmobile, motorcycle, or motor-driven
cycle;
A. On land in any portion of the Township zoned for residential,
commercial or industrial uses as shown on the Official Zoning Map of
Harris Township.
B. On land which is both:
(1) Located in an area zoned for rural uses (agricultural, forest, and
rural-commercial districts); and
(2) Within 1/4 mile from two or more private residences situate in any
other zone as shown on the Official Zoning Map of the Township
without first obtaining the prior written consent of the owner or
owners of such private residence or residences.
§ 5-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-3.3
AO:83
§ 5-3.4. Exceptions.
The following uses or operation of a snowmobile, motorcycle, or motordriven
cycle shall be excepted from the application of the above regulations:
§ 5-3.5. Special permits.
The Township Manager may issue a special permit for specific and limited
use of a snowmobile, motorcycle or motor-driven cycle contrary to the
above regulations where these regulations result in an undue hardship, or
where it is in the public interest.
§ 5-3.6. Violations and penalties.35
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default
of payment of said fines and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section
of this article which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a
separate offense.
C. Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., prevailing time, on land
which is within 1/2 mile of any private residence situate in the Township
without first obtaining the prior written consent of the owner or owners
of such private residence or residences.
A. Uses or operations incidental to sale or rental by a commercial vendor
of snowmobiles, motorcycles, or motor-driven cycles.
B. Use or operation incidental to moving or transporting the vehicle to or
from a private residence and confined to the operator's private
residence.
C. Use or operation in a public park where such use is expressly
authorized or permitted.
D. Lawful operation by a properly licensed operator on public streets or
highways as authorized by the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania, 75
Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
E. Use or operation on private property owned by the operator of said
snowmobile, motorcycle, or motor-driven cycle, provided that such
operation does not constitute a nuisance in fact to nearby landowners.
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 5-3.3 HARRIS CODE § 5-3.6
AO:84
ARTICLE IV
Emergency Management Services Responses
A.
Hazardous Material Incidents
[Adopted 3-9-1998 by Ord. No. 193]
§ 5-4.1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings as
indicated:
EXTREMELY HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — A substance appearing on the
list of extremely hazardous substances published by the Administrator of
the Federal Environmental Protection Agency under the authority of § 302
of the Federal Emergency Planning and Community Right-To-Know Act of
1986, or its successor list.
FACILITY — All buildings, structures and other stationary items which are
located on a single site or a contiguous or adjacent site, including railroad
yards and truck terminals which are owned or operated by the same person
and which actually manufacture, produce, use, transfer, store, supply or
distribute any petroleum product or hazardous material.
HAZARDOUS CHEMICAL — Substances as defined within the meaning of
29 CFR 1910.1200(c).
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any of the following as defined in this article:
a hazardous substance; an extremely hazardous substance; a hazardous
chemical; a toxic chemical.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — A substance appearing on the list of
hazardous substances prepared under § 102 of the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, or its
successor list.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, firm, association, public utility, trust,
estate, public or private institution, group, and any legal successor,
representative or agency of the foregoing.
PETROLEUM PRODUCT — Any of the following; oil, home heating fuel,
gasoline, kerosene, diesel fuel, naphtha, grease, tar or any component
thereof.
RELEASE — Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying,
discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing into the
environment of a petroleum product or hazardous material, including but
not limited to the abandonment or discarding of barrels, containers and
other receptacles containing petroleum products or hazardous materials.
TOXIC CHEMICAL — A substance appearing on the list of chemicals set
forth in the Code of Federal Regulations under the authority of § 313 of
SARA, Title III, or its successor list.
§ 5-4.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-4.1
AO:85
VEHICLE — Any car, truck, van, railroad car, water vessel, airplane or other
transportation vehicle that ships, carries or transports a petroleum product
or hazardous material.
§ 5-4.2. Liability.
Any person, facility or vehicle owner/operator having custody or control of
petroleum products and/or hazardous materials shall be liable to Boalsburg
Fire Company for all response costs directly incurred by the Boalsburg Fire
Company as the result of a release.
§ 5-4.3. Fire company response costs.
§ 5-4.4. Municipal response costs.
§ 5-4.5. Violations and penalties.36
Any person/facility who shall fail to comply with this article within 60 days
of notification as provided for in §§ 5-4.3 or 5-4.4, upon conviction thereof
in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner
provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania
Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
A. Response costs shall reflect the actual cost of providing personnel,
equipment, fuel, materials, etc., as incurred by the Boalsburg Fire
Company as a result of a release.
B. The Boalsburg Fire Company or its agent shall invoice for response
costs incurred for any applicable occurrence, referenced herein, within
60 days of the final date of response relative to the occurrence. The
responsible person/facility will be invoiced by certified mail or personal
delivery by Boalsburg Fire Company or its agent.
C. Any invoicing procedure, other than that which has been described
herein, shall be subject to approval by the Harris Township Board of
Supervisors.
A. In addition to response costs incurred by Boalsburg Fire Company, any
person, facility or vehicle owner/operator having custody or control of
petroleum products and/or hazardous materials shall be liable to Harris
Township and its agents, specifically including, but not limited to, State
College Police Department, for all response costs directly incurred as
the result of a release.
B. Harris Township shall invoice for response costs incurred for any
applicable occurrence, referenced herein, within 60 days of the final
date of response relative to the occurrence. The Treasurer of the Centre
County Fire Chiefs Association will invoice the responsible person/
facility by certified mail.
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 5-4.1 HARRIS CODE § 5-4.5
AO:86
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fines and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues or each section of this article which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 5-4.6. through § 5-4.10. (Reserved)
§ 5-4.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-4.6
AO:87

B.
Payment for Emergency Response
[Adopted 3-9-1998 by Ord. No. 194]
§ 5-4.11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings as
indicated:
EMERGENCY RESCUE —
PERSON — An individual, corporation, firm, association, public utility, trust,
estate, public or private institution, group, and any legal successor,
representative or agency of the foregoing.
VEHICLE — Any car, truck, van, railroad car, water vessel, airplane or other
motorized or nonmotorized transportation vehicle.
§ 5-4.12. Liability for emergency rescue.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Service provided by Boalsburg Fire Company at
the direction of the Centre County Emergency Communications Center,
State College Police Department, Pennsylvania State Police or mutual
aid request to secure or stabilize the scene of a motor vehicle accident.
Service may include extrication of the occupants of the motor vehicle(s)
involved in the accident by mechanical means.
A.
NONMOTOR VEHICLE — Service provided by Boalsburg Fire Company
at the direction of the Centre County Emergency Communications
Center, State College Police Department, Pennsylvania State Police or
mutual aid request to locate, and remove to safety, missing person(s),
vehicles, etc. whose whereabouts are unknown, but whose condition
may be perilous, or a threat to health or safety of the community.
B.
A. Any person, facility or vehicle owner/operator who shall be the
recipient of emergency rescue services provided by Boalsburg Fire
Company shall be liable to Boalsburg Fire Company for all response
costs directly incurred by the Boalsburg Fire Company as the result of
providing such emergency rescue services.
B. Response costs shall reflect the actual cost of providing personnel,
equipment, fuel, materials, etc. as incurred by the Boalsburg Fire
Company as a result of a release. Eligible response costs shall include
rental/lease or purchase costs of materials or services as may be
necessitated by the nature of the emergency rescue and replacement of
nondurable materials expended as a result of providing emergency
rescue service.
C. The Boalsburg Fire Company or its agent shall invoice for response
costs incurred for any applicable occurrence referenced herein within
60 days of the final date of response relative to the occurrence. The
§ 5-4.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-4.12
AO:89
§ 5-4.13. Violations and penalties.37
Any person/facility who shall fail to comply with this article within 60 days
of notification as provided for in § 5-4.12, upon conviction thereof in an
action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner provided
for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules
of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fines and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues or each section of this article which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
responsible person/facility, will be invoiced by certified mail or personal
delivery by Boalsburg Fire Company or its agent.
D. Any invoicing procedure, other than that which has been described
herein, shall be subject to approval by the Harris Township Board of
Supervisors.
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 5-4.12 HARRIS CODE § 5-4.13
AO:90
ARTICLE V
[ATdroapffitce dSi5g-n1a0l- 1P9r9e9emBpytOiornd .S Nysot.e 2m0s4]
§ 5-5.1. Purpose.
This article is enacted for the following purposes:
§ 5-5.2. Requirements.
A. To ensure that emergency response vehicles can respond to emergency
situations in a safe and efficient manner.
B. To improve emergency response by preventing accidents at intersection
locations.
C. To reduce liability exposure for municipalities by reducing accidents
during responses to emergency situations.
D. To improve public health, safety and welfare for all residents and
visitors to the Centre Region.
A. All traffic signals which are installed in Harris Township following the
enactment of this article shall be equipped with traffic signal
preemption systems.
B. The traffic signal preemption systems shall be compatible with
transmitting devices installed in apparatus of the designated
emergency response personnel and shall permit approaching
emergency response vehicles to have a green light at any intersection
equipped with the necessary receiving equipment.
C. Acquisition, installation and testing costs for a preemption system
installed as part of a subdivision or land development plan shall be the
responsibility of the developer.
D. For traffic signals installed by a public entity, the acquisition,
installation and testing costs of the required preemption system shall
be the responsibility of the appropriate public entity.
E. The specifications of and point of contact for the traffic signal
preemption device shall be determined by the Centre Region Council of
Governments, Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and Harris
Township Board of Supervisors, or their designee.
F. A copy of all proposed subdivision or other land use plans where a
traffic signal is required or proposed to be installed shall be submitted
to the appropriate municipal official for review and comment, no less
than 15 business days before the proposed subdivision or other plan is
scheduled to be presented, for approval, at a public meeting of the
Municipal Planning Commission, if such is required, or meeting of the
Board of Supervisors, for approval, if Planning Commission comment is
not required.
§ 5-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-5.2
AO:91

ARTICLE VI
[Adopted 12O-9p-e1n9 9B6urBnyinOgrd. No. 179]
§ 5-6.1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Harris Township Open
Burning Ordinance."
§ 5-6.2. Intent; purpose.
It is hereby declared to be a matter of public health and safety to regulate
the disposal of waste by open burning in the Township of Harris. It is further
declared that the dangers of open fires, the air pollution from fires, and
the management of waste removal and disposal necessitate regulation to
protect the peace, good order, and welfare of the Township and the health
and safety of its citizens.
§ 5-6.3. Definitions. [Amended 11-10-2003 by Ord. No. 240]
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise, shall have the following meanings
ascribed to them:
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, syndicate, company,
firm, trust, corporation, department, bureau, agency, or other entity
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
REFUSE — All perishable animal and vegetable matter resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food; any solid or liquid
material which, when ignited, creates toxic or noxious fumes, including but
not limited to plastics, rubber, petrochemicals, furniture, carpets, rags, and
old clothing; any waste not herein defined as yard waste or trade waste.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The total width of any land reserved or dedicated as
a street, alley, or crosswalk, or for other public or semipublic purposes,
including but not limited to the area reserved for cartway, shoulders,
drainageways, and easements.
TOWNSHIP MANAGER — The Manager of the Township of Harris or his/
her authorized designee, which shall include the Ordinance Enforcement
Officer.
TRADE WASTE — All solid or liquid waste material resulting from
construction, building operations, or the performance of any business,
trade, or industry including, but not limited to, asphalt shingles, electric
wiring, plastic products, cartons, paint, grease, oil and other petroleum
products, chemicals, cinders, processed wood, shrubs, plants, and
vegetation as part of a commercial landscape business, and other forms of
solid or liquid waste materials; provided, however, that trade waste shall not
include any coal refuse associated with the mining or preparation of coal.
TREE LEAVES — Leaves of ornamental or shade trees which fall in the late
summer or autumn.
§ 5-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-6.3
AO:93
WASTE — Material discarded as worthless or of no use.
YARD WASTE — Waste resulting from the normal maintenance and upkeep
of a yard including, but not limited to, limbs, branches, bushes, garden
plants, etc.; under no circumstances shall tree leaves be considered as yard
waste for the purposes of this subsection. Yard waste shall not include any
fire set in conjunction with the production of agricultural commodities as
excepted in § 5-6.9C.
§ 5-6.4. Open fires regulated.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite or feed an open fire except in
accordance with the regulations set forth herein.
§ 5-6.5. Burning of refuse and trade waste prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite or feed an open fire for the
burning of refuse or trade waste.
§ 5-6.6. Burning of yard waste. [Amended 11-10-2003 by Ord. No.
240]
It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite or feed a fire for the burning
of yard waste unless notification at least one hour in advance has first
been provided to the Centre County Emergency Communications Center.
The dispatch log shall record all notifications provided. The burning of yard
waste shall further be subject to the following regulations:
A. Where the burning of yard waste takes place on the premises of a
single-family or two-family dwelling, only yard waste which reasonably
results from the normal maintenance of such property shall be burned.
B. On the premises of any structure occupied by three or more families,
yard waste shall be burned only in a place approved by the Fire Chief or
Assistant Fire Chief of the Boalsburg Fire Company. Any occupant,
before burning yard waste in such designated place, must also have the
written consent of the owner of the property.
C. If the Fire Chief or Assistant Fire Chief, or the Centre County
Commissioners, determine that, due to unusual weather conditions or
other circumstances, open burning would constitute a danger to the
public health, safety, or welfare, they may notify the Centre County
Emergency Communications Center and the Township Manager of such
conditions, upon which notice no burning of yard waste will be allowed.
Upon cessation of the conditions, the Fire Chief or Assistant Fire Chief,
or the Centre County Commissioners, shall advise the Centre County
Emergency Communications Center and the Township Manager that
such conditions no longer exist. The State Department of Forestry and
the Department of Environmental Protection to those who may
determine if open burning would constitute a danger to the public
health, safety or welfare.
§ 5-6.3 HARRIS CODE § 5-6.7
AO:94
§ 5-6.7. Burning of tree leaves prohibited.
No person shall burn tree leaves for any reason within the Township of
Harris.
§ 5-6.8. General regulations for burning of yard waste. [Amended
11-10-2003 by Ord. No. 240]
The following regulations are mandatory for all fires which are permitted
for the burning of yard waste:
§ 5-6.9. Exceptions. [Amended 11-10-2003 by Ord. No. 240]
The following types of fires are excepted from the provisions of this article:
A. No fire shall be started until after the resident who wishes to burn has
notified the Centre County Emergency Communications Center.
B. All fires shall be properly attended so as to prevent the spread of fire or
the creation of hazardous conditions.
C. All fires shall be conducted only during daylight hours, defined as the
period from sunrise to sunset.
D. All fires shall be conducted only on the premises of the owner, provided,
however, that the term "premises" shall not include the area within the
right-of-way of any street.
E. No fires shall be conducted on any public street nor within the right-ofway
of a public street.
F. The Fire Marshal may, when he/she determines that there is eminent or
immediate danger to any person(s) or any property, buildings,
structures or premises as a result of a fire, take any and all steps
necessary, within the reasonable performance of his/her duties, to
extinguish, mitigate and/or control that fire in order to preserve and
protect the life, health, welfare or safety of any person(s) and to
preserve and protect property, buildings, structures or premises. The
following regulations are mandatory for all fires which are permitted
for the burning of yard waste.
A. Fires solely for the cooking of food.
B. Campfires for warmth, fellowship, food preparation, or ceremonial
purposes of private individuals or organizations such as Boy Scouts,
Girl Scouts, etc., must be attended at all times. Campfires must be of a
size and nature to be contained in an enclosed area, such as a pit or a
ring.
C. Any fire set in conjunction with the production of agricultural
commodities in their unprocessed or unmanufactured state on the
premises of the farm operation. Examples include, but are not limited
to, butchering, making apple butter, etc.
§ 5-6.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-6.9
AO:95
§ 5-6.10. Violations and penalties.38
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default
of payment of said fines and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section
of this article which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a
separate offense.
D. Fires set in the performance of an official duty by any fireman or public
officer where the fire is for the prevention of a hazard which cannot be
abated by other means; for the protection of health, safety, or welfare;
for the purpose of instructing personnel in fire safety; or for other
official purposes.
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 5-6.9 HARRIS CODE § 5-6.10
AO:96
ARTICLE VII
[AdAoupttheodri8z-e1d3 A-1c9ti7v5itBieys ROefs F. iNreom. 7a5n-8]
§ 5-7.1. Firemen's benefits authorization for benefits.39
Under the provisions of § 103(a)(1) of the Worker's Compensation Act, 77
P.S. § 1031, the members of the Boalsburg Volunteer Fire Company shall
be entitled to receive workmen's compensation benefits in case of injuries
received while actually engaged as firemen or while going to or returning
from any fire which the fire company of which they are members shall have
attended or while performing any other duties of such company authorized
by the Township of Harris.
§ 5-7.2. Other duties. [Amended 5-10-1978 by Res. No. 78-2]
A. Filling swimming pools.
B. Practicing at training sites.
C. Flushing hydrants.
D. Firemen's Carnival.
E. Fund-raising events.
(1) Serving and preparing suppers.
(2) Setting up fence and preparing grounds for rental to others.
(3) Soliciting funds with a fire truck.
(4) Goodwill (Santa Claus with treats).
(5) Giving tours of fire hall/equipment.
F. Traveling to and attending activities elsewhere.
(1) Parades.
(2) Fire schools.
(3) Seminars/workshops.
(4) Open house; inspecting new trucks and equipment demonstrations.
G. Fire inspections.
(1) Chiefs inspecting businesses for proper fire protection.
(2) Firemen with trucks (or without) instructing school children
firesafety.
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 5-7.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-7.2
AO:97
(3) Inspection by invitation for active firemen to tour local business or
hazardous areas "as a group" for proper identification of dangerous
areas.
H. Test runs.
(1) Checking vehicles for proper operation, on-/off-road running.
(2) Vehicle inspection, maintenance, preventative maintenance.
I. Emergency: non-fire-related.
(1) Manhunts, lost children, etc.
(2) Pumping basements.
(3) Car accidents, no fire, men used for rescue.
J. Property maintenance. Any repairs, service, maintenance, alterations
or modifications to the building and/or premises or whatever else is
necessary or incidental to the upkeep of the fire company property.
§ 5-7.2 HARRIS CODE § 5-7.2
AO:98
ARTICLE VIII
[AdoPptaerdk 1R0u-l1e8s- A19n7d2 RBegyuOlardti.o Nnos. 50]
§ 5-8.1. Definitions. [Amended 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 260]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXCRETA — All useless matter eliminated from the bodily system, as
sputum, urine, fecal matter.
INTOXICATION — A state of any person being drunk, inebriated or under
the influence of alcoholic beverages or spirituous liquors, taken internally,
or under the influence of any narcotic or habit-producing drug.
PARK — Unless specifically limited, shall be deemed to include all parks,
playgrounds, athletic fields, stadiums, tennis courts, golf courses,
swimming pools, beaches, band shells, music pavilions, recreational areas
and structures, museums, geological and botanical gardens, and also
entrances and approaches thereto, and all other land or property or
structures now and hereafter owned or acquired by the Township of Harris
for recreation purpose or now or hereafter owned or acquired by any other
entity and declared by resolution of the Township of Harris to be a park.
PERMIT — Any written authorization issued by or under the authority of the
Director of Parks and Recreation permitting specified park privilege.
PERSONS — Any natural person, corporation, organization of persons,
company, association, or partnership.
POLICE OFFICER — Any peace officer of the Township of Harris or State of
Pennsylvania or any employee of the Department of Parks and Recreation
appointed as a special police officer for the purpose of the enforcement of
law and order within parks.
RULES AND REGULATIONS — Any rules and regulations hereby or
hereafter established by the ordinance of the Township of Harris or as
promulgated by the Director of Parks and Recreation under authority herein
conferred.
§ 5-8.2. Interpretation of rules and regulations.
In the interpretation of the rules and regulations affecting parks, their
provisions shall be construed as follows:
A. Terms in singular. Any term in the singular shall include the plural.
B. Terms in masculine. Any term in the masculine shall include the
feminine and neuter.
C. Extension of rules and regulations. Any requirement or provision of
these rules and regulations relating to any act shall respectively extend
to and include the causing, procuring, aiding or abetting, directly or
indirectly, of such act; or the permitting or the allowing of any minor in
§ 5-8.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-8.2
AO:99
§ 5-8.3. Disturbing the peace prohibited.
No person shall disturb the peace in any park by any act.
§ 5-8.4. Immorality and indecency prohibited.
No person shall do any obscene or indecent act in any park, or display,
expose or distribute any picture, banner or other object suggestive of sex in
a lewd, indecent, immoral way; or enter a comfort station or toilet set apart
for the use of the opposite sex; nor shall any person loiter in any comfort
station or toilet at any time, nor shall any person dress or undress in any
part except dressing rooms provided for such persons.
§ 5-8.5. Unbecoming language prohibited.
No person shall use threatening, abusive, insulting, profane or obscene
language or words in any parks.
§ 5-8.6. Soliciting money prohibited.
No person shall solicit money, subscriptions, or contributions for any
purpose in any park unless authorized by permit from the Director of Parks
and Recreation.
§ 5-8.7. Intoxication prohibited.
No person shall enter or be in a park while intoxicated; nor have in his
possession any intoxicant. This provision shall not be interpreted to exclude
any person under normal and accepted medication.
the custody of any persons, doing any act prohibited by any provisions
thereof.
D. Acts not unlawful. No provision hereof shall make unlawful any act
necessarily performed by any police officer or employee of the
Department of Parks and Recreation in line of duty or work as such, or
by any person, his agents or employees, in the proper and necessary
execution of the terms of any agreement with the Department of Parks
and Recreation.
E. Permits. Any act otherwise prohibited by these rules and regulations,
provided it is not otherwise prohibited by law or local ordinance, shall
be lawful if performed under, by virtue of and strictly in compliance
with the provisions of a permit and to the extent authorized thereby.
F. State and federal laws. These rules and regulations are in addition to
and supplement all state and federal laws.
§ 5-8.2 HARRIS CODE § 5-8.8
AO:100
§ 5-8.8. Weapon and projectile prohibitions. [Amended 6-13-2011
by Ord. No. 294]
No person shall perform the following actions within parks or playgrounds
without having previously obtained the written consent and approval of
the Director of the Centre Region Parks and Recreation Department: carry
or discharge an air rifle, air pistol, a paintball gun or paintball marker;
fireworks (including rockets) or other missile-propelling instruments or
explosives; a slingshot or a bow and arrow; or other dangerous weapons,
excepting firearms, which have such properties as to cause annoyance or
injury to any person or property; provided, further, that no person shall
discharge any firearm within parks or playgrounds.
§ 5-8.9. Dangerous conduct prohibited.
No person shall interfere with, encumber, obstruct or render dangerous any
park or part thereof.
§ 5-8.10. Excreta.
No person shall emit, eject, or cause to be deposited in any park, any
excreta of the human body, except in proper receptacles designated for such
purposes.
§ 5-8.11. Improper admission.
No person shall gain improper admission to, or use of, or attempt admission
to any park facility, for which a charge is made, without paying the fixed
charge or price of admission.
§ 5-8.12. Recreational vehicles prohibited.
No person shall use snowmobiles, minibikes, motorcycles, or any vehicle
recreational or otherwise except on designated roads, trails, or areas set
aside for their use.
§ 5-8.13. Disobeying authorities and signs.
No person, shall, in any park, disobey a proper order of a police officer
or any park and recreation employee designated by the Director of Parks
and Recreation to give orders. Nor shall any person in any park disobey,
disregard or fail to comply with any rule or regulation, warning, prohibition,
instruction or direction, posted or displayed by sign, notice, bulletin, card,
poster, or when notified or informed as to its existence by a park employee
or other authorized person.
§ 5-8.14. Capturing or killing wild birds and animals prohibited.
No person shall capture or kill, or attempt to capture or kill any wild bird or
wild animal on park premises.
§ 5-8.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-8.15
AO:101
§ 5-8.15. Camping prohibited.
Day or overnight camping of any type is prohibited except as authorized by
the Director of Parks and Recreation.
§ 5-8.16. Defacing, breaking and injuring trees, plants, benches,
etc. prohibited.
No person shall cut, break, injure, deface, or disturb any tree, shrub, plant,
rock, building, cage, pen, monument, fence, bench, or other structures,
apparatus or property or pluck, pull up, cut, take or remove any shrub,
bush, plant or flower; or mark, or write upon any building, monument,
fence, bench or other structures, or injure, deface or remove any property,
real or personal or any natural growth, structure, equipment, animals,
signs, or other park property.
§ 5-8.17. Setting of fires prohibited.
No fires shall be set in any park except in areas where fires are expressly
permitted; or except as authorized by permit issued under the authority of
the Director of Parks and Recreation.
§ 5-8.18. Discharging in bodies of water prohibited.
No person shall throw, cast, lay, drop or discharge into or leave any body of
water in any park, or in any storm sewer, or drain flowing into said water, or
in any gutter, sewer or basin, any substance, matter, or thing, whatsoever.
§ 5-8.19. Animals in parks.
No person shall cause or permit any animal, livestock or poultry to come
upon or go at large in any park; except that dogs or other domesticated
animals may be brought into parks so long as the person bringing such
animals into a park shall at all times keep such animals under control
and restrained by a leash or lead not exceeding six feet in length. No
animal, including dogs and domesticated animals, shall be permitted in the
immediate vicinity of bathhouses, wading or swimming pools, children's
play areas or any other areas that may be designated by sign as prohibited
areas.
§ 5-8.20. Horses prohibited.
No person shall bring a horse in or upon park land except in areas
designated for such purposes.
§ 5-8.21. Waste matter.
No person shall deposit, drop or leave any papers, bottles, debris, or other
waste matter or refuse of any kind in any park or part thereof except in such
receptacles as may be provided for the purpose.
§ 5-8.15 HARRIS CODE § 5-8.22
AO:102
§ 5-8.22. Vehicles to be operated at reasonable speed.
No person shall operate any motor vehicle on any roadway in any park at
any rate of speed greater than is reasonable having regard to the width
of the roadway, traffic, and use of such roadway, intersection with other
roadways, weather and other conditions; and in no event shall any vehicle
be operated on such highway at a speed in excess of 15 mph.
§ 5-8.23. Repairs to vehicles.
No person shall in any park make repairs to any vehicle except those of a
minor nature, and then only in cases of emergency.
§ 5-8.24. Vehicles to be operated on roadways and parked in
approved areas.
No person shall operate any vehicle in any part of a park except on
roadways established for the operation of vehicles, nor shall any person
park any vehicle in any area except those specifically designated for parking
purposes.
§ 5-8.25. Permits.
A permit to do any act shall authorize the same only insofar as it may
be performed in strict accordance with the written terms and conditions
thereof. Any violation of any law, ordinance, or rule or regulation by the
holder or agents of the holder of any permit shall constitute grounds for
revocation, which action shall be final. In case of revocation, all moneys paid
therefore shall, at the option of the Department of Parks and Recreation, be
forfeited and shall leave the violator liable for all damages or loss suffered
in excess of such forfeited or retained money, and such moneys retained
or damages paid, or both, shall not relieve such person from liability to
punishment for violation of any law, ordinance, rule or regulation.
§ 5-8.26. Public events.
No person shall conduct, operate, present or manage in any park, a parade,
drill, maneuver, public meeting, ceremony, speech, address, public contest,
exhibit, dramatic performance, spectacle, play, motion picture, fair, circus,
or show of any kind or nature, band, choir, glee club, orchestra, without a
permit.
§ 5-8.27. Picnics.
All organized group picnics or outings shall be authorized by permits
obtained previous to entering any park.
§ 5-8.28. Baseball and softball fields.
All organized teams, leagues, agencies, schools, churches and other groups
must obtain a permit for these facilities before announcing schedules.
§ 5-8.22 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-8.29
AO:103
§ 5-8.29. Selling concessions.
No person shall in any park exhibit, sell, or offer for sale, hire, lease or
let out any object, service or merchandise or anything whatsoever, whether
corporal or incorporal except under a permit.
§ 5-8.30. Advertising.
No person shall advertise in any park in any manner whatsoever for any
reason whatsoever, except by permit.
§ 5-8.31. Games in designated areas.
Games, sports and competition shall be held and carried on only in those
places and during the times specifically designated therefore. This shall
not be construed to prevent or prohibit multi-sport and activity use of
designated areas where such use may be properly confined to such areas
and carried out without harm to the designated area; provided, however,
that properly scheduled sports, games and activities shall at all times have
priority of use of such designated areas at the scheduled times.
§ 5-8.32. Radio-controlled, string, remote-controlled or tethered
model aircraft. [Added 6-13-2011 by Ord. No. 294]
Radio-controlled, string-controlled, remote-controlled or tethered model
aircraft shall not be operated in any park without a permit for the operation
thereof issued by the Director of the Centre Region Parks and Recreation
Department.
§ 5-8.33. Authorization. [Amended 6-13-2011 by Ord. No. 294]
In order to provide for equitable use of park facilities, preserve park areas
and facilities, and to protect the safety of users of the parks and their
facilities, the Director of Parks and Recreation shall have the following
authority, the enumeration of which shall not restrict the general authority
and control of the Director over the parks.
§ 5-8.34. Duties of director. [Amended 6-13-2011 by Ord. No. 294]
A. To fix time. To fix times when the parks or parts thereof shall be open to
public use.
B. To restrict use. To designate parks and parts thereof as restricted to the
use of certain positions of the public at certain times as he sees fit.
C. To issue permits. Under uniform conditions to be prescribed by him, to
issue permits for regulated uses as hereinbefore enumerated.
D. To fix, charge and collect fees. To fix, charge and collect such fees and
deposits for the use of park areas or facilities or privileges as he deems
advisable to help defray the expenses of the parks and their facilities.
§ 5-8.29 HARRIS CODE § 5-8.34
AO:104
§ 5-8.35. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Amended
6-13-2011 by Ord. No. 294]
E. Appeals. Persons aggrieved by a decision of the Director denying the
use of a facility may appeal such decision to the Township Manager,
whose decision shall be final.
A. Police officers of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or park employees
appointed as special park police shall have the authority to enforce
these rules and regulations for parks.
B. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a
Magisterial District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement
of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus
costs and, in default of payment of said fines and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this
article continues or each section of this article which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.40
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 5-8.34 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-8.35
AO:105

ARTICLE IX
[Adopted 2-2S4o-1li9d9 W2 aBsyteOrd. No. 139]
§ 5-9.1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Harris Township Municipal Solid Waste
Ordinance."
§ 5-9.2. Purpose. [Amended 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 287]
§ 5-9.3. Definitions. [Amended 12-12-1994 by Ord. No. 163;
12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 287]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BULK WASTE — All waste materials too large for collection in ordinary
containers. Examples of bulk waste include: furniture, appliances, carpeting
and similar items. Bulk waste shall not consist of any items that may be
packaged and disposed of using regular trash collection procedures.
COMMERCIAL — Any establishment engaged in a nonmanufacturing or
nonprocessing business including, but not limited to stores, markets, office
buildings, restaurants, shopping centers and theaters. Multifamily dwelling
units, mobile/manufactured home parks, hotels, motels, mixed-use
properties (combined business/residential on a single parcel) and farms
which use commercial dumpsters shall be considered commercial
A. It is the intent and purpose of this article to promote the public health,
safety and welfare and to eliminate public health hazards,
environmental pollution and economic loss by providing that all
residential, commercial, industrial and institutional municipal solid
waste accumulated or stored upon any property within the Township
shall be collected, transported and disposed of within the following
conditions:
(1) All residential properties shall be served by the Township's
contracted hauler.
(2) All nonresidential properties not subject to the Township's contract
shall have contracted waste service with a hauler.
(3) All municipal solid waste shall be disposed of at an approved
facility, in accordance with the Centre County Solid Waste
Management Plan, as well as local, state, federal and county laws
and ordinances.
B. These conditions are established to assure Township compliance with
the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act, Act
of July 28, 1988, (P.L. 528, No. 101), "Pennsylvania Act 101."41
41.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 5-9.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-9.3
AO:107
establishments. Does not include properties where primary permitted use is
residential and accessory use is commercial (i.e., home occupations).
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE — Lumber, roofing material,
sheathing, rubble, broken concrete, macadam, plaster and brick, conduit,
pipe, insulation and other material which results from a construction,
demolition or remodeling process.
CUSTOMER — The owner of any residential, commercial, industrial or
institutional property located within the Township.
DESIGNATED AGENT — An agent such as the Centre Region Council
of Governments acting on behalf of the Township whose powers and
responsibilities are established in an intergovernmental agreement or
similar document.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms on premises which have cooking
facilities and are arranged for occupancy by one person, two or more
persons living together or one family. Each dwelling unit within a
noncommercial building shall be considered an individual residential
customer served by curbside refuse and recycling collection.
EXCLUSIVE CONTRACT — An agreement entered into by the Township, or
its designated agent, with a private person or corporation for the collection
and disposal of all municipal solid waste generated within the boundaries of
the Township to the extent provided by this article and the agreement.
FARM — A single parcel of land of at least 10 acres, which is used for
normal agricultural purposes, including barns, greenhouses and not more
than three single-family dwelling units.
HAULER — A person who collects, transports and/or disposes of municipal
solid waste, recyclable materials and bulk waste from residential,
commercial, industrial and institutional establishments or community
activity. The term may be applied to a person having the exclusive right
to collect within the Township. All such haulers shall comply with the
provisions under the Pennsylvania Waste Transportation Safety Act (Act
90),42 as well as all federal, state, county and local laws, rules and
regulations.
INDUSTRIAL — Any establishment engaging in manufacturing or
processing including, but not limited to, factories, foundries, mills,
processing plants and refineries.
INSTITUTIONAL — Any establishment engaged in service to persons
including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes, orphanages, schools
and universities.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residue, shrubbery and tree trimmings and
similar material, but not including grass clippings.
42.Editor's Note: See 27 Pa.C.S.A. § 6201 et seq.
§ 5-9.3 HARRIS CODE § 5-9.3
AO:108
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING UNIT — A type of residential property either
under single ownership or organized as a condominium or cooperative form
of housing, which contains five or more dwelling units.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or
office waste and any other material, including solid waste, liquid, semisolid
or contained gaseous materials resulting from the operation of residential,
municipal, commercial, industrial or institutional establishments and from
community activities, and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual
or hazardous waste in the Solid Waste Management Act43 from a municipal,
commercial, industrial or institutional water supply treatment plant,
wastewater treatment plant or air pollution control facility.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, corporation, association, institution,
cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, federal government or agency,
state institution or agency or any other legal entity whatsoever which is
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
RECYCLABLES — The collection and separation of aluminum, steel, and
bimetal cans; green, brown, blue, and clear glass; newsprint and bundles
of magazines; unwanted mail; mixed office paper; paperboard; all plastic
bottles (one through seven); domestic corrugated cardboard; empty aerosol
and paint cans; and any other materials listed in Section 1501 of
Pennsylvania Act 10144 or that may be added as material accepted by the
Centre County Solid Waste Authority from time to time.
REFUSE — All municipal solid waste which is regulated by Pennsylvania
Act 10145 and the Centre County Solid Waste Authority, except the following
categories of solid waste:
A. Bulk waste, including tires and appliances.
B. Construction/demolition waste.
C. Sludge.
D. Infectious/pathological waste.
E. Ash residue.
F. Friable asbestos waste.
G. Source-separated recyclable materials.
H. Household hazardous waste.
I. Oversize refuse items.
J. Grass clippings.
K. Leaf waste.
43.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
44.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.1501.
45.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 5-9.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-9.3
AO:109
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — A dwelling unit under single ownership or
organized as a condominium or cooperative form of housing, which contains
one, two, three or four dwelling units.
RESIDUAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, other discarded material or
other waste, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
materials resulting from industrial, mining and agricultural operations and
any sludge from an industrial, mining or agricultural water supply
treatment facility, wastewater treatment facility, or air pollution control
facility, provided that it is not hazardous. The term shall not include coal
refuse as defined in the Act of September 24, 1968 (P.L. 1040, No. 318),
known as the "Coal Refuse Disposal Control Act."46 The term shall not
include treatment sludge from coal mine drainage treatment plants,
disposal of which is being carried on pursuant to and in compliance with a
valid permit issued pursuant to the act of June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987, No. 394),
known as the "Clean Streams Law."47
TOWNSHIP — The governmental jurisdiction and legal entity of the
Township of Harris, Centre County, Pennsylvania.
UNACCEPTABLE WASTE — The following categories of solid waste:
§ 5-9.4. Storage, handling and disposal of municipal waste.
[Amended 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 287]
It shall be the duty of every person owning a residential, commercial,
industrial or institutional property within the Township where municipal
solid waste is generated and accumulated, by his/her own expense and
L. Unacceptable waste.
A. Hazardous waste.
B. Residual waste.
C. Unsterilized or unprocessed infectious or pathological waste.
D. Chemotherapeutic waste.
E. Gas cylinders.
F. Explosives and ordinance materials.
Liquid waste (i.e., containing less than 20% solids by weight or
flowable).
G.
Drums, barrels and buckets unless lids have been removed and
interiors cleaned and free of any residue.
H.
I. Radioactive material.
J. Any solid waste generated outside of the Township.
46.Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 30.51 et seq.
47.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 5-9.3 HARRIS CODE § 5-9.4
AO:110
cost, except as otherwise specified in this article, to provide and keep at
all times a sufficient number of containers to hold all municipal solid waste
accumulated between intervals of collection of such waste by an hauler; and
to ensure the sanitary and legal disposal of such waste in accordance with
this article and all other Township, state and federal applicable laws and
regulations.
§ 5-9.5. Storage on residential properties. [Amended 12-12-1994 by
Ord. No. 163; 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 287]
The following regulations shall govern storage on residential properties:
A. All refuse accumulated by owners of residential properties and/or the
occupants of residential properties shall be placed in containers for
collection by a hauler. Refuse containers used for curbside collection
shall be watertight, covered plastic or metallic cans or durable and
lightweight plastic bags that can be easily and quickly handled by one
person. Refuse containers shall be not less than five gallons nor more
than 35 gallons in capacity. The weight of a single filled container shall
not exceed 40 pounds. Use of bulk containers at multifamily
establishments shall comply with the provisions of § 5-9.6A below.
B. It shall be the responsibility of each customer to keep all refuse
receptacles in good repair and sanitary condition. Any receptacle which
does not conform to the provisions of this article or that may have
ragged or sharp edges or any other defect liable to hamper or injure the
hauler shall be promptly replaced upon notice. Failure to comply within
10 days will result in the removal of the defective receptacle as refuse.
C. A sufficient number of refuse receptacles shall be provided by the
customer of the premises. No container shall be so filled that the lid will
not fit tightly.
D. More than one family or living unit on the same premises may use the
same containers, but each family must pay the established rate as
though a separate container is being used.
E. Location of containers. For residential properties with curbside
collection, each refuse container shall be placed for collection so as to
be accessible to the hauler at ground level and at a point immediately
behind the curbline of the street, within no more than 10 feet of the
cartway of the street or alley from which the collection with a vehicle is
made if there is no curbing, or at a location mutually agreeable between
the resident, the Township and the hauler. Failure to place containers at
such locations may result in refuse not being collected. Pickup at
alternate locations may occur in accordance with agreement between
customer and hauler. Location of bulk containers at multifamily
dwelling units shall be in accordance with § 5-9.6B below.
§ 5-9.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-9.5
AO:111
§ 5-9.6. Storage on commercial, industrial and institutional
properties. [Amended 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 287]
§ 5-9.7. Collection of municipal solid waste. [Amended 12-14-2009
by Ord. No. 287]
It shall be unlawful for any person other than persons defined herein to
collect and/or transport municipal solid waste, which is generated within
the Township, as a regular hauling business. The Township may decide to
enter into an exclusive contract for residential and/or commercial refuse
collection or any part thereof.
§ 5-9.8. Transportation of municipal solid waste. [Amended
12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 287]
F. Failure to remove refuse containers from the curb or street after seven
days shall constitute a violation of this article, subject to the penalties
contained herein.
G. Persons with physical disabilities (due to age, poor health, or as defined
in the Americans with Disabilities Act) whose residence is included
under the Township's exclusive contract may place refuse at other-thanstreet
or alley locations at no additional charge when approved by the
Township Manager or his/her designee.
A. Containers. Storage of municipal solid waste on commercial, industrial
and institutional properties shall be done in a dumpster for collection
by a hauler. If the amount of waste generated per week is less than a
two-yard dumpster, the same type of containers as required for
residential properties as defined in section § 5-9.5 shall be allowed if
agreed upon by both the customer and the hauler.
B. Location of containers. Dumpsters for the storage and collection of
municipal solid waste at commercial, industrial or institutional
properties shall be placed, whenever possible, at ground level and at a
point on the property being serviced by the hauler which will enable
clear and easy access to the dumpster by the hauler's vehicle. The
location on the customer's premises shall be at a place agreed upon by
the customer of the commercial, industrial or institutional property and
the hauler. This location and buffering, if required, shall be in
compliance with zoning or other applicable municipal requirements for
the location of such containers. Such locations shall not interfere with
regular travel upon public or private sidewalks, walkways, driveways,
roads, streets, highways, alleys or entrances and exits of public or
private buildings.
A. Any person transporting municipal solid waste within the Township
shall prevent or remedy any spillage from vehicles or containers used in
the transport of such municipal solid waste. The haulers shall collect
municipal solid waste in vehicles which are suitable for such collection,
which are dedicated for use in performance of such collection, and
§ 5-9.5 HARRIS CODE § 5-9.8
AO:112
§ 5-9.9. Disposal of municipal solid waste. [Amended 12-14-2009 by
Ord. No. 287]
All municipal solid waste produced, collected and transported from within
the jurisdictional limits of the Township shall be disposed of at the facilities
designated in the Centre County Solid Waste Management Plan.
§ 5-9.10. Unlawful disposition of municipal solid waste. [Amended
12-12-1994 by Ord. No. 163; 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 287]
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring any municipal solid waste
into the Township or to transport municipal solid waste from one address
to another within or outside of the Township for the purpose of taking
advantage of the collection service to avoid the cost of collection.
§ 5-9.11. Bulk waste. [Amended 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 287]
which bear prominent legible marking, signs, or decals identifying them
as being municipal solid waste collection vehicles, and stating the
name and phone number of the hauler. The vehicles shall be securely
covered, watertight, strongly built and kept thoroughly cleaned and
well maintained. Except for rolloffs, open trucks or trucks covered with
tarps will not be used for the collection of municipal solid waste. Open
trucks may be used for the collection of bulk waste, provided that the
truck is tarped.
B. The Township, or its designated agent, shall have the authority to
inspect the vehicles used for the transport of municipal solid waste as it
deems necessary to determine compliance with this article or any other
ordinance, resolution and/or regulation of the Township. The hauler
shall correct deficiencies immediately upon notification by the
Township or its designated agent, and said vehicle shall not be used for
refuse collection until the deficiencies have been corrected.
A. Bulk waste shall be disposed of in accordance with the Centre County
Solid Waste Management Plan at a permitted disposal facility, a facility
especially designated by the Township to take such bulk items or a
legitimate salvage dealer that is in the business of disposing or
recycling such items. Bulk waste may be transported in a vehicle
appropriate to the type of waste so as to prevent spillage, accidental
loss, etc.
B. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to prohibit any person not
regularly engaged in the business of collecting municipal solid waste
from hauling his/her bulk waste to a permitted disposal facility or to a
disposal facility as designated by the Township in accordance with the
regulations of the disposal facility.
§ 5-9.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-9.12
AO:113
§ 5-9.12. Construction and demolition waste. [Amended 12-14-2009
by Ord. No. 287]
All waste materials resulting from the building, structural alteration, repair,
construction or demolition of buildings or structures shall be disposed of
as permitted by applicable Township, county, state and federal laws and
regulations as may be in effect or as may be subsequently imposed. It
shall be the responsibility of the property owner to ensure the disposal of
such waste in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. Nothing
contained herein shall be deemed to prohibit any person not regularly
engaged in the business of collecting municipal solid waste from hauling
his/her construction and demolition waste to a state-permitted disposal
facility or to a disposal facility as designated by the Township in accordance
with the regulations of the disposal facility.
§ 5-9.13. Exclusions. [Amended 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 287]
§ 5-9.14. Accumulation of waste prohibited. [Added 12-14-2009 by
Ord. No. 287]
For reasons of health and sanitation, it shall be unlawful for any person to
accumulate or permit to accumulate upon private property in the Township,
any of the types of wastes defined within § 5-9.3 of this article.
§ 5-9.15. Service fee required. [Amended 12-14-2009 by Ord. No.
287]
It shall be the duty and responsibility of every owner of property and
every person occupying a dwelling unit, premises or place of business
within the Township where municipal solid waste is generated to pay a
service fee for the collection and disposal of this waste, except as otherwise
provided by this article, to a hauler, exclusive contractor or to the Township.
A hauler, exclusive contractor or the Township may discontinue service
for nonpayment of service fees by a residential, commercial, industrial or
A. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit a farmer from carrying out
normal farming operations, including composting or spreading of
manure or other farm-produced agricultural waste, not otherwise
prohibited or regulated for land applications. All such practices must be
conducted in compliance with applicable Township, state and federal
laws and regulations as may be in effect or subsequently imposed.
B. The provisions of this article do not apply to anything but the storage,
collection, transportation and disposal of municipal solid waste and do
not apply therefore, to hazardous or residual waste as defined by the
Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act48 and its amendments. All
hazardous or residual waste must be disposed of in compliance with
applicable Township, state and federal laws and regulations as may be
in effect or subsequently imposed.
48.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 5-9.12 HARRIS CODE § 5-9.15
AO:114
institutional establishment. To discontinue residential service, the customer
shall be in arrears a minimum of 90 days and shall have received during
this period a minimum of two written notices from the hauler regarding the
amount due and procedures for payment. The second notice shall be sent
by certified mail. At the time of the discontinuance of service, the customer
shall be considered in violation of this article. Discontinuance of service due
to nonpayment of service fees shall not relieve the resident or establishment
from abiding by all of the requirements of this article. The Township,
or its designated agent, hauler or exclusive contractor may impose an
administrative fee to reinstate customers whose service is disconnected.
§ 5-9.16. Service charges. [Amended 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 287]
The cost of such residential or commercial municipal solid waste collection
service, and the responsibility of payment therefor, shall be borne by the
owner of the premises from which said municipal solid waste is collected or
upon which premises said municipal solid waste is generated and disposed
of. No agreement between an owner and occupant or other person shall
relieve the owner of any premises from liability for payments as set forth
hereinafter.
§ 5-9.17. Charges to be established by resolution. [Amended
12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 287]
All service fees established under an exclusive contract for the collection of
municipal solid waste by the Township shall be established by a resolution
of the Township Board of Supervisors. Service charges so established shall
be reviewed at least annually and adjusted as necessary to ensure that all
costs involved in the collection and disposal of municipal solid waste under
the exclusive contract, including the administrative costs of the Township,
or its designated agent, are covered by the service charges.
§ 5-9.18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-14-2009 by Ord.
No. 28749]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction by a Magisterial District Judge, be subject to a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $1,000, together with the cost of prosecution, or
imprisonment in the Centre County Prison for a period of not more than 30
days. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure. Every violator of the provisions of this article shall be deemed
guilty of a separate offense each and every day such violation continues and
shall be subject to the penalty imposed by this section for each and every
separate offense.
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 5-9.15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-9.19
AO:115
§ 5-9.19. Other remedies. [Amended 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 287]
In addition to the foregoing penalty, the Township may require the owner or
occupant of a property to remove any accumulation of waste as identified
under § 5-9.14, and should said person fail to remove such waste after five
days following written notice, the Township may cause the waste to be
collected and disposed of with the cost for such action to be charged to the
owner or occupant of the property. Failure by the owner or occupant of the
property to pay said charges within 30 days will result in a lien being filed
against the property.
§ 5-9.19 HARRIS CODE § 5-9.19
AO:116
ARTICLE X
[Adopted 2-24-1992 By OrRd.e cNyoc.l i1n4g0; Amended In Its Entirety
12-14-2009 By Ord. No. 287]
§ 5-10.1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Township of Harris Recycling Ordinance"
and the same may be cited in that manner.
§ 5-10.2. Purpose.
The Township of Harris, recognizing the reclamation of recyclable materials
has become an important method for addressing the growing solid waste
disposal problem through conservation of landfill space, preservation of
natural resources and a reduction in energy consumption, does hereby
authorize the storage, collection and transportation of recyclable materials
in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Waste Planning,
Recycling and Waste Reduction Act (No. 101),50 the Centre County Solid
Waste Management Plan, and this article. This article is intended to be an
integral part of an overall system designed to facilitate recycling and foster
the cooperation of the residents.
§ 5-10.3. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article shall have,
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the meanings given to them
in this article:
ALUMINUM CANS — Empty all-aluminum beverage and food containers.
AUTHORITY — Centre County Solid Waste Authority.
BIMETAL CONTAINERS — Empty beverage or food containers consisting of
two metals such as steel, tin or aluminum.
COMMERCIAL — Any establishment engaged in a nonmanufacturing or
nonprocessing business including, but not limited to stores, markets, office
buildings, restaurants, shopping centers and theaters. Multifamily dwelling
units, mobile/manufactured home parks, hotels, motels, mixed-use
properties (combined business/residential on a single parcel) and farms
which use commercial dumpsters shall be considered commercial
establishments. Does not include properties where the primary permitted
use is residential and accessory use is commercial (i.e., home occupations).
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Church, school, civic, service group,
municipal functions and all other such functions.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Structural paper material with an inner core
shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges.
50.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 5-10.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-10.3
AO:117
CURBSIDE RECYCLING COLLECTION — The scheduled collection and
transportation of recyclable materials placed at the curbline or other area
designated by the collector.
CUSTOMER — The owner of any residential, commercial, industrial or
institutional property located within the Township.
DESIGNATED AGENT — An agent, such as the Centre Region Council
of Governments, acting on behalf of the Township whose powers and
responsibilities are established in an intergovernmental agreement or
similar document.
DROPOFF SITES — Those specified locations, staffed or unstaffed, where
recyclable materials may be taken at specified times.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms on premises which have cooking
facilities and are arranged for occupancy by one person, two or more
persons living together or one family. Each dwelling unit within a
noncommercial building shall be considered an individual residential
customer served by curbside refuse and recycling collection.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The official designated herein or otherwise
charged with the responsibilities of administering this article, or the official
authorized representative.
EXCLUSIVE CONTRACT — An agreement entered into by the Township, or
its designated agent, with a private person or corporation for the collection
and disposal of all municipal solid waste generated within the boundaries of
the Township to the extent provided by this article and the agreement.
GLASS CONTAINERS — Bottles and jars made of clear, green or amber
glass. Expressly excluded are noncontainer glass, automobile glass, plate
glass, blue glass, lead crystal and porcelain and ceramic products.
HAULER — A person who collects, transports and/or disposes of municipal
solid waste, recyclable materials and bulk waste from residential,
commercial, industrial and institutional establishments or community
activity. The term may be applied to a person having the exclusive right
to collect within the Township. All such haulers shall comply with the
provisions under Pennsylvania Act 90,51 as well as all federal, state, county
and local laws, rules and regulations.
HIGH-DENSITY POLYETHYLENE (HDPE) CONTAINERS — Plastic bottles
and jars made exclusively from noncolored high-density polyethylene, such
as milk and water jugs.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — All white paper, bond paper, and computer
paper used in commercial, industrial, institutional and municipal
establishments.
INDUSTRIAL — Any establishment engaging in manufacturing or
processing including, but not limited to factories, foundries, mills,
processing plants and refineries.
51.Editor's Note: See 27 Pa.C.S.A. § 6201 et seq.
§ 5-10.3 HARRIS CODE § 5-10.3
AO:118
INSTITUTIONAL — Any establishment engaged in service to persons
including, but not limited to hospitals, nursing homes, orphanages, schools
and universities.
LEAD-ACID BATTERIES — Includes, but is not limited to, automotive, truck
and industrial batteries that contain lead.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residue, shrubbery and tree trimmings and
similar material, but not including grass clippings.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING UNIT — A type of residential property either
under single ownership or organized as a condominium or cooperative form
of housing, which contains five or more dwelling units.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or
office waste and any other material including solid waste, liquid, semisolid
or contained gaseous materials resulting from the operation of residential,
municipal, commercial, industrial or institutional establishments and from
community activities, and any sludge not meeting the definition of "residual
or hazardous waste" in the Solid Waste Management Act52 from a municipal,
commercial, industrial or institutional water supply treatment plant,
wastewater treatment plant, or air pollution control facilities.
NEWSPAPERS — All paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint"
and distributed at fixed intervals having printed thereon news and opinions,
containing advertisements and other matters of public interest. Expressly
excluded are newspapers which are wet, yellowed or soiled.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, corporation, association, institution,
cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, federal government or agency,
state institution or agency or any other legal entity whatsoever which is
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
POLYETHYLENE TEREPHTHALATE (PET) CONTAINERS — Plastic soda
bottles composed of the polymer PET.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — The collection and separation of aluminum,
steel, and bimetal cans; green, brown, blue, and clear glass; newsprint and
bundles of magazines; unwanted mail; mixed office paper; paperboard; all
plastic bottles (1 through 7); domestic corrugated cardboard; empty aerosol
and paint cans; and any other materials per Section 1501 of Pennsylvania
Act 10153 or added as material accepted by the Centre County Solid Waste
Authority from time to time.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — A dwelling unit under single ownership or
organized as a condominium or cooperative form of housing, which contains
one, two, three or four dwelling units.
STEEL CANS — Empty all-steel food and beverage containers.
TOWNSHIP — The governmental jurisdiction and legal entity of the
Township of Harris, Centre County, Pennsylvania.
52.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
53.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.1501.
§ 5-10.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-10.4
AO:119
§ 5-10.4. Recyclable materials not subject to solid waste disposal
provisions.
Those recyclable materials separated under the provisions of this article
shall not be considered municipal solid waste and shall not be subject to the
provisions of Township ordinances which require disposal of municipal solid
waste at the Centre County Solid Waste Authority facilities by a hauler as
defined herein.
§ 5-10.5. Recycling program established.
The Township hereby establishes a program for the mandatory separation
of recyclables from municipal solid waste by residential dwellings and
commercial, industrial and institutional establishments.
§ 5-10.6. Dropoff facilities.
Dropoff facilities may be sited for use by those residential and commercial
properties located within Centre County not serviced by a curbside route.
Occupants of these residential and commercial properties shall be
responsible for the separation of recyclable materials from municipal solid
waste and their preparation and delivery to dropoff sites established by the
Township.
§ 5-10.7. Container use.
§ 5-10.8. Recycling by hauler.
A. All recyclable material accumulated by owners of residential,
commercial, industrial and institutional properties and/or occupants of
said properties shall be placed in containers for collection by a hauler.
B. It shall be the responsibility of each customer to keep all recycling
receptacles in good repair and sanitary condition.
C. More than one family or dwelling unit on the same premises may use
the same containers, but each family must pay the established rate as
though a separate container is being used.
D. Location of containers. For residential and commercial properties,
recycling containers shall be placed near refuse containers for
collection. Pickup at alternate locations may occur in accordance with
agreement between customer and hauler.
A. All recyclable materials generated within the Township shall be
collected by a hauler. A commercial, industrial and institutional
establishment may utilize an individual recycling program in
conformance with § 5-10.9.
B. The Township or its designated agent may, through a competitive
bidding process, award an exclusive service contract for all or part of
residential recycling collection.
§ 5-10.4 HARRIS CODE § 5-10.9
AO:120
§ 5-10.9. Individual recycling plan.
§ 5-10.10. Establishment of regulations.
The Township or its designated agent shall establish and promulgate
regulations on the manner, days and time of collection of recyclable
materials and for the bundling, handling, location and time of placement
of such materials for collection. Regulations shall be promulgated for each
of the programs undertaken for residential dwelling units, and commercial,
industrial and institutional establishments.
§ 5-10.11. Special items.
A. Commercial, industrial and institutional establishments conducting
their own recycling programs, not in conjunction with a hauler or under
an exclusive contract as may be established by the Township for the
collection of municipal solid waste and recyclables, shall file with the
Township or its designated agent and have approved by the Township or
its designated agent, plans for individual recycling programs which
provide for, at a minimum, the recycling of items listed in the rules and
regulations for the recycling program.
B. In addition to filing an individual recycling plan, commercial, industrial
and institutional customers who choose to establish an individual
recycling program are required to submit semiannually to the Township
or its designated agent, weigh slips or other certification which show by
weight and type of material recycled by that establishment. If weigh
slips are not used, the form of certification requires the prior approval
of the Township or its designated agent. Required information is due
within 60 days of the end of the reporting period designated in the
regulations for the recycling program.
C. An individual recycling plan for commercial, industrial or institutional
establishments shall provide the following information:
(1) Applicant's company name, address, telephone number, contact
person and owner's name.
(2) Company name, address, telephone number, and contact person for
entity providing the recycling service.
(3) Description of materials to be recycled, frequency of collection,
method of storage and how service will be provided.
(4) Form of certification to assure proper disposal of recyclable
materials.
(5) Municipality in which the establishment is located.
(6) Other information as may be required by the Township or its
designated agent which is intended to assure the proper disposal of
recyclable materials.
§ 5-10.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-10.11
AO:121
§ 5-10.12. Collection by unauthorized persons.
It is understood that any recyclable materials located at the curbline are
the property of the Township. It is further understood that any recyclable
materials deposited in storage bins associated with commercial, industrial
and institutional establishments belong to the property owner. Recyclable
materials deposited in containers owned by the Centre County Solid Waste
Authority are the property of the Authority.
§ 5-10.13. Accumulation of recyclables prohibited.
For reasons of health and sanitation, it shall be unlawful for any person to
accumulate or permit to accumulate upon private property in the Township,
any of the types of recyclables defined within § 5-10.3 of this article.
§ 5-10.14. Enforcement and administration.
The Board of Supervisors shall appoint an enforcement officer or officers to
enforce and administer the provisions of this article.
§ 5-10.15. Alternative disposition of recyclable materials.
Any person may donate or sell recyclable materials to individuals or
organizations. Otherwise, such materials are to be placed at curbside,
in dropoff facilities or storage bins or similar authorized locations for
collection by the exclusive contractor or hauler as applicable.
§ 5-10.16. Violations and penalties.
A. Lead-acid batteries. No person shall place a used lead-acid battery in
mixed municipal solid waste, discard or otherwise dispose of a lead-acid
battery except by delivery to an automotive battery retailer or
wholesaler, to a secondary lead smelter permitted by the Environmental
Protection Agency, or to a collection or recycling facility authorized
under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Leaf collection. All residential customers and commercial, industrial or
institutional establishments who gather leaves shall separate all leaf
waste from municipal solid waste and place it for collection at the times
and in the manner theretofore or hereafter prescribed by the Township.
Nothing herein shall require any person to gather leaf waste or prevent
any person from utilizing leaf waste for compost, mulch or other
agriculture, horticulture, silvicultural, gardening or landscape
purposes.
A. Nonparticipation.
(1) Upon the discovery of any violation under the terms of this article,
the Township may, through its authorized agent, give notice to the
owner or occupant of a violation hereunder, either by personal
delivery to such owner or occupant, by United States Mail directed
§ 5-10.11 HARRIS CODE § 5-10.16
AO:122
to the last known address of such person or persons, as shown in
the real estate registry records of the Township, or by leaving the
same on the premises where such violation occurs.
(2) Such person shall, within seven days after the delivery, mailing or
leaving of such notice, make settlement by paying to the Treasurer
of the Township a sum of not more than $600 for the violation. The
failure of such person to make a settlement, as aforesaid, within
seven days, the Township may institute an action for violation
pursuant to Subsection B.
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall affect, in any way, the
provisions of this article regarding separate offenses for every day
any violation occurs.
B. Fines for nonparticipation or nonpayment. On neglect or refusal of the
occupant of any dwelling serviced by curbside recycling collection,
residential dwelling unit or commercial, industrial or institutional
establishment, to separate recyclable materials from municipal solid
waste and place them at curbside or sites established by the Township
or its designated agent, or make a settlement as provided in Subsection
A, that person shall, upon conviction before a Magisterial District Judge
of such violation, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $1,000, together with the cost of prosecution, or
imprisonment in the Centre County Prison for a period of not more than
30 days. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable
rules of civil procedure. Each violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
C. Unauthorized collection. If any person, firm, corporation or other entity,
unauthorized by the Township or its designated agent, collects or
removes or causes to be collected or removed any such recyclable
materials as specified in the Township regulations, or in violation of the
provisions of this article, such person, firm, corporation or other entity
shall, upon conviction by a Magisterial District Judge in a summary
proceeding, be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than
$1,000, together with the cost of prosecution, or imprisonment in the
Centre County Prison for a period of not more than 30 days. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township
may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure. Each day of a violation shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense and shall be subject to separate summary proceedings
before a Magisterial District Judge, and be subject to a penalty imposed
by this section for each and every such violation shall continue.
D. Pilfering of collection containers. If any person is responsible for
pilfering of collection containers issued to a residence slated for either
curbside collection or any other phase of the Township Recycling
Program, such person shall, upon conviction by a Magisterial District
Judge in a summary proceeding, be subject to a fine of not less than
§ 5-10.16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-10.16
AO:123
$100 nor more than $1,000, together with the cost of prosecution, or
imprisonment in the Centre County Prison for a period of not more than
30 days. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable
rules of civil procedure. Each day of a violation shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense and shall be subject to separate summary
proceedings before a Magisterial District Judge and subject to a penalty
imposed by this article for each and every such violation shall continue.
The affected resident will be responsible for replacing any missing
container through purchase from the Township or its designated agent.
§ 5-10.16 HARRIS CODE § 5-10.16
AO:124
Chapter 6
PUBLIC SAFETY AND CONDUCT
§ 5-10.16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-10.16
AO:125

ARTICLE I
Dogs
[Adopted 9-12-1994 by Ord. No. 159]
§ 6-1.1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Harris Township Dog Ordinance."
§ 6-1.2. Authorization.54
This article is authorized by the following Sections of the Second Class
Township Code:
§ 6-1.3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONTINUOUS BARKING — Sustained barking by a dog.
DOG OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog, means every
person having a right of property in any dog, and every person who keeps
or harbors any dog or has it in his/her care, and every person who permits
any dog to remain on or about any premises occupied by him/her.
KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or harbor any
dog, or otherwise have custody of any dog, whether or not the owner of such
dog, whether for compensation or otherwise.
ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Ordinance Enforcement Offer
of the Township of Harris, Centre County, Pennsylvania.
POLICE OFFICER — An officer of State College Police Department or any
duly sworn law enforcement officer authorized to enforce the Laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and ordinances of the Township of Harris.
PREMISES — A tract of land, including buildings.
REPETITIVE BARKING — Barking by a dog at frequent intervals.
A. Section 1529, concerning nuisances, 53 P.S. § 66529.
B. Section 3010, concerning public health, 53 P.S. § 68010.
C. Section 1530, concerning regulation of dogs, 53 P.S. § 66530.
D. Section 1601, concerning ordinances, 53 P.S. § 66601.
E. Section 1527, concerning public safety, 53 P.S. § 66527.
F. Section 1501, concerning corporate powers, 53 P.S. § 66501.
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 6-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-1.4
AO:127
§ 6-1.4. Confinement and control of dogs.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any dog to fail to keep at all
times such dog either:
§ 6-1.5. Excessive barking.
§ 6-1.6. Curbing of dogs and removal of feces.
A. Confined within the premises of the owner.
B. Firmly secured by means of a collar and chain, leash, rope or other
device so that it cannot stray beyond the premises on which it is
secured.
C. Under the reasonable control of some person, or when engaged in
lawful hunting, exhibition or field training.
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper to harbor any dog which
barks repetitively during any given one-hour period, or which barks
continuously for a period of 10 consecutive minutes or more, and which
is audible on any adjacent property or public right-of-way.
B. Upon the first offense, the dog owner or keeper shall be given a written
warning notice by personal service or certified mail, return receipt
requested.
C. It shall be a condition precedent to any enforcement proceeding to
show that a written warning was issued to the dog owner or keeper
within the previous twelve-month period.
A. The owner or keeper shall immediately remove and dispose of all feces
deposited by any dog on private or public property not under the
control of the owner or keeper of such dog. Owner or keeper shall
dispose of feces in a sanitary manner.
B. It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of any dog to allow feces to
accumulate on private property, owned or controlled by the owner or
keeper, to a level which is detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of
persons or property, as determined by the Harris Township Ordinance
Enforcement Officer or police officer conducting the investigation of the
property.
(1) The owner of any property where dog feces has been allowed to
accumulate to a level which is detrimental to the health, safety or
welfare of persons or property, as determined by the Harris
Township Ordinance Enforcement Officer or police officer
conducting the investigation of the property, shall be ordered to
remove and dispose of such accumulation of feces in a sanitary
manner within a period of five days.
(2) Notice to such property owner shall be provided in writing to the
dog owner or keeper by: personal service; or by certified mail,
§ 6-1.4 HARRIS CODE § 6-1.6
AO:128
§ 6-1.7. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Amended 4-8-1996
by Ord. No. 173]
return receipt requested, sent to the dog owner or keeper. If the
dog owner is not available, notice may be given by posting the
property at a conspicuous place. Each five-day period after service
or posting of notice that the property remains in a condition which
is detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of persons or
property shall constitute a separate offense.
C. The accumulation of dog feces upon private property is declared to be a
public nuisance.
A. The Ordinance Enforcement Officer of the Township of Harris, and any
police officer empowered to enforce the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Township of
Harris, shall hereby be authorized to enforce the provisions of this
article.
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of §§ 6-1.4, 6-1.5 or 6-1.6A of
this article, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a
Magisterial District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement
of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus
costs and, in default of payment of said fines and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this
article continues or each section of this article which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a separate offense. Additionally,
third and subsequent convictions of § 6-1.5 after the mandatory
warning notice has been issued, within one year of any previous such
conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $600.55
C. Any person who shall violate § 6-1.6B by failing to remove accumulation
of feces within five days after service or posting of notice, shall, upon
conviction thereof by a Magisterial District Judge, be subject to pay a
fine of not less than $25 nor more than $300 plus costs of prosecution
for each offense.
D. Any person who shall violate § 6-1.6C by maintaining a nuisance shall
be subject to the procedures provided in Article VII, Section 702,
Paragraph 12, of the Second Class Township Code, as amended, 53 P.S.
§ 65712. The penalty prescribed by this article, which may be collected
by summary proceedings or in the manner provided for the collection of
municipal liens or by an action of assumpsit, shall be not less than $25
nor more than $300, plus costs of prosecution for each offense.
E. In addition to the penalties and procedures provided above, the Board
of Supervisors is also authorized to institute proceedings in courts of
equity to abate nuisances or to protect the health, safety and welfare.
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 6-1.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-1.7
AO:129

ARTICLE II
Chickens
[Adopted 2-13-2012 by Ord. No. 297]
§ 6-2.1. Intent.
It is the intent of this article to provide for the keeping of chicken hens
on fee simple lots that are less than 10 acres in size and developed with
a single-family detached dwelling unit. The keeping of chicken hens shall
be for the use and enjoyment of the occupants of the property and shall
not be used for commercial purposes. This article creates standards and
requirements to ensure that chicken hens do not adversely impact the
neighborhood surrounding the property on which the chicken hens are kept.
§ 6-2.2. Confinement and control of chickens.
A. Only chicken hens are permitted to be kept on lots that are less than 10
acres in size.
B. Number of chicken hens allowed on various lot sizes. For any property
with a single-family detached dwelling unit on lots that are less than 10
acres, the maximum number of chicken hens allowed shall be eight. The
number of chicken hens allowed per individual lot is as follows:
3,000 to 5,999 square feet 2 chicken hens
6,000 to 10,999 square feet 4 chicken hens
11,000 to 20,999 square 6 chicken hens
21,000 square feet and over 8 chicken hens
C. All chicken hens shall be housed in a roofed coop that is stationary,
ventilated, predator-resistant, and enclosed in a way that contains the
chicken hens. An outdoor run is permitted and can be moveable as long
as it is not enclosed and is not permanently attached to the chicken
coop.
D. The coop and run housing chicken hens shall not be located in a front or
side yard area. The location of the coop and run shall follow the
underlying zoning district setbacks for accessory structures. No
chicken coop and run shall be closer than six feet from any property
line. Only one coop shall be allowed on each non-agriculturally zoned
property.
E. The minimum coop size shall be three square feet per chicken hen.
F. A coop can be an existing structure, if it meets applicable setback
requirements, or a new structure. A zoning permit shall be required
before any coop or run is established on a property.
§ 6-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-2.3
AO:131
§ 6-2.3. Requirements and prohibitions.
The following requirements shall apply to all eligible properties less than 10
acres in area that house a chicken hen:
A. Unlawful for chickens to run at large. It shall be unlawful for the owner
or owners of any chicken hens to allow the same to run at large upon
any of the common thoroughfares, sidewalks, passageways, play areas,
parks, streets, alleys or public highways, or any place where people
congregate or walk, or upon any public or private property, Any chicken
not contained in a coop or run shall be deemed "at large."
B. Sanitary requirements for chickens. Any owner or owners of chicken
hens shall be required to house the same at all times under sanitary
conditions so that the keeping of chicken hens shall not become either a
public or a private nuisance. The following provisions apply:
(1) Chicken feces on private property shall not be allowed to
accumulate to the degree that it becomes a public health nuisance
or hazard. All coops and runs shall be maintained in a neat and
sanitary condition and shall be cleaned as necessary to prevent any
odor detectable at a property line. In cases where chicken feces
does accumulate on private property, the Ordinance Enforcement
Officer or his/her designee may conduct an investigation after
which the accumulation may be declared a public health hazard or
nuisance and the owner shall be ordered to remove and dispose of
the accumulated feces. Written notice shall be provided to the
property owner of such violation and a time period not to exceed
seven days shall be given to abate the violation.
(2) Composting. It shall be unlawful for any person to spread or cause
to be spread or deposited upon any ground or premises within
Harris Township any chicken manure. However; chicken manure
may be composted on the property where the chickens are housed
and the composted material then applied to gardens or yards.
(3) Slaughtering or butchering. Slaughtering or butchering of chickens
for personal consumption or religious practices shall be permitted,
provided that it is done wholly on the property where the chicken
hens are kept. Slaughtering or butchering shall be conducted only
in an indoor location, and any waste created from slaughtering or
butchering shall be disposed of in a proper and sanitary manner.
Commercial slaughtering or butchering is prohibited unless it is
done under the operation of an approved facility for the
slaughtering of animals as regulated by the Pennsylvania
Department of Agriculture.
(4) Proper storage of feed. All feed, water and other items associated
with the keeping of chicken hens shall be stored and dispensed in a
way that prevents infestation by rats, mice or other rodents or
vectors. Failure to keep all feed, water and other items associated
§ 6-2.3 HARRIS CODE § 6-2.3
AO:132
§ 6-2.4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article, upon conviction
thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the
manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs. Each day that a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 6-2.5. When effective.
The effective date of this article shall be five days after the date of
enactment thereof.
with the keeping of chicken hens in a clean and sanitary condition
constitutes a violation of this article.
§ 6-2.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-2.5
AO:133
Chapter 7
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Motor vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 8. Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
11.
§ 6-2.5 HARRIS CODE § 6-2.5
AO:134
ARTICLE I
Streets
A.
Street Obstructions and Excavations
[Adopted 10-12-1998 by Ord. No. 202]
§ 7-1.1. Definitions.
Unless the context shall clearly indicate otherwise, the following words and
phrases shall have the definitions hereinafter described to them:
DRAINAGE DITCH CULVERT or DRAINAGE AREA — Portion of the
Township road or right-of-way of such road and areas adjacent to any road
or in and upon any road right-of-way provided for, utilized or otherwise
planned or used for the drainage of stormwater.
EMERGENCY REPAIR — Work necessitated by the rupture or sudden or
unexpected malfunction of existing underground facilities.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, firm or entity, whether
or not the same is a resident, doing business in Harris Township.
PUBLIC UTILITY —
Persons now or hereafter owning or operating, in this commonwealth,
equipment or facilities for:
Producing, generating, transmitting, distributing or furnishing
natural or artificial gas, electricity, or steam for the production of
light, heat or power to or for the public for compensation.
(1)
Diverting, developing, pumping, impounding, distributing, or
furnishing water to or for the public for compensation.
(2)
Transporting or conveying natural or artificial gas, crude oil,
gasoline, or petroleum products, by pipelines or conduit, for the
public for compensation.
(3)
Conveying or transmitting messages or communications by
telephone or telegraph to the public for compensation.
(4)
Sewage collection, treatment or disposal for the public for
compensation.
(5)
A.
The term "public utility" shall not include:
Any person or corporation, not otherwise a public utility, who or
which furnishes services only to himself or itself.
(1)
Any bona fide cooperative association which furnishes services only
to its stockholders or members on a nonprofit basis.
(2)
B.
§ 7-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-1.1
AO:135
RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY LOG — A chronological record of pavement
cuts and disturbances to rights-of-way as reported to the Township
containing pertinent data as required by the Township for the purpose of
inspection and control.
TEMPORARY RESTORATION — Work within an existing cartway which
shall consist of a minimum of eight-inch stone base and a minimum of twoinch
bituminous surface material.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Harris, County of Centre, Pennsylvania.
"Township" shall also refer to personnel of the Township of Harris
empowered to represent the Township of Harris in enforcement of this
subarticle, which may include but is not necessarily limited to the Township
Manager, Ordinance Enforcement Officer, Township Engineer, Public Works
Director.
TOWNSHIP ROAD, ROAD, WAY, STREET — All streets, highways, roads,
alleys, lands and other public ways which have been accepted for
maintenance by the Supervisors and comprise part of the Township road
system.
WORK — The furnishing of all materials, labor, equipment, and other
incidentals necessary or convenient to the successful completing of
anything done within the right-of-way of a street and the fulfillment of all
duties and obligations imposed by this subarticle.
§ 7-1.2. Unlawful acts.
No person, unless specifically permitted by the Township of Harris and in
possession of a valid road occupancy permit, as set forth in the following
sections of this subarticle, shall do any act or deed which changes, obstructs
or otherwise interferes with any Township road or road grade, or any
drainage system of such roads or ways, or which changes the established
slope of the berm of such roads. In furtherance of the foregoing provisions,
and in addition to other acts which are found to be in derogation of the
foregoing, the following acts are hereby declared unlawful, unless
specifically permitted:
Any producer of natural gas not engaged in distributing such
directly to the public for compensation.
(3)
(4) The Township of Harris.
(5) Cellular service providers.
A. Deposit of any foreign matter, including but not limited to stones,
gravel, dirt, grass, weeds, leaves, snow or ice, upon any Township road
or maintenance or conduct of any use upon lands abutting such road or
roads which results in stones, gravel, dirt, grass, weeds, leaves, snow or
ice, or other foreign matter, being deposited upon any Township road or
drainage area.
§ 7-1.1 HARRIS CODE § 7-1.2
AO:136
§ 7-1.3. Road occupancy permit requirements.
All persons desiring to construct or reconstruct a motor vehicle access,
driveway, ingress or egress shall apply for a permit for connection if access
shall intersect with a Township street. Application shall be in writing and
on a form provided by the Township. The application shall be accompanied
by payment of an application fee in such amount as shall be established
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. The applicant shall provide such
pertinent information as may be deemed by the Township to be necessary to
adequately evaluate the application, which may include, but is not limited
to, location of the work area, including property owner(s), addresses,
telephone numbers and other contact information; a narrative explaining,
in detail, what work is being proposed, including construction materials; a
sketch or drawing of the proposed work area, including Township facilities
in the right-of-way; engineering data, including elevations, cross-section
drawings, etc.
§ 7-1.4. Drainage maintenance.
Appropriate drainage must be maintained at all times. Construction of
a driveway or access shall not interfere with preconstruction flow of
stormwater within the public right-of-way. The proposed method of
maintaining drainage within the public right-of-way shall be detailed in the
application for permit and in any drawings submitted.
§ 7-1.5. Permit approval.
B. Removal of stones, gravel, pavement, dirt or other substance placed
upon any municipal road or street by the municipality or its agent, or
alteration or interference with such substances or road surface.
C. Construction or reconstruction of a driveway or entryway on or onto
any Township road.
D. Blocking, filling or otherwise changing or interfering with any drainage
ditch or culvert on any Township road or diverting the flow of water to
or away from the same.
E. Maintenance, relocation or related work by any public utility, such as
water or sewer, involving one or more pavement cuts or alteration or
disturbance to any drainage conveyance or stormwater facility within
the Township right-of-way.
F. Constructing or reconstructing a sidewalk in any Township right-of-way.
A. The Township shall assure that the specifications to be contained in the
issued permit are appropriate for the application.
B. In the event the Township shall deem that any proposed work shall
jeopardize health, safety or welfare, the Township shall provide
notification to the applicant that the permit shall not be approved until
such time as the applicant shall provide sufficient evidence that
§ 7-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-1.5
AO:137
§ 7-1.6. Utilization of right-of-way.
Persons owning lands abutting Township roads, ways or drainage areas
may utilize that portion of the Township right-of-way not comprising part
of the cartway, berm or drainage ditch for any lawful use not obstructing
or interfering with such cartway, berm or drainage area or ditch; provided,
however, that the Supervisors may require that such use be removed or
discontinued, as the case may be, at their sole discretion, upon written
notice by ordinary mail to such abutting owner or, where the whereabouts
of such owner is unknown, by posting the said notice at a conspicuous place
upon the abutting land. Upon notice given as herein provided and within
the time set forth in such notice, the owner of such lands shall remove or
discontinue the said use, as the case may be, at the sole expense of such
owner, without right of reimbursement from the Township. In the event that
the owner refuses to remove or discontinue such use in the time set forth
in the notice, the Supervisors may cause the same to be discontinued or
removed and shall be entitled to recover the actual costs incurred by the
Township in securing the discontinuance or removal of the use, plus any
costs or expenses incurred. This remedy shall not be exclusive and shall be
in addition to such other remedies in law or at equity that may be available
to the Township.
§ 7-1.7. Emergency repairs by utilities.
proposed work has been revised to correct said deficiency. If the
applicant shall not correct the deficiency within 30 days of the date of
written notification, the permit shall be deemed to be denied.
C. The permit shall contain specifications for construction or repair, which
shall be supplied to the person or firm completing the construction or
repair by the applicant, and which shall be made available to Township
personnel, upon demand, at the work site during construction. All
authorized construction shall be completed in accordance with permit
specifications.
D. The Township shall approve or deny the road occupancy permit
application within 30 days of receipt of such application and payment of
fees or, if supplemental data is required, within 30 days after the
receipt of such data. If the permit is denied, the Township shall provide
notification of reasons for denial to the applicant. Permission or denial
shall be provided to the applicant in person or by ordinary mail
addressed to the applicant at the address set forth in the application.
A. In the event an emergency repair is necessary to be completed by a
public utility, the utility shall provide notice to the Township within 24
hours of when the emergency is discovered. Notice shall include day,
date, time, location, and nature of the emergency work. The Township
Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall record information provided by
the utility in the right-of-way occupancy log.
§ 7-1.5 HARRIS CODE § 7-1.7
AO:138
§ 7-1.8. Liability; insurance requirements.
§ 7-1.9. Safety precautions.
During the progress of work, the applicant shall provide and maintain
such barricades, warning signs and other traffic control devices as may
be deemed necessary by the Township or required by applicable PennDOT
regulation (PennDOT Publication 203 - Work Zone Traffic Control) to
maintain safe conditions for the traveling public and neighboring property
owners/tenants.
§ 7-1.10. Construction procedures.
B. A road occupancy permit shall be required for every emergency repair
completed in the Township right-of-way. The public utility shall submit
all pertinent information as may be needed for the Ordinance
Enforcement Officer or Township Engineer to review the emergency
repairs completed and determine specifications necessary to restore
the right-of-way to a stable, permanent condition. The issued permit
shall contain specifications. The public utility shall complete restoration
in compliance with the specifications.
A. The applicant shall protect, defend, indemnify, and save harmless the
Township, its officers, employees, and agents thereof from all claims,
suits, actions and proceedings of every nature and description which
may be brought for or on account of any injuries or damages to persons
or public or private property because of any materials or appliances
used in the work, or by or on account of improper materials or
workmanship, or for or on account of any accident or any other act,
negligence or omission of said applicant, or his agents, servants, or
employees, and the Township shall not in any way be liable therefor
during the period of the work in progress and the two-year guarantee
period following the acceptance of the work.
B. Any person or public utility performing work within the Township rightof-
way shall provide evidence of minimum insurance coverage, as
follows:
(1) Three hundred thousand dollars liability per individual with a limit
of $500,000 for each occurrence for bodily injury.
(2) Three hundred thousand dollars liability for property damage.
C. Evidence of insurance in the form of a certificate or letter executed by a
duly authorized representative of the insurance carrier shall be
submitted to the Township. Evidence of insurance may be provided on
an annual, calendar-year basis or prior to permit issuance.
A. Road closing.
(1) For nonemergency repairs, no street or road in the Township of
Harris shall be completely closed to traffic at any time. One lane of
§ 7-1.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-1.10
AO:139
traffic must be able to pass at all times. All established traffic
patterns must be maintained at all times.
(2) If emergency repairs necessitate that a road be closed, and all
other means of traffic control have been exhausted, the Township
may allow a road to be temporarily closed for short duration,
provided that permission has been granted by the Township and a
detour route is provided.
B. Scheduling. The public utility or contractor shall coordinate all planned
pavement cuts to coincide with the Township's paving program. A
construction schedule of improvements planned for completion in the
upcoming calendar year shall be provided to the Township Manager by
a responsible representative of the public utility or contractor by
December 1 of the previous year. Addendums shall be provided to the
Township as plans are revised.
C. Excavated material and waste material.
(1) Stormwater and drainage facilities shall be kept clear of excavated
or waste material and other debris. No materials or obstructions
shall be placed within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
(2) The public utility or contractor shall be responsible for removal and
disposal of all excavated or waste material resulting from work. If
excavated or waste material has been temporarily placed on
pavement during work, the pavement must be swept and/or washed
prior to reopening the street to traffic.
D. Opening of all streets. Power-driven pavement saws shall be used on all
pavement cuts. The cut must be of sufficient depth to provide a smooth
edge.
E. Responsibility for damages. If there is damage to another utility's
facilities as a result of the work, the public utility or contractor shall
notify that utility and the Township immediately. If damage is to an
underground facility, the public utility and the Township shall be
notified before any backfilling is begun.
F. Backfilling. The Township shall be notified in advance of all backfilling.
Backfilling shall be completed in such a manner as to obtain maximum
compaction throughout the entire length of backfill. Type 2RC stone
shall be used in all backfilling. The method of backfilling shall be
consistent with good engineering practice, i.e., the material shall be
placed in layers not to exceed six inches properly tamped using a
mechanical tamper or a mechanical vibrator up to the bottom elevation
of the pavement structure. All backfill shall be compacted in
accordance with PennDOT Specifications, Publication 408, § 206.3, as
amended.
G. Temporary restoration. The permittee shall be responsible for all costs
of constructing and maintaining temporary and permanent restorations
§ 7-1.10 HARRIS CODE § 7-1.10
AO:140
of disturbed areas. Temporary restoration shall consist of a minimum of
two inches of bituminous material placed until permanent restoration
can be completed, at which time the public utility shall notify the
Township to complete an inspection.
H. Permanent restoration.
(1) Only public utilities or their contractors shall be permitted to make
permanent restoration of openings in pavements. The restored
pavements shall be guaranteed from failure for a period of two
years from the date of acceptance. Permanent restoration shall be
completed no sooner than within 30 days nor later than within 60
days of the initial cut. Any pavement cut made in the months of
November through March shall be permanently restored within 30
days after hot asphalt becomes available.
(2) Existing base and surface must be exposed six inches on each side
on any failures that may have developed.
(3) Permanent restoration of flexible base pavements shall consist of
six inches of 2A stone subbase, five inches of bituminous concrete
base course, and two inches of ID-2 wearing course rolled to
conform with the existing road, and the edges sealed with AC-20.
All openings, regardless of size, must be permanently restored in
accordance with PennDOT Specifications, Publication 408, as
amended and superseded.
(4) Upon any failure of restoration being reported to a public utility,
the pertinent public utility shall begin repairs within 24 hours after
such notification. Upon failure of the public utility to repair the cut
in a satisfactory manner, the Township shall have the option to
complete the work or to contract to complete the work and to
invoice the public utility which shall be responsible for the cost of
same.
(5) The permanent restoration of special-type pavements, such as
concrete, brick, paving block, etc., shall consist of relaying the
original wearing course in accordance with the original installation
specifications in such a manner as to prevent settlement or other
deterioration.
(6) The permanent restoration of chip-seal-type pavements shall
consist of a minimum of two applications of the original wearing
course, specifications to be provided by the Township.
I. Monuments and survey markers. No monument or survey marker may
be removed or altered at any time. When work in the right-of-way
requires the temporary removal of a limestone monument or survey
marker, it must be preserved at the site and reset at the direction of a
registered surveyor. All costs incidental thereto, including surveys,
shall be charged to the public utility or contractor.
§ 7-1.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-1.10
AO:141
J. Test borings. All test holes and boring in the right-of-way shall require a
permit. Restoration of bore holes shall follow immediately after testing
with the application of asphalt permanent restoration or other waterresistant
plugs.
K. Replacement of pavement markings. The utility and/or its contractor
shall replace, in kind, all pavement markings damaged or removed by
pavement cutting or work incidental thereto. All markings must be
replaced within five days after permanent restoration. The Township
may contract to have the necessary repairs made and invoice the utility.
L. Replacement of electronic traffic control devices and ancillary
equipment.
(1) Electronic traffic control devices and ancillary equipment damaged
or removed because of pavement excavations or work incidental
thereto shall be replaced by the utility or its contractor, in kind, in
whole or in part as required by the Township.
(2) If not replaced in a timely manner, the Township shall contract to
have the necessary repairs made and invoice the utility.
M. Testing and inspection.
(1) The Township may, at the discretion of the Township, assign a
qualified construction inspector to inspect all permitted work. The
Township shall assign the inspector to inspect the work, as needed,
to assure that the work is adequate and sufficient to insure the
integrity of the work. Adequate level of qualification for the
inspector shall be as determined by the Township Engineer. Level
of inspection shall be as determined by the Township.
(2) The cost for inspection shall be the responsibility of the permittee
or, in case of emergency repairs, the public utility responsible for
the work.
N. Repaving and reconstruction.
(1) Public utilities provided notification from the Township of a
planned street resurfacing or reconstruction shall be required to
test their lines and services and schedule necessary capital
improvements and service connections prior to planned
commencement of resurfacing or reconstruction.
(2) Pavement cuts shall be prohibited in new pavement except when
the following conditions exist: Pavement cuts in new pavement
shall be allowed only in the event of emergency, or installation of
primary essential service, and only in the event that no other
reasonable alternative for placement or repair (e.g., subsurface
boring with casing) exists.
(3) Pavement shall be considered new for a period of five years from
the date of placement.
§ 7-1.10 HARRIS CODE § 7-1.11
AO:142
§ 7-1.11. Violations and penalties.56
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
subarticle, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a
Magisterial District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure,
shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs, and,
in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not
to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this subarticle continues or
each section of this subarticle which shall be found to have been violated
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 7-1.12. through § 7-1.20. (Reserved)
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 7-1.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-1.12
AO:143

B.
Fire Lanes
[Adopted 2-8-1999 by Ord. No. 201]
§ 7-1.21. Short title.
This subarticle shall be known and may be cited as the "Harris Township
Fire Lane Ordinance."
§ 7-1.22. Statutory authority.
This subarticle is enacted and ordained under the grant of powers by the
General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act of 1968, July 31, P.L. 805, as amended.57
§ 7-1.23. Purpose.
This subarticle shall be enacted for the following purposes:
§ 7-1.24. Community development objectives.
The community development objectives of this subarticle are the goals,
objectives, and policies of the Centre Region Comprehensive Plan, as
applicable to the purposes of this subarticle.
§ 7-1.25. Establishment of controls.
The following regulations shall apply to all properties located within the
boundaries of Harris Township:
A. To promote and protect public health, safety, and welfare through the
designation of no-parking areas and fire lanes within Harris Township.
B. To allow the efficient operation of the Fire Company by preventing
parked vehicles from interfering with the Company's operations.
A. Designation of no-parking areas. Whenever the Fire Chief, the Board of
Supervisors, or their designee shall determine that the parking of motor
or other vehicles on any portion of any public or private street, retail
property, multifamily parking lot, or school is likely to interfere with the
operation of the Fire Company or seriously hamper egress of occupants
from buildings in case of fire, he shall designate such areas as noparking
areas. The Fire Chief shall provide such designations in
writing, including the use of maps or sketches, to the Harris Township
Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors shall consider such
recommendations of the Fire Chief and shall either approve or
disapprove such designated locations. If approved, each designated noparking
area shall be added to a list, be numbered consecutively, and
the list shall be maintained in the Township office. Such list may be
57.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 7-1.21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-1.25
AO:145
modified by the Board of Supervisors after written recommendations by
the Fire Chief.
B. Marking of fire lanes; time limit for compliance.
(1) Once fire lanes are established, such fire lanes shall be marked,
under the direction of the Fire Chief, by the following appropriate
methods:
(a) By posting signs in such areas reading "Fire Lane - No Parking"
in accordance with state regulations.
(b) By the painting of lines four inches in width on the roadway or
parking surface indicating the area.
(c) By painting the words "Fire Lane - No Parking" in letters three
feet wide on the roadway or parking surface.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to designate the
fire lane by one of these three methods within 30 days of
notification by the Township. Whenever the state or Township
regulations for marking fire lanes change, the property owner shall
comply with the new standards within 90 days of notification.
Failure to comply shall result in the enforcement of this subarticle
as described herein.
C. Temporary no-parking areas. In the event of an emergency or special
condition whereby the Fire Chief shall determine that the parking of
vehicles is likely to interfere with the operation of the Fire Company in
any public or private street, retail property, multifamily building
parking lot or school, the Fire Chief shall notify the Police Department
of such condition. The Police Department may post signs in such areas
reading "No Parking - Temporary Fire Lane." Such signs shall be
removed by the Police Department, based upon consultation with the
Fire Chief, when such emergency or special condition ceases.
D. Violations and penalties. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this
subarticle for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle within
any fire lane established and marked as set forth in Subsection B herein
or in any temporary no-parking area as set forth in Subsection C herein.
In addition, it shall be unlawful for property owners to fail to designate
fire lanes determined appropriate by the Township as provided in
Subsection B. Any such person, upon conviction thereof in an action
brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner provided for
the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50
nor more than $1,000, plus costs, and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day
that a violation of this subarticle continues or each section of this
subarticle which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a
separate offense. The continued violation of this subarticle for a period
§ 7-1.25 HARRIS CODE § 7-1.25
AO:146
§ 7-1.26. Authority to remove vehicle.
Any vehicle left unattended on any highways, public rights-of-way, or on
other public property in the Township or left unattended on private property
may be removed under the provisions of this subarticle. The Township
Manager, Fire Chief, or any police officer is authorized to decide whether to
remove any vehicle in violation of this subarticle.
of more than two hours shall constitute a new and separate offense for
each successive additional two-hour period.58
E. Notice of violation; time limit for payment of fine.
(1) It shall be the duty of the Police Department upon finding any
vehicle parked in violation of the provisions of this subarticle to
report:
(a) The state or province license number attached to such vehicle;
(b) The location and nature of the parking violation;
(c) The time and date of such violation;
(d) Any other relevant facts attending such violation.
(2) In the event that the Fire Chief identifies a violation of this
subarticle, the information outlined above shall be provided by the
Fire Chief to the Police Department. On finding a vehicle parked in
violation of the provisions of this subarticle, the police officer shall
attach to such vehicle, where possible, a notice that such vehicle
was parked in violation of this subarticle and instructing such
owner or operator to report to the Township office.
(3) Each owner or operator receiving such notice may, within 48 hours
of the time when the notice was attached to such vehicle, pay to the
Township office of the Township as a penalty and in full satisfaction
of such violation the sum of $50. The failure of payment being made
within such forty-eight-hour period shall render such owner or
operator subject to the penalties herein provided for violation of
this subarticle.
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 7-1.25 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-1.26
AO:147

ARTICLE II
Sidewalks
A.
Sidewalk Maintenance
[Adopted 9-14-1987 by Ord. No. 112]
§ 7-2.1. Purpose.
This subarticle is intended to provide for the repair, reconstruction and
removal of obstructions from sidewalks available for use by the public which
are presently existing or which may be constructed in the future. This
subarticle is enacted for safety purposes in order to protect the public which
use such sidewalks, and to prevent dangerous conditions on sidewalks
intended for public use whether on public rights-of-way, on easements for
the use of the public, or on sidewalks located on private property. Such
dangerous conditions, in the form of improperly maintained or deteriorated
sidewalks, or in the form of obstructions, are declared to be nuisances
constituting a danger to the public.
§ 7-2.2. Definitions.
Unless a contrary intention clearly appears, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings given in this section. All words and terms
not defined herein shall be used with a meaning of standard usage.
OBSTRUCTION — An obstacle or impediment which renders the sidewalk
impassable without unreasonable inconvenience or hazard.
RECONSTRUCT — To replace and rebuild or relay a sidewalk upon
determination that it can no longer be repaired by patching and fixing.
REPAIR — To restore to a safe and sound state by patching or fixing after
decay, deterioration or partial destruction.
SIDEWALK — A paved walkway for pedestrians available for use by the
general public, whether located on the owner's property, in an easement
for public passage, or within the right-of-way of any street, drive, avenue,
highway, road, lane or alley.
§ 7-2.3. Duty of property owner.
It shall be the duty of owners of property upon which sidewalks presently
exist or upon which sidewalks are constructed to maintain them in good
repair, repair and reconstruct them when necessary, and keep them free
from obstructions and safe for passage by pedestrians.
§ 7-2.4. Notice to repair, reconstruct or remove obstructions.
A. In the event that the condition of any sidewalk is observed by the
Township Manager or other authorized Township employee to require
repair, reconstruction or removal of obstacles, a written notice shall be
§ 7-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-2.4
AO:149
§ 7-2.5. Time limits for repair, reconstruction or removal of
obstacles after notice.
§ 7-2.6. Specifications for reconstruction.
When it is determined that reconstruction of a sidewalk is necessary, or in
the event a property owner reconstructs a sidewalk prior to determination
or notice, the same shall be reconstructed according to the following
specifications:
sent to the property owners requiring them to repair, reconstruct or
remove obstructions. The notice shall specify the nature of the defect or
obstruction, the portion of the sidewalk to be repaired or reconstructed,
or the obstruction to be removed. For repair or reconstruction, the
notice shall also specify the current construction material and the scope
of the repair or reconstruction required.
B. Reconstruction shall be accomplished according to the specifications
set forth in this subarticle. Repairs shall be made according to the
criteria for repairs set forth in this subarticle. Said notice shall be
delivered personally to the owner, sent by certified mail, or posted on
the property.
A. The property owner shall effect, or cause to be effected, the repairs or
reconstruction described in the notice within 90 days after the receipt
of the notice specified above. In the event that the Township Manager
determines that the condition constitutes a dangerous condition or an
emergency, the Township Manager may reduce the time for repairs,
reconstruction or removal of obstacles to 48 hours or to such period as
he deems necessary and appropriate.
B. In the event of an obstruction, the property owner shall remove or shall
cause to be removed the obstruction within seven days of receipt of
notice or, if deemed to constitute an emergency, within 48 hours or such
other time period as he deems necessary and appropriate.
A. ASTM standards. Materials and methods shall meet the requirements of
the latest specifications of the American Society for Testing Materials
(ASTM).
B. Width. The standard width for all sidewalks shall be four feet, except as
follows:
(1) Additional width. In areas designated "Commercial" on the
Township Zoning Map, the Township Supervisors may require by
resolution an additional width so that the sidewalk shall extend
from the curbline to the property line.
(2) Less width. In places where the sidewalk cannot be made four feet
wide because of existing tree trunks or roots, the Township
Supervisors may, upon request of the property owner, allow a lesser
width.
§ 7-2.4 HARRIS CODE § 7-2.6
AO:150
C. Portland cement concrete sidewalks. All sidewalks shall be constructed
of portland cement.
D. Material. All concrete shall be Class A (3,300 psi), 28 days compressive
strength and have one- to three-inch slump, 5% to 7% air entrainment,
six to eight bags of cement per cubic yard of concrete, and a maximum
water-cement ratio of 0.50 (lbs./lbs.).
E. Grades. The grass plot shall have a slope of 3/8 inch per foot rise from
top of curb to street edge of sidewalk. The sidewalk shall have a 1/4
inch per foot rise from the street edge to the abutting property edge of
the sidewalk. Grades may be adjusted on an individual basis, as
authorized by the Township Engineer or Manager.
F. Subgrade foundation. The subgrade shall be well drained and
thoroughly compacted to a firm, even and uniform bearing surface.
Unsuitable material shall be removed and replaced.
G. Forms. Forms extending the full depth of the concrete shall be used.
H. Drains. Drains will be installed, when necessary, to protect the sidewalk
from frost damage.
I. Thickness. All sidewalks shall be of one course construction not less
than four inches thick in residential and commercial areas and not less
than six inches where a driveway crosses the sidewalk.
J. Contraction joints shall be spaced in uniform lengths or sections of five
feet for sidewalk and may be either hand formed or sawed. If sawed,
they shall be 3/16 inch wide and a minimum of two inches deep.
K. Expansion joints shall be constructed of premolded one-half-inch
expansion material placed the full depth of the sidewalk, curb, or curb
gutter and at right angles to the surfaces of the aforementioned.
Expansion material shall be placed between the sidewalk and any rigid
structure (e.g., another sidewalk, curb or curb gutter, inlet, concrete
driveway, light post).
L. Edging. All hand-formed contraction and expansion joints shall be
edged with an edge having a one-fourth-inch maximum radius.
M. Slip-resistant textures. A slip-resistant texture shall be achieved on all
sidewalks by coarse brooming of the finished surfaces.
N. Curing. All concrete shall be cured by applying a white pigmented
liquid membrane-forming curing compound or another method with
authorization of the Township Engineer.
O. Sealing. All new concrete shall be sprayed with an antispalling
compound (boiled linseed oil) mixture at the rate of 0.02 gallon per
square yard or at the rate specified by the manufacturer, applied
approximately 45 days to 60 days following placement. Application shall
be by pressure-spray equipment, portable hand-spray equipment,
§ 7-2.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-2.6
AO:151
§ 7-2.7. Criteria for repairs.
The following criteria shall be followed in making repairs:
brushing or by a combination of these methods to insure complete
coverage of treated concrete surfaces. It is recommended that a second
application be made a minimum of 24 hours after the initial application.
P. Placing and finishing. Concrete shall be placed, consolidated, struck off
and floated until an even and true surface is obtained. Care shall be
taken to avoid overfinishing (i.e., bringing to the surface an excess of
water and fine sand).
Q. Backfilling. After the concrete has cured for at least 72 hours, spaces
adjacent to the sidewalk shall be backfilled with topsoil and compacted
in such a manner to prevent settling below sidewalk grade.
R. Seeding. Disturbed areas shall be seeded and/or mulched as necessary
to insure new growth over disturbed areas.
A. Horizontal alignment. A sidewalk square must be repaired when a crack
within a square or a joint between two adjacent squares has separated
to a distance of 3/8 inch or greater, or when the edges of a crack are
chipped or broken to create surface openings of 3/8 inch or more.
Where expansion or contraction joints have widened to 3/8 inch or
greater, repairs should be made in such a way as to allow for expansion
to occur later. If multiple cracks exist within a square, or if vertical
movement occurs around a crack, the square should be removed and
replaced.
B. Vertical alignment. Repairs must be made when a sidewalk square or
portion of it has risen or sunk 3/4 inch or more in relation to the
remainder of the square or to an adjacent square. The square can be
physically raised or lowered to be realigned with the adjacent squares.
If an entire square has sunk, it may be patched with concrete bonded
overlay of the entire square. The minimum thickness of this patch
cannot be less than one inch. Placing a wedge of patch material over a
portion of the square is not acceptable.
C. Surface deterioration. A sidewalk square must be repaired when 25%
or more of the exposed horizontal surface has chipped or crumbled,
exposing aggregate and creating peaks and valleys, to a depth at any
point of 1/2 inch or more below the original surface.
D. Portland cement. Repair must be made with a half-and-half mixture of
portland cement and sand, or with a commercial two-part epoxy-type
concrete patch material.
E. Removal of deteriorated materials. Deteriorated materials must first be
removed to a depth adequate to expose sound concrete and this surface
prepared with bonding material to epoxy as prescribed by the patch
material manufacturer.
§ 7-2.6 HARRIS CODE § 7-2.7
AO:152
§ 7-2.8. Maintenance of trees, poles, pipes or other objects.
Trees, shrubbery, bushes, poles, pipes, or other objects now or hereafter
placed or maintained on the sidewalk limitations, or which overhang the
sidewalk pavements as are herein provided, shall be so placed or
maintained as to prevent injury to person or property and shall be removed,
changed or trimmed upon 10 days' notice whenever, in the judgment of the
Township Manager, it is deemed necessary for the health, safety, welfare
and convenience of the Township or of the inhabitants of the particular
section thereof. Such trees, poles, pipes or other objects overhanging the
sidewalks which are obstructions shall constitute a nuisance. Failure to
remove such obstructions after notice to do so shall constitute a violation of
this subarticle.
§ 7-2.9. Driveways in public right-of-way.
Where driveways exist or are hereafter constructed between the sidewalk
and curbline, or from the street to the abutting property, they must be so
constructed that the material used will not work loose or scatter from the
driveway (e.g., portland cement concrete, bituminous concrete, or brick).
§ 7-2.10. Failure to comply deemed nuisance.
Failure of a property owner to effect repair, reconstruction or removal of
obstructions after expiration of the time limit specified in the notice and in
accordance with such notice and the terms of this subarticle shall constitute
a nuisance and a violation of this subarticle.
§ 7-2.11. Work done by Township; costs.
Upon failure of any owner of property to effect the repair of, reconstruction
of, or removal of obstacles on the sidewalk within the time period specified
in the notice, the Township Manager may, in addition to all other penalties,
cause the same to be done and collect the cost of same from the property
owner, together with a penalty of 10%, by summary proceedings in the
manner provided for the collection of municipal claims, by action of
assumpsit without the filing of a claim, or by actions instituted in courts of
equity.
§ 7-2.12. Violations and penalties.59
Failure of a property owner to effect the repair, reconstruction or removal of
obstruction within the time period specified in the notice and in accordance
with such notice and the terms of this subarticle shall constitute a violation.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
F. Reinspection. All repairs must be completely intact when reinspected,
i.e., a sealed crack must show no sign of recracking, no additional
deterioration may have occurred on the edges of the patch area, etc.
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 7-2.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-2.12
AO:153
subarticle, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a
Magisterial District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure,
shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs, and,
in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not
to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this subarticle continues or
each section of this subarticle which shall be found to have been violated
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 7-2.13. through § 7-2.20. (Reserved)
§ 7-2.12 HARRIS CODE § 7-2.13
AO:154
B.
Snow Removal
[Adopted 9-14-1987 by Ord. No. 113]
§ 7-2.21. Findings; statutory authority.60
The Board of Supervisors of Harris Township finds that the failure of
property owners to remove snow and ice from sidewalks abutting their
property or sidewalks on their property or sidewalks in easements across
their property used by the public creates a nuisance and an unsafe condition
for the pedestrian public traveling on such sidewalks. This subarticle is
adopted pursuant to the authority of Section 1506 of the Second Class
Township Code, 53 P.S. § 66506.
§ 7-2.22. Duty of property owner.
It shall be the duty of the owners and occupiers of properties as hereinafter
provided, and the owners of unoccupied lots along whose premises
sidewalks have been laid or may hereafter be laid under the authority of
the Township, to cause said sidewalks along their respective properties to
be cleared to the width of said sidewalk of snow and/or ice within 12 hours
after the same shall have ceased to fall, in the case of snow, or shall have
occurred, in the case of ice.
§ 7-2.23. Notice to remove snow or ice.
§ 7-2.24. Violations and penalties.61
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation who or which shall fail to
remove snow or ice within three hours in accordance with the notice
specified in the previous section, upon conviction thereof in an action
brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the manner provided for the
enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000,
plus costs, and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term
of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this
A. Whenever it shall be reported to or observed by the Township Manager
or his designee that the owner or occupant of real property in the
Township shall have failed to comply with any of the terms of this
subarticle, the Township Manager shall cause a written notice to be
served upon the owner or occupant, or both, directing the owner or
occupant, or both, to comply with all the terms of this subarticle within
three hours.
B. Such notice may be served personally or may be left upon the property
by being posted in a conspicuous place upon the property.
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 7-2.21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-2.24
AO:155
subarticle continues or each section of this subarticle which shall be found
to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 7-2.25. Removal by Township; costs.
In the event of the failure of the owner and/or occupant to remove the snow
or ice within three hours of the time of the delivery or positing of the notice
specified in § 7-2.23, the Township may have the snow and ice removed
and bill the owner for the cost thereof, plus a penalty of 10%. These costs
and penalties shall be in addition to fines for violations. Penalties may
be collected by summary proceedings or in the manner provided for the
collection of municipal claims or by any action in assumpsit without the
filing of a claim.
§ 7-2.24 HARRIS CODE § 7-2.25
AO:156
Chapter 8
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Motor-driven recreational vehicle
nuisances — See Ch. 5, Art. III.
Traffic signal preemption systems — See Ch.
5, Art. V.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 7.
§ 7-2.25 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-2.25
AO:157

ARTICLE I
[Adopted 2-13-T1r9a8ffi0cBy Ord. No. 86]
A.
General Provisions
§ 8-1.1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Harris Township Traffic Ordinance."
§ 8-1.2. Definitions; word usage.
§ 8-1.3. Construal of provisions.
The provisions of this article, so far as they are the same as those
ordinances and regulations in force immediately prior to the enactment
of this article, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and
regulations and not as new enactments. The provisions of this article shall
not affect any act done or liability incurred, nor shall they affect any suit
or prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any of these repealed
ordinances or regulations.
§ 8-1.4. through § 8-1.10. (Reserved)
A. Words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania, as now in force,
or as hereafter amended, enacted or reenacted, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
C. The term "Vehicle Code" shall refer to the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code,
Act of June 17, 1976, P.L. 162, No. 81, as amended, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et
seq.
§ 8-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-1.4
AO:159

B.
Speed Restrictions
§ 8-1.11. Streets restricted to 35 mph. [Amended 11-13-2000 by
Ord. No. 209]
No person shall drive or operate any vehicle on the following roads at a
speed greater than 35 mph:
Highway Between TR No.
Boalsburg Pike Boal Avenue and dead
end
958
Houser Road Brush Valley Road and
end of Township Road
366
§ 8-1.12. Streets restricted to 25 mph. [Amended 2-14-1983 by Ord.
No. 97; 8-13-1990 by Ord. No. 130; 9-14-1992 by Ord. No. 143;
11-13-2000 by Ord. No. 209]
No person shall drive or operate any vehicle on the following roads at a
speed greater than 25 mph:
Highway Between TR No.
Academy Street East Pine Street and dead
end
360
Anna Street Belle Avenue and cul-desac
715
Appollo Avenue Boalsburg Pike and dead
end
696
Aspen Court Aspen Drive to dead end 973
Aspen Drive Norwich Boulevard to
Aspen Court
972
Beaumont Drive Circle Drive and South
Atherton
700
Belle Avenue Boalsburg Pike and dead
end
698
Belle Avenue, Township
Route 698
From dead end to
Tressler Street
714
Brookside Drive East Drive and West Drive 614
Brush Valley Road Township line and LR
14021
333
Church Street Crestview Avenue and
Boal Avenue
823 and 846
Circle Drive South Atherton Street and
Beaumont Drive
700
§ 8-1.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-1.12
AO:161
Highway Between TR No.
Crestview Avenue Woodmont Street and
Miller Lane
824 and 892
East Drive Brookside Drive and Boal
Avenue
614
East Harris Drive Harris Drive and cul-desac
825
East Hubler Road Outer Drive and Township
line
752
East Outer Drive Outer Drive and dead end 754
Elks Club Road LR 14021 and U.S. Route
322
366
Ella Drive Kay Street and Kathryn
Street
719 and 820
Harris Avenue Boalsburg Pike and Ishler
Street
637
Harris Drive East Harris Drive and
Outer Drive
725 and 755
Hazel Street South Church Street and
Woodmont Street
890
Hemlock Street Mary Elizabeth Street and
dead end
640
Hess Road Shingletown Road and
Waltz Avenue
353
Homestead Lane Torrey Lane and cul-desac
939
Honeysuckle Drive West Drive and dead end 940
Hubler Road Outer Drive and Township
Line
752 and 753
Indian Hill Road Earlystown Road and
dead end
701
Indian Hill Road,
Township Route 702
To dead end 702
Ishler Street Harris Avenue and dead
end
713
Karen Street Ella Drive and dead end 719 and 821
Karen Street, Township
Route 821
From Karen Street to
dead end
821
Karmel Street Montclair Lane to
Kaywood Park
957
Kathryn Street Ella Drive and dead end 819
§ 8-1.12 HARRIS CODE § 8-1.12
AO:162
Highway Between TR No.
Kay Street Rockey Lane and dead
end
718 and 822
Kay Street, Township
Route 822
From Kay Street to Indian
Hill Road, Township
702
Kaywood Drive From Indian Hill Road to
dead end
702
Kimport Avenue Boalsburg Pike and dead
end
697
Kimport Avenue, Route
697
From Belle Avenue 697
Lamp Post Lane Ishler Street and dead
end
717
Lamp Post Lane,
Township Route 717
From Belle Avenue to
Ishler Street
713
Lawnwood Avenue Hemlock Street and dead
end
758
Lee Avenue Boalsburg Pike and dead
end
—
Loop Road East Main Street and Boal
Avenue
355
Main Street Boal Avenue and
Shingletown Road
845
Mary Elizabeth Street Boalsburg Pike and spur
to Route 1050
640 and 943
Memorial Drive Boalsburg Pike and dead
end
763
Misty Hill Drive [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
SR 45 West and Mountain
Road
Montclair Lane Kay Street and dead end 719 and 818
Mountain Road Shingletown Road and
dead end
354
Norwich Boulevard SR 2006 to Aspen Drive 971
Oak Hall Street Mary Elizabeth Street and
dead end
639
Old Boalsburg Road Church Street and Boal
Avenue
355
Outer Drive Township line and dead
end
724
Pine Street Boal Avenue and Wagner
Street
358, 360, 579 and
702
§ 8-1.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-1.12
AO:163
Highway Between TR No.
Pine Tree Avenue Boalsburg Pike and Ishler
Street
699
Rockey Lane Earlystown Road and Kay
Street
718
Sharer Road United States Route 322
and LR 14021
370
Shrineview Avenue Boalsburg Pike and dead
end
638
Torrey Lane Loop Road and dead end 362
Tressler Street Belle Avenue and Ishler
Street
714
Wagner Street West Main Street and
dead end
882
Waltz Avenue Hess Road and Mountain
Road
353
West Drive Brookside Drive and
Torrey Lane
614 and 938
Woodmont Street Hazel Street and East
Crestview Avenue
891
§ 8-1.13. Streets restricted to 15 mph.
No person shall drive or operate any vehicle on the following roads at a
speed greater than 15 mph:
Highway Between TR No.
Beacon Circle [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Entire Length
Chambers Alley Loop Road and Tennis
Street
—
Commonwealth Drive
[Added 8-14-2017 by
Ord. No. 327]
SR 45 East and Beacon
Circle
Dearing Drive [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Sophie Court and Emma
Court
342
Emma Court [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Dearing Drive and
Homestead Lane
344
Founders Court [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Beacon Circle and
Terminus
§ 8-1.12 HARRIS CODE § 8-1.13
AO:164
Highway Between TR No.
Glory Way [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Beacon Circle and
Terminus
Homestead Lane [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Torrey Lane and Emma
Court
939
Kent Drive Ishler Street and dead
end
716
Pilgrim Drive [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Beacon Circle and
Terminus
Pine Alley Academy Street and
Wagner Street
—
Plymouth Circle [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Beacon Circle and
Settlers Way
Reuben Way [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Loop Road and Sophie
Court
340
Rockey's Alley East Main Street and
Wagner Street
—
Settlers Way [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Beacon Circle and
Plymouth Circle
Sophie Court [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Reuben Way and Dearing
Drive
341
Tennis Street Chambers Alley and Pine
Alley
358
§ 8-1.14. through § 8-1.20. (Reserved)
§ 8-1.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-1.14
AO:165

C.
Stop Intersections
§ 8-1.21. Stop intersections established. [Amended 12-13-1993 by
Ord. No. 153; 9-12-1994 by Ord. No. 160]
The following intersections are hereby established or reestablished as stop
intersections at which official stop signs are erected or will hereafter be
erected. All vehicles approaching any such intersection on the street called
the "stop street" shall come to a full stop at a clearly marked stop line, or, if
none, then before entering a crosswalk on the rear side of the intersection,
or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the
driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway, before
entering.
Stop Street Through Highway Traffic Direction
Academy Street East Main Street North and South
Academy Street East Pine Street North
Anna Street Belle Avenue North
Anna Street Pine Tree Avenue North and South
Apollo Avenue Boalsburg Pike East
Aspen Drive (TR 972) Norwich Boulevard (TR
971)
South
Bailey Lane West Main Street North
Beaumont Drive South Atherton Street
(U.S. Route 322)
South
Belle Avenue Boalsburg Pike West
Belle Avenue Ishler Street East and West
Blue Spring Lane Bailey Lane West
Boalsburg Pike Boal Avenue South
Boalsburg Pike Mary Elizabeth Street North and South
Brisbin Way [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Emma Court South
Church Street East Main Street North and South
Circle Drive South Atherton Street
(U.S. Route 322)
South
Commonwealth Drive
[Added 8-14-2017 by
Ord. No. 327]
Earlystown Road South
Commonwealth Drive
[Added 8-14-2017 by
Ord. No. 327]
Beacon Circle North
§ 8-1.21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-1.21
AO:167
Stop Street Through Highway Traffic Direction
Dearing Drive [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Sophie Court North
Dearing Drive [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Emma Court South
East Crestview Avenue South Church Street North and South
East Drive Boal Avenue (U.S. Route
322)
South
East Harris Drive Harris Drive South
East Hubler Road Outer Drive East
East Pine Street Boal Avenue East
Elks Club Road LR 14018 North and South
Elks Club Road U.S. Route 322 East and West
Ella Drive Kay Street South
Emma Court [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Dearing Drive West
Emma Court [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Dearing Drive East
Founders Court [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Beacon Circle South
Glory Way [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Beacon Circle North
Harris Avenue Boalsburg Pike West
Hazel Street South Church Street West
Hemlock Street Apollo Avenue North
Hemlock Street Mary Elizabeth Street North
Hess Road Shingletown Road North
Homestead Lane [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Emma Court South
Homestead Lane [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Dearing Drive East
§ 8-1.21 HARRIS CODE § 8-1.21
AO:168
Stop Street Through Highway Traffic Direction
Homestead Lane [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Dearing Drive West
Homestead Lane [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Torrey Lane East
Homestead Lane Torrey Lane West
Homestead Lane West Drive East and West
Honeysuckle Drive West Drive West
Hubler Road Outer Drive North and South
Indian Hill Road Earlystown Road (LR
14021)
South
Karen Street Ella Drive East
Karen Street Montclair Lane East and West
Karmel Street Montclair Lane West
Kent Drive Ishler Street East
Kimport Avenue Boalsburg Pike West
Kimport Avenue Ishler Street East and West
Lamp Post Lane Ishler Street West
Lawnwood Avenue Hemlock Street East
Lee Avenue Boalsburg Pike West
Loop Road Boal Avenue (U.S. Route
322)
East
Loop Road East Main Street North
Loop Road [Added
10-8-2012 by Ord. No.
306]
Torrey Lane East
Memorial Drive Boalsburg Pike West
Memorial Drive [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Pilgrim Drive East
Misty Hill Drive [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Mountain Road West
Misty Hill Drive [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Shingletown Road North
Montclair Lane Kathryn Street North and South
Montclair Lane Kay Street South
§ 8-1.21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-1.21
AO:169
Stop Street Through Highway Traffic Direction
Mountain Road Shingletown Road North
Norwich Boulevard (TR
971)
Aspen Drive (TR
972)/Aspen Court (TR
973)
West
Norwich Boulevard (TR
971)
Linden Hall Road (SR
2006)
East
Oak Hall Street Apollo Avenue North
Oak Hall Street Apollo Avenue South
Oak Hall Street Mary Elizabeth Street North
Oak Hall Street Shrineview Avenue South
Old Boalsburg Road Boal Avenue North
Old Boalsburg Road North Church Street East
Outer Drive Harris Drive North and South
Pilgrim Drive [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Beacon Circle East
Pine Street North Church Street East and West
Pine Tree Avenue Boalsburg Pike West
Plymouth Circle [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Beacon Circle East
Plymouth Circle [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Plymouth Circle South
Post office West Pine Street North
Rockey Lane Earlystown Road South
Reuben Way [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Loop Road North
Reuben Way [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Sophie Court South
Settlers Way [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Beacon Circle South
Settlers Way [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Plymouth Circle North
Shrineview Avenue Boalsburg Pike East
Shrineview Avenue Hemlock Street East and West
§ 8-1.21 HARRIS CODE § 8-1.21
AO:170
Stop Street Through Highway Traffic Direction
Shrineview Avenue Oak Hall Street East and West
Sophie Court [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Dearing Drive West
Tennis Street West Pine Street North
Torrey Lane [Amended
10-8-2012 by Ord. No.
306]
Loop Road North
Torrey Lane [Added
10-8-2012 by Ord. No.
306]
Loop Road West
Tressler Street Belle Avenue North
Tressler Street Ishler Street West
Wagner Street West Main Street South
Waltz Avenue Hess Road West
Waltz Avenue Mountain Road East
West Drive Boal Avenue (U.S. Route
322)
North and South
West Drive Torrey Lane West
West Pine Street Wagner Street West
§ 8-1.22. One-way streets. [Added 8-14-2017 by Ord. No. 327]
The streets or parts of streets described below are hereby designated as
one-way streets in the direction indicated, and it shall be unlawful for any
person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street other than in the direction
established for traffic on that street:
Name of Street Direction of Travel Limits
Belle Avenue West Terminus to exit at
Beacon Circle
Memorial Drive East Terminus to entrance at
Pilgrim Drive
§ 8-1.23. through § 8-1.30. (Reserved)
§ 8-1.21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-1.23
AO:171

D.
Parking
§ 8-1.31. Parking restrictions. [Amended 11-12-1990 by Ord. No.
131; by Ord. No. 149; 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 171; 5-13-1996 by
Ord. No. 176; 9-8-2003 by Ord. No. 239]
A. Parking is prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Highway
Side(s) of
Highway For or Between
Academy Street Both Entire distance
Banner Way [Added
7-9-2007 by Ord. No.
269]
Both Entire distance
Beacon Circle [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Inside lane Entire length
Belle Avenue [Added
9-11-2017 by Ord. No.
329]
North Boalsburg Pike to St.
Joseph's Academy
Boalsburg Pike East Between SR 0322 - South
Atherton Street and Pine
Tree Avenue TR 699
Circle Drive (TR 701) Both Between SR 3014 South
Atherton Street and TR 700
Beaumont Drive
Commonwealth Drive
[Added 8-14-2017 by
Ord. No. 327]
Both Entire length
Dearing Drive [Added
1-3-2011 by Ord. No.
291]
Both Entire length
East Main Street [Added
7-9-2007 by Ord. No.
269]
South From a distance 210 feet east
to 475 feet east
East Main Street [Added
7-9-2007 by Ord. No.
269]
South Church Street to a distance
120 feet east
East Main Street [Added
7-9-2007 by Ord. No.
269]
South Along property at 102 East
Main Street
East Main Street [Added
7-9-2007 by Ord. No.
269]
South Along property at 108 East
Main Street
§ 8-1.31 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-1.31
AO:173
Highway
Side(s) of
Highway For or Between
East Main Street [Added
7-9-2007 by Ord. No.
269]
South Along the portion of a
property at 114 East Main
Street
East Main Street [Added
7-9-2007 by Ord. No.
269]
South Along the portion of a
property at 122 East Main
Street
East Main Street [Added
7-9-2007 by Ord. No.
269]
South Along property at 126 East
Main Street
East Main Street [Added
7-9-2007 by Ord. No.
269]
South Along property at 130 East
Main Street
East Main Street [Added
7-9-2007 by Ord. No.
269]
South From South Academy Street
to a point 25 feet east
East Pine Street Both Church Street to a distance
of 142 feet east to Academy
Street
East Pine Street [Added
9-11-2017 by Ord. No.
329]
North Entrance to Boalsburg Fire
Company
Emma Court [Added
1-3-2011 by Ord. No.
291]
North, plus
turnaround
Entire length
Founders Court [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Both Entire length including culde-
sac bulb
Gaylord Lane [Added
7-9-2007 by Ord. No.
269]
Both Entire distance
Glory Way [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Both Entire length including culde-
sac bulb
Homestead Lane Both Entire distance
Homestead Lane [Added
1-3-2011 by Ord. No.
291]
South Entire length
Honeysuckle Drive Both Entire distance
Laurel Meadow Lane
[Added 7-9-2007 by
Ord. No. 269]
Both Entire distance
§ 8-1.31 HARRIS CODE § 8-1.31
AO:174
Highway
Side(s) of
Highway For or Between
Loop Road [Added
7-9-2007 by Ord. No.
269]
South Main Street to Torrey Lane
Mary Elizabeth Street North Entire distance
Mountain Road Both Entire distance
Mount Pleasant Drive
[Added 7-9-2007 by
Ord. No. 269]
Both Entire distance
Pilgrim Drive [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Both Entire length except at culde-
sac bulb
Plymouth Circle [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Both Entire length
Reuben Way [Added
1-3-2011 by Ord. No.
291]
Both Entire length, except by the
Community Center
Round Hill Road [Added
7-9-2007 by Ord. No.
269]
Both Entire distance
Settlers Way [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
327]
Both Entire length
Sophie Court [Added
1-3-2011 by Ord. No.
291]
South, plus
cul-de-sac
Entire length
South Church Street
[Added 7-9-2007 by
Ord. No. 269]
East Along property at 102 East
Main Street
South Church Street
[Added 7-9-2007 by
Ord. No. 269]
East Main Street to a distance 100
feet south
South Church Street
[Added 7-9-2007 by
Ord. No. 269]
West From a distance 142 feet
south to a distance 210 feet
south
South Church Street
[Added 7-9-2007 by
Ord. No. 269]
West Main Street to a distance 42
feet south
South Church Street
[Added 7-9-2007 by
Ord. No. 269]
West Along property at 104 West
Main Street
§ 8-1.31 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-1.31
AO:175
§ 8-1.32. Report of violation.
It shall be the duty of the peace officers of the Township, upon finding any
vehicle parking in violation of any provision of the Pennsylvania Vehicle
Code or of this article, to record:
§ 8-1.33. Notice of violation.62
Every peace officer shall also attach to such vehicle, where possible, a
notice to the owner thereof that such vehicle was parked in violation of a
provision of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code or of this article and instructing
Highway
Side(s) of
Highway For or Between
Tennis Street [Added
7-9-2007 by Ord. No.
269]
Both West Main Street to West
Pine Street
Torrey Lane West Entire distance
West Crestview Avenue
[Added 7-9-2007 by
Ord. No. 269]
Cul-de-sac Entire length of cul-de-sac
West Drive Both Entire distance
West Main Street North Tennis Street, a distance of
125 lineal feet, westbound
West Main Street
[Added 7-9-2007 by
Ord. No. 269]
South 116 West Main to Church
Street
West Pine Street South Front of post office
B. Parking is prohibited from 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. in the following
locations: [Added 7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 285]
Highway
Side(s) of
Highway For or Between
Jacks Mill Drive Both Entire distance
A. The state, provincial, or other license number of such vehicle.
B. The model, year, make, type, and color of vehicle.
C. The location and nature of the parking violation.
D. The time at which such vehicle was noted to be parked in violation of
the law or of any provision of this article.
E. Any other facts, a knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending such violation.
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 8-1.31 HARRIS CODE § 8-1.33
AO:176
such owner as to the procedure to be followed to avoid prosecution as
described in § 8-1.34.
§ 8-1.34. Settlement of violation. [Amended 2-14-1983 by Ord. No.
9763]
Every such owner may, within 72 hours of the time when such notice was
attached to such vehicle, make a check or money order payable to the
Township in the sum provided on said notice and mail the check or money
order to the Township in the envelope provided after affixing first-class
postage; or, instead of mailing said check or money order in the envelope
provided, such owner may pay said sum in person at the Township Building
from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. The
failure of any such owner to make payment to the Township office within the
time provided shall render such owner subject to the penalties hereinafter
provided for violation of the provisions of this article. If such owner shall in
fact make payment after such period, but before filing of a complaint with
the Magisterial District Judge on account of such violation, said sum shall
be accepted by the Township in full satisfaction of such violation.
§ 8-1.35. through § 8-1.40. (Reserved)
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 8-1.33 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-1.35
AO:177

E.
Restrictions on Maximum Gross Vehicle Weight
[Added 5-10-1999 by Ord. No. 203]
§ 8-1.41. Definitions.
When used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the
following meanings:
EXCESS MAINTENANCE — Maintenance or restoration, or both (but not
improvement), of a posted road in excess of normal maintenance, caused by
use of over-posted-weight vehicles.
GROSS COMBINATION WEIGHT RATING — The value specified by the
manufacturer as the loaded weight of a combination.
GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING — The value specified on the federal
weight certification label by the manufacturer as the loaded weight of a
single vehicle.
GROSS WEIGHT — The combined weight of a vehicle or combination of
vehicles and its load, excluding the driver's weight.
NORMAL MAINTENANCE — The usual and typical activities necessary to
maintain the roadway, shoulders, and drainage facilities in the state of
repair existing prior to issuance of a permit to operate any over-postedweight
vehicle.
OVER-POSTED-WEIGHT VEHICLE — A vehicle or combination having a
gross weight in excess of the posted weight limit.
POSTED WEIGHT LIMIT — A restricted weight limit posted on a road under
authority of Section 4902 of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902.
§ 8-1.42. Vehicle weight limits established.
A. By authority granted by Title 75, Motor Vehicle Code, Section 4902,
"Restrictions on use of highways and bridges," the Board of Supervisors
of the Township of Harris hereby declares that it shall be unlawful for
any person or persons to operate any vehicle or combination having a
gross weight in excess of 10 tons on the following Township roads:
[Amended 9-10-2007 by Ord. No. 272]
Academy Street (TR 360)
Bailey Lane (TR 356)
Brush Valley Road (TR 333)
Church Street (TR 846)
Elks Club Road (TR 366)
Houser Road (TR 367)
Laurel Meadow Lane (TR 765)
Loop Road (TR 357)
§ 8-1.41 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-1.42
AO:179
§ 8-1.43. Permit to exceed posted weight limit.
Unless otherwise exempted by § 8-1.42C of this article, over-posted-weightlimit
traffic may not exceed the posted weight limit unless permitted by the
Ordinance Enforcement Officer of the Township of Harris. A permit may
be issued by the Ordinance Enforcement Officer only when the following
criteria are met:
Main Street (TR 845)
Mountain Road (TR 354)
Sharer Road (TR 370)
Smith Lane (TR 371)
Torrey Lane (TR 362) from Homestead Lane to the terminus
West Crestview Avenue (TR 824)
West Drive (TR 938)
B. Any police officer empowered to enforce the laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania within jurisdictional boundaries of the Township of
Harris shall hereby be authorized to investigate the gross weight of any
vehicle suspected of exceeding the weight limit established in
Subsection A of this section. The owner or operator of the vehicle shall
provide evidence of gross vehicle weight in one or more of the following
forms:
(1) Empty vehicles. Gross weight for empty vehicles shall be
determined by gross vehicle weight rating or gross combination
weight rating.
(2) Laden vehicles. Gross weight for laden vehicles shall be
determined by bill of lading or weight slip from a certified scale.
C. Vehicles to be exempted: highway maintenance vehicles owned,
operated, contracted or otherwise permitted by Harris Township,
school buses, emergency vehicles, farm vehicles and vehicles making
local deliveries to existing residential structures which can only be
accessed by a weight-restricted road. [Amended 9-10-2007 by Ord.
No. 272]
D. Signs required. The Township Manager shall cause weight limit
restriction signs as prescribed by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation to be placed before the provisions of this article may be
enforced.
A. The destination(s) of the vehicle(s) is/are not accessible via an alternate
route.
B. Issuance of a permit to exceed a posted weight limit will be conditioned
on the agreement by the permittee to accept financial responsibility for
§ 8-1.42 HARRIS CODE § 8-1.43
AO:180
§ 8-1.44. Determination of road condition.
excess maintenance/reconstruction of the posted road or portion
thereof to be used by the permittee.
C. Financial security shall be in a form of surety negotiable by Harris
Township. Examples include a performance bond with surety by a
company authorized to do business in the commonwealth; certified or
cashier's check; irrevocable letter of credit; or some other form
acceptable and negotiable by the Township.
D. The amount of security shall be $12,500 per lineal mile. Minimum
surety to be posted shall be $12,500. Surety for distances in excess of
one lineal mile shall be calculated in increments of 1/2 mile.
A. Inspection. The Township Engineer or his designee shall make an onsite
inspection of the posted road immediately before issuance of each
permit, to document the road condition. The road may be periodically
reinspected as determined appropriate by the Township Engineer or his
designee and upon the termination of any permit. It shall be the
responsibility of the permittee to notify the Ordinance Enforcement
Officer when a permit is to be terminated.
B. In the event that the Township Engineer determines that the road has
been damaged by one or more over-posted-weight vehicles, the
Township Engineer shall determine the maintenance necessary to
restore the road to the state of repair existing at the time of the
preliminary inspection and shall notify the permittee of his findings.
The determination of the Township Engineer shall be conclusive.
C. Upon termination of the permit or upon notification by the Township
Engineer or his designee, the permittee shall promptly complete all
excess maintenance/repairs as shall be deemed necessary to restore
the condition of the road by the Township Engineer.
D. If permittee fails to perform excess maintenance/repairs in a timely
manner suitable to assure safe traveling conditions, the Township may,
at its discretion:
(1) Revoke the permit for use of the road(s) until such time as the
condition of the road is satisfactorily restored and all costs have
been paid.
(2) Maintain or restore the portion(s) of the posted road that requires
excess maintenance or restoration; permittee shall be liable for all
such costs incurred.
(3) Execute surety and contract for completion of excess maintenance/
repairs.
§ 8-1.43 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-1.45
AO:181
§ 8-1.45. Multiple permittees.
In the event of multiple permittees, each permittee shall be jointly and
severally liable for any damage.
§ 8-1.46. Fees.
§ 8-1.47. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. The Board of Supervisors shall have the right and authority to set such
fees for permit application and administration of this article as shall be
deemed appropriate and shall authorize the collection of fees by the
Township Manager or his designee. Financial responsibility for the
Township Engineer's inspections shall be borne by the permittee.
B. Fees shall be set, and may be periodically amended, by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors.
C. Fees for permit applications shall be nonrefundable.
A. Enforcement. The Ordinance Enforcement Officer of the Township of
Harris and any police officer empowered to enforce the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania within jurisdictional boundaries of the
Township of Harris shall hereby be authorized to enforce the provisions
of this article.
B. Penalty. Any person operating or owning a vehicle or combination in
violation of the restrictions of this article shall be subject to penalties of
Section 4902(g) of Title 75, the Motor Vehicle Code, as amended, and,
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $150, plus $150 for
each 500 pounds, or part thereof, in excess of 3,000 pounds over the
maximum allowable weight, plus costs.
§ 8-1.45 HARRIS CODE § 8-1.47
AO:182
ARTICLE II
[Adopted 1S-6n-o1w9 9R7eBmyovOarld. No. 182]
§ 8-2.1. Parking during snow emergencies.
§ 8-2.2. Reparking after snowfall. [Amended 10-11-2010 by Ord. No.
290]
It shall be lawful to repark any vehicle, tractor or trailer on the paved
or improved portion of any municipal street or road in areas otherwise
permitted under the law and the ordinances of the Township 24 hours after
the snowfall has ceased and/or the accumulated snow has been cleared
from the paved portion by the employees of Harris Township, but not before
such time.
A. Snow removal zone.
(1) Parking prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any
vehicle, tractor or trailer or allow same to remain parked or
unattended on the paved or improved portion of any municipal
street or road in the Township designated as a snow removal zone
at any time during or after any snowfall when the depth of such
snowfall reaches or exceeds two inches. [Amended 11-13-2018
by Ord. No. 334]
(2) Designation of snow removal zone. The Board of Supervisors of
Harris Township hereby designates all municipal streets and roads
within the Township as snow emergency zones. [Amended
10-11-2010 by Ord. No. 290]
(3) Signage. Unless required by state law, no sign shall be required for
the enforcement of the provisions of this article. However, signs
shall be placed at every entry point into the Township via a
Township road to notify the public of this article. The sign shall
read: [Amended 10-11-2010 by Ord. No. 290]
All Public Streets Within Harris Township
No Parking During Declared Snow Emergencies
Subject to Towing or Fines
B. Snow emergency. At such time when snowfall is forecasted to reach two
inches or greater, the Township Manager or his/her designee may
declare a snow emergency, requiring that all vehicles be removed from
all municipal streets of the Township until the snowfall has ceased and
the streets have been cleared of accumulated snow. All such snow
emergency declarations shall be provided to local media for public
broadcast and publication. [Amended 11-13-2018 by Ord. No. 334]
§ 8-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-2.3
AO:183
§ 8-2.3. Report and notice of violation.
Any police officer or Ordinance Enforcement Officer of the Township finding
any vehicle in violation of any provision of this article may issue a notice of
parking violation.
§ 8-2.4. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who shall violate § 8-2.1 of this article shall pay a fine of $5
if paid within 24 hours or $15 thereafter.
B. Any person who shall violate § 8-2.2 of this article shall pay a fine of $5
if paid within 24 hours or $15 thereafter. Any duly authorized agent of
the Township of Harris may cause any vehicle in violation of § 8-2.2 to
be towed from the municipal street or road at the owner's expense.
C. Enforcement of § 8.2.1 shall not occur for at least three hours after the
Township Manager or his/her designee publicly declares a snow
emergency. The snow emergency shall be considered to be publicly
declared once it has been distributed to one or more local media outlets
serving Harris Township or to C-Net. [Amended 11-13-2018 by Ord.
No. 334]
D. Any owner who fails to remove their vehicle parked in violation of
§ 8-2.1 within 24 hours may, in addition to the fine, have the vehicle
towed from the municipal street or road at the owner's expense. The
continuation of any violation of any provision of this article for a period
of more than 12 hours shall constitute a new and separate offense for
each successive twelve-hour period.
§ 8-2.3 HARRIS CODE § 8-2.4
AO:184
Chapter 9
SEWERS
§ 8-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-2.4
AO:185

ARTICLE I
Sewer Connections
[Adopted 4-12-1969 by Ord. No. 35]
§ 9-1.1. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the
meanings of terms and phrases used in this article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — College-Harris Joint Authority, a Pennsylvania municipality
authority.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the sewage drainage system of
any structure to the lateral of a sewer.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property located within this Township upon
which there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic
habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which
structure sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes shall be or may be
discharged.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or form of
energy ejected or escaping in the course of any industrial, manufacturing,
trade or business process or in the course of the development, recovery or
processing of natural resources, as distinct from sanitary sewage.
LATERAL — That part of the sewage collection system extending from a
sewer to the curbline or, if there shall be no curbline, to the property line,
or, if no such lateral shall be provided, then that portion of or place in a
sewer which is provided for connection of any building sewer.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any improved property.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society,
corporation or other group or entity.
SANITARY SEWAGE — Normal water-carried household and toilet wastes
from any improved property.
SEWAGE COLLECTION SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time,
for collecting, pumping, transporting and/or disposing of sanitary sewage
and/or industrial wastes, situate in or adjacent to this Township and owned,
maintained and operated by the Authority.
SEWER — Any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the sewage collection
system, used or usable for sewage collection purposes.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Harris, Centre County, Pennsylvania, a
political subdivision, acting by and through its Board of Supervisors or, in
appropriate cases, by and through its authorized representatives.
§ 9-1.2. Use of public sewers required; restrictions.
§ 9-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.2
AO:187
A. The owner of any improved property which is located in this Township
and is accessible to and whose principal building is within 150 feet of
the sewage collection system shall connect such improved property
therewith, in such manner as this Township and the Authority may
require, within 60 days after notice to such owner from this Township to
make such connection, for the purpose of discharge of all sanitary
sewage and industrial wastes from such improved property, subject to
such limitations and restrictions as shall be established by this
Township or the Authority from time to time.
B. All sanitary sewage and industrial wastes from any improved property,
after connection of such improved property with a sewer shall be
required under Subsection A of this section, shall be conducted into a
sewer, subject to such limitations and restrictions as shall be
established herein or otherwise shall be established by this Township or
the Authority from time to time.
C. No person shall place or deposit or permit to be placed or deposited
upon public or private property within this Township any sanitary
sewage or industrial wastes in violation of Subsection A of this section.
D. No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle
shall be used and maintained at any time upon any improved property
which has been connected to a sewer or which shall be required under
Subsection A of this section to be connected to a sewer.
(1) Every such privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar
receptacle in existence shall be abandoned and shall be cleansed
and filled under the direction and supervision of this Township
within two years of connection, and any such privy vault, cesspool,
sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle not so abandoned and
cleansed and filled shall constitute a nuisance, and such nuisance
may be abated as provided by law, at the expense of the owner of
such improved property. The owner of such privy vault, cesspool,
sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle may appeal to the
Township for an extension of time or exception from this provision.
E. No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle at
any time shall be connected with a sewer.
F. The notice by this Township to make a connection to a sewer, referred
to in Subsection A of this section, shall consist of a copy of this article,
including any amendments at the time in effect, and a written or printed
document requiring such connection in accordance with the provisions
of this article and specifying that such connection shall be made within
60 days from the date such notice is given. Such notice may be given at
any time after a sewer is in place which can receive and convey sanitary
sewage improved property. Such notice shall be served upon the owner
either by personal service or by registered mail or by such other
method as at the time may be provided by law.
§ 9-1.2 HARRIS CODE § 9-1.3
AO:188
§ 9-1.3. Separate connections required; costs; point of connection;
failure to connect.
§ 9-1.4. Existing house sewer lines; inspections; maintenance of
building sewers; additional rules and regulations.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this section, each improved property
shall be connected separately and independently with a sewer through
a building sewer. Grouping of more than one improved property on one
building sewer shall not be permitted, except under special
circumstances and for good sanitary reasons or other good cause
shown, and then only after special permission, in writing, shall have
been secured from the Authority and the Township.
B. All costs and expenses of construction of a building sewer and all costs
and expenses of connection of a building sewer to a sewer shall be
borne by the owner of the improved property to be connected, and such
owner shall indemnify and save harmless this Township and the
Authority from all loss or damage that may be occasioned, directly or
indirectly, as a result of construction of a building sewer or of
connection of a building sewer to a sewer.
C. A building sewer shall be connected to a sewer at the place designated
by the Authority and where the lateral is provided. The invert of a
building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same or a
higher elevation than the invert of the sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall
be made and the connection of a building sewer to the lateral shall be
made secure and watertight. The Authority shall establish and publicize
procedures whereby the owner of an improved property may designate
a preferred location for a lateral to be provided by the Authority.
D. If the owner of any improved property located in this Township and
accessible to and whose principal building is within 150 feet of the
sewage collection system, after 60 days' notice from this Township, in
accordance with § 9-1.2A, shall fail to connect such improved property,
as required, this Township may make such connection and may collect
from such owner the costs and expenses thereof. In such case, this
Township shall forthwith, upon completion of the work, send an
itemized bill of the cost of the construction of such connection to the
owner of the improved property. In case of neglect or refusal by the
owner of such improved property to pay said bill, this Township shall
file a municipal lien for said construction within six months of the date
of the completion of the construction of said connection, the same to be
subject in all respects to the general law provided for the filing and
recovery of municipal liens.
A. Where an improved property, at the time connection to a sewer is
required, shall be served by its own sewage disposal system or device,
the existing house sewer line shall be broken on the structure side of
such sewage disposal system or device and attachment shall be made,
§ 9-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.4
AO:189
§ 9-1.5. Violations and penalties.64
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs, and, in default
of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section
of this article which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a
separate offense.
with proper fittings, to continue such house sewer line as a building
sewer.
B. No building sewer shall be covered until it has been inspected and
approved by this Township and the Authority. If any part of a building
sewer is covered before so being inspected and approved, it shall be
uncovered for inspection at the cost and expense of the owner of the
improved property to be connected to a sewer.
C. Every building sewer of any improved property shall be maintained in a
sanitary and safe operating condition by the owner of such improved
property.
D. Every excavation for a building sewer shall be guarded adequately with
barricades and lights to protect all persons from damage and injury.
Streets, sidewalks and other public property disturbed in the course of
installation of a building sewer shall be restored, at the cost and
expense of the owner of the improved property being connected, in a
manner satisfactory to this Township.
E. If any person shall fail or refuse, upon receipt of a notice of this
Township or the Authority, in writing, to remedy any unsatisfactory
condition with respect to a building sewer, within 60 days of receipt of
such notice, this Township or the Authority may refuse to permit such
person to discharge sanitary sewage and industrial wastes into the
sewage collection system until such unsatisfactory condition shall have
been remedied to the satisfaction of this Township and the Authority.
F. This Township reserves the right to adopt, from time to time, additional
rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper relating to
connections with a sewer and the sewage collection system, which
additional rules and regulations, to the extent appropriate, shall be and
shall be construed as part of this article.
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 9-1.4 HARRIS CODE § 9-1.6
AO:190
§ 9-1.6. Declaration of purpose.
It is declared that enactment of this article is necessary for the protection,
benefit and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of inhabitants of
this Township.
§ 9-1.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.6
AO:191

ARTICLE II
Sewer Connection Standards65
[Adopted 1-2-1979 by Ord. No. 83]
§ 9-2.1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Building Sewers Standards Ordinance."
§ 9-2.2. Purpose.
It is hereby declared to be the intention and purpose of this article to
establish standards for connections to the College-Harris Joint Authority
and to bring its standards into conformity with other municipalities in the
Centre Region, in order to protect, benefit, and preserve the health, safety,
and welfare of the inhabitants of this Township.
§ 9-2.3. Adoption of standards.
Building sewers and building drains shall be constructed in accordance with
those sections of the BOCA Basic Plumbing Code, Fourth Edition, 1978,
pertaining to building sewers and building drains, which are incorporated
herein by reference and which are specifically enumerated as sections in
each article and appendixes as follows:
A. Article I, Administration and Enforcement:
(1) Section P-104.0, Existing Use.
(2) Section P-105.0, Repairs and Maintenance.
(3) Section P-106.0, Demolition and Structures.
(4) Section P-107.0, Moved Structures.
(5) Section P-108.0, Approval.
(6) Section P-115.0, Inspection.
(7) Section P-116.0, Workmanship.
(8) Section P-118.0, Stop-Work Order.
(9) Section P-120.0, Unsafe Conditions.
(10) Section P-121.0, Emergency Measures.
B. Article II, Definitions:
(1) Section P-200.0, General.
(2) Section P-201.0, Definitions of Plumbing Terms.
65.Editor's Note: See Section 2515 of the Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S. § 67515.
§ 9-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-2.3
AO:193
C. Article III, General Regulations:
(1) Section P-300.0, General.
(2) Section P-301.0, Health and Safety.
(3) Section P-302.0, Connection to Plumbing Systems Required.
(4) Section P-304.0, Exclusion of Materials Detrimental to the
Sewerage System.
(5) Section P-308.0, Protection of Pipes (as amended in § 9-2.4 below).
(6) Section P-309.0, Sleeves (as amended in § 9-2.4 below).
D. Article IV, Materials:
(1) Section P-400.0, General.
(2) Section P-401.0, Performance Requirements.
(3) Section P-402.0, Minimum Standards.
(4) Section P-403.0, Standards Applicable to Plumbing Materials.
(5) Section P-404.0, Identification of Materials.
(6) Section P-405.0, Piping System Materials (as amended in § 9-2.4
below).
(7) Section P-406.0, Special Materials.
(8) Section P-407.0, Fixture Materials.
E. Article V, Joints and Connections:
(1) Section P-500.0, General.
(2) Section P-501.0, Types of Joints for Piping Materials.
(3) Section P-502.0, Types of Joints Between Different Piping
Materials.
(4) Section P-503.0, Connections Between Drainage Piping and Certain
Fixtures.
(5) Section P-504.0, Tightness.
(6) Section P-505.0, Waterproofing of Openings.
F. Article VI, Drainage Systems:
(1) Section P-600.0, General.
(2) Section P-601.0, Determining Size of Drainage System.
(3) Section P-602.0, Drainage Piping Installation.
§ 9-2.3 HARRIS CODE § 9-2.3
AO:194
§ 9-2.4. Modifications and amendments to code.
The following subsections of the BOCA Code are hereby amended to read
as follows:
G. Article IX, Vents and Venting:
(1) Section P-902.0, Protection of Trap Seals.
(2) Section P-915.0, Venting of Sumps and Sewers.
H. Article X, Traps, Interceptors, Separators, and Back Water Valves:
(1) Section P-1001.0, Fixture Traps (as amended in § 9-2.4 below).
(2) Section P-1002.0, Interceptors and Separators.
I. Article XI, Drainage Pipe Cleanouts:
(1) Section P-1100.0, General.
(2) Section P-1101.0, Location.
(3) Section P-1102.0, Underground Drainage.
(4) Section P-1103.0, Concealed Piping.
(5) Section P-1104.0, Direction of Flow.
(6) Section P-1105.0, Cleanout Size.
(7) Section P-1106.0, Manholes for Larger Pipes.
(8) Section P-1107.0, Cleanout Clearances.
(9) Section P-1108.0, Cleanouts to be Accessible.
J. Article XVIII, Inspection, Tests, and Maintenance:
(1) Section P-1800.0, General.
(2) Section P-1801.0, Inspections.
(3) Section P-1802.0, Testing of Plumbing Systems.
(4) Section P-1803.0, Maintenance.
K. Appendix B, Typical Symbols and Drawings.
L. Appendix E, Plumbing Material Standards.
A. Section P-308.3, Freezing. This subsection is amended to read as
follows:
§ 9-2.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-2.4
AO:195
P-308.3 Freezing: Sewer shall be installed below recorded frost
penetration but not less than three feet, six inches, below grade.
In climates with freezing temperatures, plumbing piping in exterior
building walls shall be adequately protected against freezing by
insulation or heat, or both. Variations in required minimum depths
for the sewer house trap may be made only with the approval of the
Plumbing Official.
B. Section P-309.1, Exterior walls. This subsection is amended to read as
follows:
P-309.1 Exterior walls: In exterior walls, a steel sleeve shall be used
when the sewer passes through the foundation or footer. The annular
space between the sleeve and pipe shall be sealed using a rubber seal
which utilizes bolts to expand the rubber thereby sealing the space
between the sewer pipe and sleeve.
C. Section P-405.2.3, Building sewer. This subsection is amended to read
as follows:
P-405.2.3 Building sewer: The building sewer shall be subject to the
following provisions:
1. Separate trenches for the waterlines and for the building sewer are
mandatory.
2. The sewer pipe shall be of cast iron, concrete, vitrified clay tile,
plastic, asbestos cement, copper tube of a weight not less than
that of copper water tube Type L, hard temper. Joints shall be
watertight and rustproof.
3. Building sewers in roads, streets, pavements, alleys, driveways,
parking areas, rights-of-way, or in areas subject to superimposed
loads shall be of materials as referenced in Table 404.1 and
Appendix E.
D. Section P-405.3.1, Above ground venting. This subsection is amended to
read as follows:
P-405.3.1 Above ground venting: Vent piping installed above
ground shall be brass or copper pipe, copper tube having a weight of
not less than that of copper drainage tube Type DWV, cast-iron pipe,
galvanized steel pipe, galvanized open-hearth iron pipe, lead pipe, ABS
plastic pipe or PVC plastic pipe, Schedule 40.
E. Section P-1001.7, Building traps. This subsection is amended to read as
follows:
§ 9-2.4 HARRIS CODE § 9-2.4
AO:196
§ 9-2.5. Additional standards.
The following requirements or standards are adopted in addition to those
set forth in those sections of the BOCA Basic Plumbing Code as adopted and
amended above:
§ 9-2.6. Plumbing Official.
The Harris Township Supervisors shall appoint a Plumbing Official charged
with the administration and enforcement of this article. The Board of
Supervisors may appoint the College-Harris Joint Authority or the said
Authority's specifically designated agents as Plumbing Official or Officials.
§ 9-2.7. Variances.
The Board of Supervisors of Harris Township may grant a variance or
variances from the strict requirements of this article upon application in
writing by a landowner or his agent. A variance shall be granted where
it can be shown by the applicant that, because of physical circumstances
or conditions, strict conformity with the requirements of this article would
cause unnecessary hardship and that the fundamental purposes of this
article can be fulfilled in another reasonable and sound manner. Prior to
the grant of any variance, a copy of the application shall be sent to the
office of the College-Harris Joint Authority for review and comment. Said
Authority and the applicant shall be notified by mail of the date and time of
the Supervisors meeting at which said application shall be considered.
§ 9-2.8. Violations and penalties.66
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs, and, in default
of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section
of this article which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a
separate offense.
P-1001.7 Building traps: Building (house) traps shall be installed.
Each building trap, when installed, shall be provided with a cleanout
and with a relieving vent or fresh-air intake on the inlet side of the trap
which need not be larger than 1/2 the diameter of the drain to which it
connects. Such relieving vent or fresh-air intake shall be carried above
grade and terminate in a screened outlet located outside the building.
A. No two lots shall use the same building sewer or other sewer which is
part of the building sewer.
66.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 9-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-2.9
AO:197
§ 9-2.9. Additional remedies.
The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the
institution of appropriate actions at law or equity to prevent unlawful
construction or to restrain, correct, or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal
occupancy of a building structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act,
conduct, business or use of a building or structure in or about any premises.
§ 9-2.9 HARRIS CODE § 9-2.9
AO:198
ARTICLE III
Industrial Pretreatment Program
[Adopted 7-8-1996 by Ord. No. 177]
§ 9-3.1. Title; when effective.
This article shall be known as the "Industrial Pretreatment Program (IPP)
Ordinance," and the provisions hereof shall become effective upon the date
of enactment hereof and shall remain in effect thereafter unless the same
be repealed.
§ 9-3.2. Prohibited wastes and pollutant limitations.
§ 9-3.3. Fees.
It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of costs from
industrial users of the sewer system for the implementation of the industrial
pretreatment program established herein. The University Area Joint
Authority may establish a system of rates and charges for implementation of
the industrial pretreatment program authorized and adopted by this article,
which shall be applicable to users in the Township.
§ 9-3.4. Violations and penalties.
A. No person shall discharge, or cause or allow to be discharged, into the
sewer system, directly or indirectly, any pollutant, wastewater, or
combination of wastewaters which will, alone or in conjunction with
other discharges, cause or contribute to interference or pass-through.
To provide for the effective monitoring and control of discharges to the
sewer system, the Industrial Pretreatment Program Resolution adopted
by the University Area Joint Authority on May 20, 1996, and being
Resolution No. 96-01 of said Authority, and as it may be amended from
time to time, is hereby incorporated, in its entirety, and made a part
hereof.
B. The terms and definitions used in this article are defined as they appear
in the Industrial Pretreatment Program Resolution.
A. Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or the orders,
rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, may be subject to a
civil monetary penalty pursuant to applicable law. Each day on which a
violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and
distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the
Township may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, court
reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at
law against the person found to have violated this article or the orders,
rules, regulations, and permits issued hereunder. Except for a violation
which has been subject to a civil or criminal penalty by the Township,
nothing shall be deemed to preclude the University Area Joint Authority
from commencing an action seeking a penalty of up to $25,000 per day
§ 9-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-3.4
AO:199
§ 9-3.5. Remedies not exclusive.
The enumeration of remedies in § 9-3.4 of this article and in the University
Area Joint Authority Resolution does not restrict their application and shall
not be deemed to preclude any other Township remedies, enforcement
responses or other causes of action, including those available under
common law. Nothing in this article, any enforcement response plan, or
any provision of the University Area Joint Authority's approved industrial
pretreatment program shall be intended to limit the enforcement discretion
of the Township or the University Area Joint Authority to enforce this article
and the industrial pretreatment program and their provisions as otherwise
provided for by law.
§ 9-3.6. Adoption of additional rules and regulations.
The Township reserves the right to adopt, from time to time, such additional
rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper in conjunction
with use and operation of the sewage collection system, which rules and
regulations shall be, shall become, and shall be construed as part of this
article.
§ 9-3.7. Administration and enforcement.
The Township appoints the University Area Joint Authority as its agent in
all aspects for the administration and enforcement of this article and the
industrial pretreatment program established herein, to the extent permitted
by law. The administrative and enforcement powers granted to the
University Area Joint Authority include, but are not limited to, the following:
for each violation, pursuant to the Publicly Owned Treatment Works
Penalty Law, Pennsylvania Act 9 of 1992, P.L. 23, 35 P.S. § 752.1 et seq.
B. In addition to any applicable civil or criminal penalty, the user is liable
for:
(1) All damage which its discharge causes to the sewer system or
University Area Joint Authority Sewage Treatment Plant if that
damage is caused, in whole or in part, by the user's violation of its
wastewater discharge permit or any applicable law, ordinance,
resolution, regulation, rule or pretreatment requirement
established by the Township or the University Area Joint Authority.
(2) Any penalty imposed upon the Township or the University Area
Joint Authority (whether by judicial or administrative order or the
settlement of a judicial or administrative penalty action) where the
liability of the Township or University Area Joint Authority was
caused by the user, either alone or in conjunction with discharge(s)
from other source(s).
§ 9-3.4 HARRIS CODE § 9-3.7
AO:200
A. Local limits on the control of discharge of pollutants may be developed,
enforced and revised from time to time by the University Area Joint
Authority.
B. Wastewater discharge permits or other permits for the discharge of
wastes to the sewer system shall be issued or denied and may be
suspended or revoked by the University Area Joint Authority. Conditions
contained in wastewater discharge permits and other permits may be
developed by the University Area Joint Authority.
C. Hearings provided for by this article, including those established by the
University Area Joint Authority Pretreatment Program Resolution, shall
be held by the University Area Joint Authority Board or its delegates as
provided by the Industrial Pretreatment Program Resolution.
D. Written directions and notices of violation may be issued by the
University Area Joint Authority acting for and in the name of the
Township.
E. Special agreements and/or waivers of industrial pretreatment program
requirements may be made by the University Area Joint Authority
acting in the name of and after written approval from the Township.
F. The University Area Joint Authority shall have the right under this
section, as agent for the Township, to commence legal action to enforce
the provisions of this article.
G. Proper records retention, including the protection of confidential
information, as required by the industrial pretreatment program, is the
responsibility of the University Area Joint Authority.
§ 9-3.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-3.7
AO:201

ARTICLE IV
On-Lot Sewage Disposal Facilities
[Adopted 6-11-1990 by Ord. No. 129]
§ 9-4.1. Title; purpose; statutory authority.
§ 9-4.2. Definitions. [Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 27467]
A. This article shall be known and may be cited as the "On-Lot Sewage
Disposal Program for Harris Township." [Amended 11-13-2007 by
Ord. No. 274]
B. This article establishes a sewage management plan for Harris
Township.
C. As mandated by the municipal codes, the Clean Streams Law (35 P.S.
§ 691.1 et seq.), and the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act of
January 24, 1966, P.L. 1535, as amended, 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq., known
as "Act 537"), municipalities have the power and the duty to provide for
adequate sewage treatment facilities and for the protection of the
public health by preventing the discharge of untreated or inadequately
treated sewage. The official sewage facilities plan for Harris Township
indicates that it is necessary to formulate and implement a sewage
management program to effectively prevent and abate water pollution
and hazards to the public health caused by improper treatment and
disposal of sewage. [Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 274]
D. The purpose of this article is to provide for the inspection, maintenance
and rehabilitation of on-lot sewage disposal systems; to further permit
the municipality to intervene in situations which are public nuisances or
hazards to the public health; and to establish penalties and appeal
procedures necessary for the proper administration of a sewage
management program.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT 247 — The Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as amended,
53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., known as the "Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code."
ACT 537 — The Act of January 24, 1966, P.L. 1535, as amended, 35 P.S.
§ 750.1 et seq., known as the "Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act."
AUTHORIZED AGENT — A certified Sewage Enforcement Officer, Code
Enforcement Officer, professional engineer, Plumbing Inspector,
Municipal Secretary or any other qualified or licensed person who is
delegated by the municipality to function within specified limits as the
agent of the municipality to carry out the provisions of this article.
67.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 9-4.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-4.2
AO:203
BOARD/COUNCIL — The Board of Supervisors, Harris Township,
Centre County, Pennsylvania.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (CEO) — An individual employed
by the municipality to administer and enforce ordinances in the
municipality.
COMMUNITY ON-LOT SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Any system,
whether publicly or privately owned, for the collection of sewage from
two or more lots or uses, or two or more equivalent dwelling units, and
the treatment and/or disposal of the sewage on one or more lots or at
any other site.
DEP — The Department of Environmental Protection of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any successor agency.
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership or corporation which erects
or contracts to erect a building on property it owns, whether with the
intent to sell the building to some other party upon its full or partial
completion, or upon conveyance of property on which the building is to
be built, or with the intent to continue ownership of the property.
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT (EDU) — For the purpose of
determining the number of lots in a subdivision or land development,
that part of a multiple-family dwelling, commercial, industrial, or
institutional establishment with sewage flows equal to 400 gallons per
day.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the municipality upon
which there is erected an improvement intended for continuous or
periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings and from which
improvement sewage shall or may be discharged by any means.
INDIVIDUAL ON-LOT SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A system of
piping, tanks or other facilities serving a single lot and collecting and
disposing of sewage in whole or in part into the soil or into any waters
of this commonwealth or by means of conveyance to another site for
final disposal.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — A land development as identified in the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L.
805, No. 247, as amended, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plot or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon
as a unit.
MALFUNCTION — The condition which occurs when an on-lot sewage
disposal system causes pollution to groundwater or surface water,
contamination of private or public drinking water supplies, nuisance
problems or hazard to public health. Indications of malfunctioning
systems include but are not limited to foul odors, lush grass growing
over the system, backup of wastewater in the attached buildings, soggy
ground over the system, surfacing sewage effluent flowing over the
ground and occurring at any time of the year.
§ 9-4.2 HARRIS CODE § 9-4.2
AO:204
MANAGEMENT PROGRAM — The management program shall
encompass individual and community on-lot sewage disposal systems
which discharge into the soils of the municipality. All systems shall
be operated under the jurisdiction of the Harris Township Board of
Supervisors and other applicable laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
OFFICIAL SEWAGE FACILITIES PLAN — A comprehensive plan for the
provision of adequate sewage disposal, adopted by the municipality and
approved by DEP in accordance with the Act and with applicable DEP
regulations.
OWNER — Any person, corporation, partnership, etc., holding deed/
title to lands within the municipality.
PERSON — Any individual, association, public or private corporation,
whether for profit or not for profit, partnership, firm, trust, estate, or
other legally recognized entity. Whenever the term "person" is used
in connection with any clause providing for the imposition of a fine
or penalty or the ordering of action to comply with the terms of this
article, the term "person" shall include the members of an association,
partnership or firm and the officers of any public or private corporation,
whether for profit or not for profit.
PLANNING MODULE FOR LAND DEVELOPMENT — A revision to,
or exception to the revision of, the municipal official plan submitted
in connection with the request for approval of a subdivision or land
development in accordance with DEP regulations.
PUMPER/HAULER — Any person, company, partnership or corporation
which engages in cleaning community or individual sewage systems
and transports the septage cleaned from these systems.
PUMPER'S REPORT/RECEIPT — Form which shall be used by all
permitted pumpers/haulers to report each pumping of on-lot sewage
disposal systems in the municipality.
REHABILITATION — Work done to modify, repair, enlarge, or replace
an existing on-lot sewage disposal system.
REPLACEMENT AREA — An area designated as the future location
of an individual on-lot sewage system that shall be installed should
the initial individual on-lot system installed or to be installed fail or
otherwise become inoperable and which shall meet all the regulations
of the DEP and all applicable municipal ordinances for an individual
on-lot sewage system and shall be protected from encroachment by an
easement recorded on the final plan as filed with the Centre County
Recorder of Deeds.
SEPTAGE — The residual scum and sludge pumped from septic
systems.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products
or excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or
any noxious or deleterious substances being harmful or inimical to the
§ 9-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-4.2
AO:205
§ 9-4.3. Applicability. [Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 274]
From the effective date of this article, its provisions shall apply to all
persons owning any property in the municipality serviced by an individual
on-lot sewage disposal system or a community on-lot sewage disposal
system and to all persons installing such on-lot sewage disposal systems.
§ 9-4.4. Permit requirements.
public health, or to animal or aquatic life, or to the use of water for
domestic water supply or for recreation.
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (SEO) — A person appointed by
the municipality to administer the provisions of this article and
authorized by DEP in accordance with Chapter 72, "Administration
of Sewage Facilities Permitting Program," of Title 25, "Environmental
Protection,"68 to perform percolation tests, site and soil evaluation, and
issue sewage permits for on-lot disposal systems.
SEWAGE FACILITIES — A system of sewage collection, conveyance,
treatment and disposal which will prevent the discharge of untreated
or inadequately treated sewage or other waste into waters of this
commonwealth or otherwise provide for the safe and sanitary treatment
and disposal of sewage or other waste.
SINGLE AND SEPARATE OWNERSHIP — The ownership of a lot by one
or more persons, which ownership is separate and distinct from that of
any abutting or adjoining lot.
SUBDIVISION — A subdivision as defined by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as
amended, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
B. All other definitions of words and terms used in this article shall have
the same meanings as set forth in Chapter 73, "Standards for Onlot
Sewage Treatment Facilities," of Title 25, "Environmental Protection."69
A. Regardless of lot size, no person shall install, construct, or request bid
proposals for construction or alter an individual sewage system or
community sewage system or construct or request bid proposals for
construction or install or occupy any building or structure for which an
individual sewage system or community sewage system is to be
installed without first obtaining a permit indicating that the site and the
plans and specifications of such system are in compliance with the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (hereinafter called
"Act 537" or "Act") and the standards adopted pursuant to that Act.
[Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 274]
B. No system or structure designed to provide individual or community
sewage disposal shall be covered from view until approval to cover the
68.Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Ch. 72.
69.Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Ch. 73.
§ 9-4.2 HARRIS CODE § 9-4.4
AO:206
§ 9-4.5. Replacement areas. [Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 274]
same has been given by the Municipal Sewage Enforcement Officer.
If 72 hours have elapsed, excepting Sundays and holidays, since the
Sewage Enforcement Officer issuing the permit received notification
of completion of construction, the applicant may cover said system
or structure unless permission has been specifically refused by the
Sewage Enforcement Officer.
C. The municipality may require applicants for sewage permits to notify
the municipality's certified SEO of the schedule for construction of the
permitted on-lot sewage disposal system so that inspection(s) in
addition to the final inspection required by Act 537 may be scheduled
and performed by the municipality's certified SEO at the cost of the
applicant. [Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 274]
D. No building or occupancy permit shall be issued by the municipality or
its Code Enforcement Officer for a new building which will contain
sewage-generating facilities until a valid sewage permit has been
obtained from the municipality's certified Sewage Enforcement Officer.
E. No building or occupancy permit shall be issued and no work shall
begin on any alteration or conversion of any existing structure, if said
alteration or conversion will result in the increase or potential increase
in sewage flows from the structure, until the municipality's Code
Enforcement Officer and the structure's owner receive from the
municipality's SEO either a permit for modification or replacement of
the existing sewage disposal system or written notification that such a
permit will not be required. In accordance with Chapter 73
regulations,70 the certified SEO shall determine whether the proposed
alteration or conversion of the structure will result in increased sewage
flows. [Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 274]
F. Sewage permits may be issued only by a certified SEO employed by the
municipality for that express purpose. The DEP shall be notified by the
municipality as to the identity of its currently employed primary and
alternate certified SEOs. [Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 27471]
G. No sewage permit for a new occupancy, whether residential or
nonresidential, may be issued unless proof is provided the lot of record
existed prior to May 15, 1972, or that Act 537 planning for that lot has
been provided by the municipality and approved by DEP. [Added
11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 274]
H. No final Act 247 approval of a subdivision or land development plan
may be made and no recording of deeds for newly created lots
completed until formal Act 537 planning approval by DEP is received.
[Added 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 274]
70.Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Ch. 73.
71.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 9-4.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-4.5
AO:207
A. Any supplements, revisions, or exceptions (Component I) to the
municipality's official sewage facilities plan which are prepared
pursuant to the applicable regulations of the DEP for subdivision or
development of land within the municipality shall provide for the
testing, identification, and reservation of an area of each lot or
developed property suitable for the installation of a replacement on-lot
sewage disposal system. This requirement is in addition to the testing,
identification, and reservation of an area for the primary sewage
disposal system.72
B. No permit shall be issued for any proposed new on-lot sewage disposal
system on any newly created or subdivided property in the municipality
unless and until a replacement area is tested, identified and reserved.
C. After the effective date of this article, a replacement area for an
individual on-lot sewage system shall be required for all lots or lots to
be created which are not serviced or to be serviced by a community
sewerage system or for which a valid permit for installation of an
individual on-lot sewage system has not been issued. Lots existing prior
to the effective date of this article shall be exempt from the
requirements of this section.
D. The replacement area provided shall comply with the Act and with all
regulations issued by DEP as incorporated into this article concerning
individual on-lot and community on-lot sewage systems, including
isolation distances, and with the terms of this article and any other
applicable municipal ordinances.
E. Each applicant who shall submit a plan for the subdivision or
development of land or who shall apply for a permit for the installation
of an individual on-lot or community on-lot sewage system, or who shall
request approval of a planning module for land development or the
adoption of a revision, exception to revision, or supplement to the
official plan shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the certified SEO
that a suitable area exists on the lot or on each lot to be created for an
initial individual on-lot sewage system and for the replacement area.
The certified SEO shall perform or observe all tests required for the
location of an individual on-lot or community on-lot sewage system to
confirm the suitability of the replacement area. Allowance of open land
for the replacement area without testing performed or observed by the
certified SEO shall not constitute compliance with the requirements of
this section.
F. The location of the initial individual on-lot sewage system and the
replacement area as confirmed by the certified SEO shall be identified
on the plot plans and diagrams submitted as part of the permit
application.
72.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 9-4.5 HARRIS CODE § 9-4.5
AO:208
§ 9-4.6. Inspections. [Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 274]
G. If the application has been submitted as part of an application for
subdivision or land development approval or as part of a request that
the municipality approve a planning module for land development or
amend its official plan, or a request for an exception to the revision of
the official plan, the location of each initial individual on-lot or
community on-lot sewage system and each replacement area shall be
noted upon the plot plans. If the application is for subdivision or land
development approval, a note constituting a permanent easement shall
be added to the plans stating that no improvements shall be
constructed upon the replacement area, and the deed to be recorded
for each lot created as part of the subdivision or land development shall
contain language reflecting this limitation.
H. Any revisions to a permit or plan affecting a replacement area which
previously has been approved pursuant to the provisions of this article
shall be reviewed for approval by the Municipal Board/Council or its
authorized representative.
I. The easement for the replacement area noted upon the plan and
recorded with the Centre County Recorder of Deeds shall state that no
permanent or temporary improvements of any character, other than
shallow-rooted plant matter, shall be constructed upon the replacement
area.
J. If a person desires to construct such improvements on the designated
replacement area, such person shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the certified SEO that an alternate replacement area, which complies
with all applicable regulations of the DEP, this article, and all other
applicable municipal ordinances, exists upon the lot. If such an
alternate replacement area shall be identified, the alternate
replacement area may be considered to be the replacement area
required by this article and shall be designated as the replacement
area.
A. Any on-lot disposal system may be inspected by the municipality's
certified SEO or authorized agent at any reasonable time as of the
effective date of this article, but in no case shall an inspection of every
on-lot disposal system be conducted less frequently than once every six
years.
B. The inspection may include a physical tour of the property, the taking of
samples from surface water, wells, other groundwater sources, the
sampling of the contents of the sewage disposal system itself and/or the
introduction of a traceable substance into the interior plumbing of the
structure served to ascertain the path and the ultimate destination of
wastewater generated in the structure. A copy of the inspection report
shall be furnished to the owner and current resident, which shall
include all of the following information: date of inspection; name and
address of system owner; description and location of the system,
§ 9-4.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-4.6
AO:209
including presence of access hatches, risers, and markers; size of
tank(s); current occupant's name and number of users; indication of
any system malfunction observed; results of any and all soils and water
tests. The municipality's certified SEO will follow up should any
remedial action be required.
C. The municipality's certified SEO or authorized agent shall have the
right to enter upon land for the purposes of inspections described
above. In the event access to inspect the property is denied, the
following steps shall be taken:
(1) The matter will be officially referred to the governing body of the
municipality for action.
(2) The governing body of the municipality may schedule a review at
the next scheduled meeting of the Municipal Board/Council or, if
the situation threatens the health or safety of the residents of the
municipality, the Board/Council may commence an immediate
procedure to obtain a search warrant from the Magisterial District
Judge.
(3) Upon receipt of a search warrant to inspect the property, the
certified SEO or authorized agent of the municipality shall be
accompanied by an officer of the municipal or state police, and the
inspection shall be completed in accordance with this subsection.
D. An initial inspection shall be conducted by the municipality's certified
SEO or authorized agent within six years of the effective date of this
article for the purpose of determining the type and functional status of
each sewage disposal system in the municipality. A written report shall
be furnished to the owner of each property inspected, and a copy of said
report shall be maintained in the municipal records.
E. A routine inspection of each sewage disposal system in the municipality
will be scheduled every six years to assure the proper function of all
systems in the municipality.
F. The municipality's certified SEO or authorized agent shall inspect
systems known to be, or alleged to be, malfunctioning. Should said
inspections reveal that the system is indeed malfunctioning, the
municipal certified SEO shall take action to require the correction of
the malfunction. If total correction is not technically or financially
feasible in the opinion of the municipal certified SEO and a
representative of the DEP, then action by the property owner to
mitigate the malfunction shall be required. A permit shall be required
by the municipality for alterations or connections to an existing
individual or community on-lot sewage system when the alteration or
connection requires the repair, replacement or enlargement of a
treatment tank or retention tank or the repair, replacement,
disturbance, modification or enlargement of a soil absorption area or
spray field or the soil within or under the soil absorption area or spray
field.73
§ 9-4.6 HARRIS CODE § 9-4.6
AO:210
§ 9-4.7. Prohibited discharges.
Only normal domestic wastes shall be discharged into any on-lot sewage
disposal system. The following shall not be discharged into the system:
§ 9-4.8. Maintenance requirements. [Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord.
No. 274]
G. There may arise geographic areas within the municipality where
numerous on-lot sewage disposal systems are malfunctioning. A
resolution of these areawide problems may necessitate detailed
planning and a municipally sponsored revision to that area's Act 537
official sewage facilities plan. When a DEP-authorized sewage facilities
plan revision has been undertaken by the municipality, mandatory
repair or replacement of individual malfunctioning sewage disposal
systems within the study area may be delayed, at the discretion of the
municipality, pending the outcome of the plan revision process.
However, the municipality may compel immediate corrective action
whenever a malfunction, as determined by municipal officials and/or
the DEP, represents a serious public health or environmental threat.74
A. Industrial waste.
B. Automobile oil and other nondomestic oil.
C. Toxic or hazardous substances or chemicals, including but not limited
to pesticides, disinfectants, acids, paints, paint thinners, herbicides,
gasoline and other solvents.
D. Clean surface water or groundwater, including water from roof or cellar
drains, springs, basement sump pumps and french drains.
A. Any person owning a building served by an on-lot sewage disposal
system shall have the septic tank pumped by a qualified pumper/hauler
within three years of the effective date of this article. Thereafter, that
person shall have the tank pumped at least once every three years.
Receipts from the pumper/hauler shall be submitted to the municipality
or authorized agent within 30 days of the date of pumping.
B. An option will be provided to allow the property owner to request a
waiver from pumping every three years if, because of tank size,
household size, or seasonal use, it is determined by the municipality's
certified SEO that such pumping is not needed. In such cases, a waiver
from pumping can be granted at the discretion of the municipality's
certified SEO when an inspection of the tank by the municipal SEO
reveals that the solids are less than 1/3 the liquid depth of the tank.
C. The required pumping frequency may be increased at the discretion of
the municipality's SEO or authorized agent if the septic tank is
73.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 9-4.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-4.8
AO:211
undersized, if solids buildup in the tank is above average, if the
hydraulic load on the system increases significantly above average, if a
garbage grinder is used in the building, if the system malfunctions or
for other good cause shown.
D. If any person can prove that their system tank had been pumped within
three years prior to their pumping notification date, then the
municipality may delay that person's initial required pumping to
conform with the general pumping frequency requirement.
E. Any person owning a building served by an on-lot sewage disposal
system which contains an aerobic treatment tank shall follow the
operation and maintenance recommendations of the equipment
manufacturer. A copy of the manufacturer's recommendations and a
copy of the service agreement shall be submitted to the municipality
within six months of the effective date of this article. Thereafter, service
receipts shall be submitted to the municipality at the intervals specified
by the manufacturer's recommendations. In no case may the service or
pumping intervals for aerobic treatment exceed those required for
septic tanks.
F. Any person owning a building served by a cesspool or dry well shall
have that system pumped according to the schedule prescribed for
septic tanks as noted in Subsection A of this section. As an alternative
to this scheduled pumping of the cesspool or dry well, the owner may
secure a sewage permit from the certified SEO for a septic tank to be
installed preceding the cesspool or dry well. For a system consisting of
a cesspool or dry well preceded by an approved septic tank, only the
septic tank must be pumped at the prescribed interval.
G. The municipality may require additional maintenance activity as
needed, including, but not necessarily limited to, cleaning and
unclogging of piping, servicing and the repair of mechanical
equipment, leveling of distribution boxes, tanks and lines, removal of
obstructing roots or trees, the diversion of surface water away from the
disposal area, etc.
H. Each time a septic tank or other subsurface waste disposal tank is
pumped out, the municipality, its authorized agent, or a private septage
pumper/hauler, whichever provides the service, shall provide to the
owner of the on-lot disposal system a signed pumper's report/receipt
containing, at a minimum, the following information:
(1) Date of pumping.
(2) Name and address of system owner.
(3) Address of tank's location, if different from owner's.
(4) Amount of septage or other solid or semisolid material removed.
(5) Destination of septage (name of treatment facility).
§ 9-4.8 HARRIS CODE § 9-4.8
AO:212
§ 9-4.9. Malfunctioning systems.
I. Upon completion of each required pumping, the pumper/hauler shall fill
out and submit a pumper's report/receipt, copies of which shall be
provided by the municipality or its authorized agent to all registered
pumpers/haulers. The pumper/hauler shall provide one copy of the
pumper's report/receipt to the owner and one copy to the municipality
or its authorized agent. Copies must be received by the municipality or
its authorized agent within 30 days of the date of pumping.
A. No person shall operate and maintain an on-lot sewage disposal system
in such a manner that it malfunctions. All liquid wastes, including
kitchen and laundry wastes and water softener backwash, shall be
discharged to a treatment system or tank. No sewage system shall
discharge untreated or partially treated sewage to the surface of the
ground or into the waters of the commonwealth unless a permit to
discharge has been obtained from the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.75
B. The municipality or its authorized agent shall issue a written notice of
violation to any person who is the owner of a property in the
municipality which is found to be served by a malfunctioning on-lot
sewage disposal system or which is discharging raw or partially treated
sewage without a permit. [Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 274]
C. Within seven days of notification by the municipality that a malfunction
has been identified, the property owner shall make application to the
municipality's certified SEO for a permit to repair or replace the
malfunctioning system. Within 30 days of initial notification by the
municipality, construction of the permitted repair or replacement shall
commence. Within 60 days of the original notification by the
municipality, the construction shall be completed unless seasonal or
unique conditions mandate a longer period, in which case the
municipality or its authorized agent shall set an extended completion
date. [Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 274]
D. The municipality's certified Sewage Enforcement Officer shall have the
authority to require the repair of any malfunction by the following
methods: cleaning, repair or replacement of components of the existing
system, adding capacity or otherwise altering or replacing the system's
treatment tank, expanding the existing disposal area, replacing the
existing disposal area, replacing a gravity distribution system with a
pressurized system, or other alternatives as appropriate for the specific
site.
E. In lieu of, or in combination with, the remedies described in Subsection
D above, the Municipal Sewage Enforcement Officer may require the
installation of water conservation equipment and the institution of
water conservation practices in structures served. Water-using devices
75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 9-4.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-4.9
AO:213
§ 9-4.10. Work performed by Township; costs. [Added 11-13-2007 by
Ord. No. 27477]
The municipality, upon written notice from the municipal SEO that an
imminent health hazard exists due to failure of a property owner to
maintain, repair or replace an on-lot sewage disposal system as provided
under the terms of this article, shall have the authority to perform or
contract to have performed the work required by the certified SEO. The
owner shall be charged for the work performed, and, if necessary, a lien
shall be entered therefor in accordance with law.
§ 9-4.11. Disposal of septage. [Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No.
274]
and appliances in the structure may be required to be retrofitted with
water-saving appurtenances or they may be required to be replaced
by water-conserving devices and appliances. Wastewater generation in
the structure may also be reduced by requiring changes in water usage
patterns in the structure served.
F. In the event that the rehabilitation measures in Subsections A through
E are not feasible or do not prove effective, the municipality may
require the owner to apply to the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection for a permit to install a single-residence
treatment and discharge system. Upon receipt of said permit, the
owner shall complete construction of the system within 60 days.76
G. Should none of the remedies described above prove totally effective in
eliminating the malfunction of an existing on-lot sewage disposal
system, the property owner is not absolved of responsibility for that
malfunction. The municipality may require whatever action is necessary
to lessen or mitigate the malfunction to the extent that it feels
necessary.
A. All septage originating within the municipality shall be disposed of at
sites or facilities approved by the DEP. Approved sites or facilities shall
include the following: septage treatment facilities, wastewater
treatment plants, composting sites, and approved farmlands.78
B. All septage pumpers/haulers operating within the municipality shall be
licensed by the DEP and permitted by the municipality or its authorized
agent. Pumpers/haulers shall comply with all reporting requirements
established by the municipality.
C. All septage of pumpers/haulers operating within the municipality shall
operate in a manner consistent with the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Solid Waste Management Act (Act 97 of 1980, 35 P.S. §§ 6018.101 to
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
77.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original § 9-4.10, Fees.
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 9-4.9 HARRIS CODE § 9-4.11
AO:214
§ 9-4.12. Administration. [Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 274]
6018.1003. Any septage pumper/hauler who violates any of the
provisions of this article or regulations of the municipality, the
conditions of its state permit, or any state or local law governing its
operation shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine
not exceeding $5,000 and costs and, in default of the payment thereof,
shall be subject to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. If
any pumper/hauler shall have been convicted on two occasions of any
violation of this article, or for violating the conditions of its state permit
or of any state or local law governing its operation, the Municipal
Board/Council shall have the power to suspend said pumper/hauler
from operating within the municipality for a period of not less than
six months nor more than two years for each violation, as determined
by the municipality. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
A. The municipality shall fully utilize those powers it possesses through
enabling statutes and ordinances to effect the purposes of this article.
B. The municipality shall employ qualified individuals to carry out the
provisions of this article. Those employees shall include a certified SEO
and may include a Code Enforcement Officer, secretary, administrator
and other persons as required. The municipality may also contract with
qualified persons or firms as necessary to carry out the provisions of
this article.
C. All permits, records, reports, files and other written material relating to
the installation, operation and maintenance and malfunction of on-lot
sewage disposal systems in the municipality shall become the property
of the municipality. Existing and future records shall be available for the
public inspection during required business hours at the official
municipal office. All records pertaining to sewage permits, building
permits, occupancy permits and all other aspects of the municipality's
sewage management program shall be made available, upon request,
for inspection by representatives of the DEP.79
D. The Municipal Board/Council shall establish a fee schedule to cover the
cost of administering this program. Fees shall be collected by the
municipality or its authorized agent.
E. The Municipal Board/Council shall establish all administrative
procedures necessary to properly carry out the provisions of this
article.
F. On the seventh anniversary of the passage of this article, the on-lot
sewage management program shall be evaluated by the municipality to
determine its effectiveness.
79.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 9-4.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-4.13
AO:215
§ 9-4.13. Appeals. [Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 274]
§ 9-4.14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-13-2007 by Ord.
No. 27480]
Any person failing to comply with any provisions of this article shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $100, and costs, and not more than $300,
and costs, or, in default thereof, shall be confined in the county jail for a
period of not more than 30 days. Each day of noncompliance shall constitute
a separate offense.
A. Appeals from decisions of the municipality or its authorized agents
under this article shall be made to the Municipal Board/Council in
writing within 30 days from the date of the decision in question.
B. The appellant shall be entitled to a hearing before the Municipal Board/
Council at its next regularly scheduled meeting, if the appeal is
received at least 14 days prior to that meeting. If the appeal is received
within 14 days of the next regularly scheduled meeting, the appeal shall
be heard at the subsequent meeting. The municipality shall thereafter
affirm, modify, or reverse the aforesaid decision. The hearing may be
postponed for a good cause shown by the appellant or the municipality.
Additional evidence may be introduced at the hearing, provided that it
is submitted with the written notice of appeal.
C. A decision shall be rendered in writing within 30 days of the date of the
hearing. If a decision is not rendered within 30 days, the release sought
by the appellant shall be deemed granted.
80.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 9-4.13 HARRIS CODE § 9-4.14
AO:216
ARTICLE V
Holding Tanks and Existing and New Privies
[Adopted 8-9-1993 by Ord. No. 150]
§ 9-5.1. Purpose.
§ 9-5.2. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the
meanings of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
AGENT — Any employee of the Township of Harris empowered by the
Township of Harris and/or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to enforce
the provisions of this article. The term "agent" shall include, but shall not
be limited to, any certified Sewage Enforcement Officer duly appointed by
the Harris Township Board of Supervisors.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of Harris Township, Centre County,
Pennsylvania.
HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle, whether permanent or
temporary, which receives and retains sewage conveyed by a water-carrying
system and is designed and constructed to facilitate the ultimate disposal of
the sewage at another site. For purposes of this article, a holding tank shall
have a capacity of no less than 1,000 gallons.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the Township upon which
there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure
sewage shall or may be discharged.
MUNICIPALITY — Harris Township, Centre County, Pennsylvania.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole, or
partial, of any property located in the Township.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation
or other group or entity.
PRIVY — A watertight tank designed to receive sewage where water under
pressure and piped wastewater are not available.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products,
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals
and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or inimical to the
public health, or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic
A. The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for the use and
maintenance of existing and new privies and holding tanks which are
designed to receive and retain sewage.
B. It is hereby declared by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Harris that the enactment of this article is necessary for the protection,
benefit and preservation of health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants
of this municipality.
§ 9-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-5.2
AO:217
water supply or for recreation. Sewage shall include "gray water," which is
further defined as discharge from any shower, tub, sink, washing machine
or other facility used for bathing or washing, including dishwater and water
softener discharge.
§ 9-5.3. Rights and privileges granted.
The Board of Supervisors, hereinafter referred to as "Board," is hereby
authorized and empowered to regulate as specified herein, within the
municipality, the methods of holding tank use, privy use, sewage collection,
transportation and disposal resulting from such use.
§ 9-5.4. Rules and regulations.
§ 9-5.5. Rates and charges.
The Board shall have the right and power to fix, alter, charge and collect
rates, assessments, and other charges as may be authorized by applicable
law and as may be deemed necessary to implement the provisions of this
article.
§ 9-5.6. Exclusiveness of rights and privileges.
A. The Board is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such rules and
regulations concerning sewage which it may deem necessary from time
to time to effect the purposes herein.
B. All such rules and regulations adopted by the Board shall be in
conformity with the provisions herein, all other ordinances of the
municipality, and all applicable laws, rules and regulations of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. Holding tank.
(1) The collection and transportation of all sewage from any property
utilizing a holding tank shall be completed under the direction and
control of the Board or its agent, and the disposal thereof shall be
made only at such site or sites as may be approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.81
(2) The Board or its agent shall be provided pumping receipts from
permitted holding tanks and documentation of receipt from a PA
DEP approved receiving station.82
(3) The Board or its agent will complete and retain annual inspection
reports for each permitted tank.
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
82.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 9-5.2 HARRIS CODE § 9-5.6
AO:218
§ 9-5.7. Conditions of privy use.
(4) The Board or its agent shall permit a holding tank only for
properties whose primary use is recreational or properties where
use of a holding tank shall be deemed necessary to abate a
nuisance. In no event shall a holding tank be permitted by the
Board or its agent as a permanent system of sewage disposal for
residential purposes. Property owners shall comply with all
applicable Pennsylvania state regulations for holding tank use.
(5) Holding tanks will only be permitted with appropriate PA DEP
approval.83
B. Privy. The collection and transportation of all sewage from any
improved property utilizing a privy shall be completed under the
direction and control of the Board or its agent, and the disposal thereof
shall be made only at such site or sites as may be approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.84
A. The property owner must show that site and soil suitability testing of
the lot has been conducted by the Sewage Enforcement Officer and that
the site meets the Title 25, Chapter 73, "Standards for Onlot Sewage
Treatment Facilities," requirements for the ultimate sewage disposal by
an approved on-lot system if water under pressure becomes available to
the lot.
B. At such time that water under pressure becomes available, the property
owner must remove the privy and replace the privy with an approved
on-lot system.
C. The conditions of use described in Subsection A above do not apply to a
privy intended to be used on an isolated lot which is one acre or larger;
to an isolated lot with an area of less than one acre if the lot is legally
nonconforming; to existing leaseholds in Rothrock State Forest, which
are owned by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and are not nor will
not be served by water under pressure or piped wastewater in the
future; or to legally nonconforming lots in existence at the time of
adoption of this article; however, all appropriate PA DEP permitting
shall be required for these lots.85
D. Specific conditions for use of privies shall be incorporated in the permit
application and permit for the proposed use of a privy.
E. The Board or its agent shall have the right to inspect the privy for
proper operation, maintenance and content disposal.
83.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 9-5.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-5.8
AO:219
§ 9-5.8. Duties and responsibilities of improved property owner.
§ 9-5.9. Abatement of nuisances.
A. Holding tanks. The owner of a property that utilizes a holding tank
shall:
(1) Maintain the holding tank in conformance with this article or any
ordinance or resolution of this municipality and the provisions of
any applicable law and the laws, rules and regulations of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and shall further agree to provide
the municipality or its agent such documentation as may be
deemed necessary or appropriate to provide assurance of
conformance. Said documentation may include, but shall not be
limited to, permits, receipts, correspondence, etc., from PA DEP,
the pumper/hauler, and the receiving station.86
(2) Permit only the Board or its agent to inspect holding tanks on an
annual basis or, in the event of deficiency, as deemed necessary by
the Board or its agent.
(3) Provide documentation to the Board or its agent that the hauler
selected to collect, transport, and dispose of the contents therein
has disposed of the contents at a receiving station approved by PA
DEP.87
B. Privies. The owner of an improved property that utilizes a privy shall:
(1) Maintain the privy in conformance with this article or any
ordinance or resolution of this Township and the provisions of any
applicable law, rules and regulations of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(2) Permit the Board or its agent to enter upon lands to inspect the
privy for proper operation, maintenance and contents disposal.
(3) Provide documentation to the Board or its agent that the hauler
selected to collect, transport, and dispose of the contents therein
has disposed of the contents at a receiving station approved by PA
DEP.88
(4) Abandon the privy consistent with applicable public health and
environmental standards and obtain a permit for and install an
approved on-lot system meeting Chapter 73 standards89 in the
event that water under pressure or piped wastewater becomes
available to the property.
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
87.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
88.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
89.Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Ch. 73.
§ 9-5.8 HARRIS CODE § 9-5.9
AO:220
§ 9-5.10. Violations and penalties.90
Any person who violates any provisions of §§ 9-5.6, 9-5.7, or 9-5.8 shall,
upon conviction thereof by summary proceedings brought before a
Magisterial District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs, and, in default
of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section
of this article which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a
separate offense.
A. In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, any violation
of § 9-5.8 of this article shall constitute a nuisance and shall be abated
by the municipality or its agent either by seeking mitigation of the
nuisance or appropriate equitable or legal relief from a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Owners of improved property shall be responsible for any cost to the
municipality or its agent relative to abatement of a nuisance.
90.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 9-5.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-5.10
AO:221
Chapter 10
CONSTRUCTION CODES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Weed removal — See Ch. 5, Art. I.
Open burning — See Ch. 5, Art. VI.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
11.
Zoning — See Ch. 12.
§ 9-5.10 HARRIS CODE § 9-5.10
AO:222
ARTICLE I
Building Numbering
[Adopted 5-13-1991 by Ord. No. 136]
§ 10-1.1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Building Numbering Ordinance."
§ 10-1.2. Findings and purpose.
The Board of Supervisors finds that the police, ambulance and fire services
have had difficulty locating addresses of homes and businesses on Township
streets and roads due to the lack of lot and building identification numbers.
It is, therefor, the purpose of this article to establish a system of numbering
all lots on which there is located a dwelling unit or business so that police,
ambulance and fire services can locate addresses in emergencies.
§ 10-1.3. Statutory authority.91
This article is authorized by Section 1520 of the Second Class Township
Code, 53 P.S. § 66520.
§ 10-1.4. Numbering required.
From and after the effective date of this article, it shall be the duty of each
owner of property to cause each lot or parcel and each dwelling unit and
each business upon each lot or parcel to be numbered in accordance with
this article.
§ 10-1.5. Responsibility for assigning numbers.
The Zoning Officer shall be responsible for assigning numbers to dwellings
and businesses and each occupied lot or parcel. Any owner of property on
which there exists a dwelling unit or business which does not presently have
a number assigned to it shall apply to the Zoning Officer for assignment of
a number.
§ 10-1.6. Power to change numbers.
The Zoning Officer shall have the power and authority to change numbers
for the purpose of the orderly numbering of addresses. The Zoning Officer
shall change the number of a dwelling or business by sending a notice to the
owner notifying the owner of the new number assigned by certified mail,
return receipt requested, or by personal service, or by posting the notice on
the property. The owner of property receiving such notice shall cause the
numbers to be changed within 30 days of receipt or posting of such notice
by the Zoning Officer.
91.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 10-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-1.7
AO:223
§ 10-1.7. Style and size of numbers.
The numbers shall be Arabic numbers and shall be of durable materials.
Each digit shall be at least four inches in height. The colors shall be in
contrast with the immediate background so as to be easily readable.
§ 10-1.8. Location and placement of numbers.
Numbers shall be located and placed so as to clearly identify the structure
containing each dwelling unit or business in accordance with the following
regulations:
§ 10-1.9. Concealment or confusion unlawful; removal of old
numbers.
It shall be unlawful to cover or conceal or to permit the sight obstruction
of the numbers required to be displayed by this article. It shall further be
unlawful to post other numbers which would be confusing. All old numbers
shall be removed when a new number has been assigned by the Zoning
Officer in accordance with this article.
§ 10-1.10. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this article:
BUSINESS — A building or portion of a building designed and occupied by a
nonresidential, commercial, industrial, institutional, governmental or other
nonresidential use.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion of a building designed to be
occupied by one family for human living quarters.
OWNER — Includes the following:
A. The numbers shall be placed in a conspicuous place so as to clearly
identify the location of the dwelling unit or business.
B. The placement of the numbers must be such that the numbers can be
seen and read from the sidewalk (if any) in front of said dwelling unit or
business, from the traveled portion of the street, and from the opposite
side of the street.
C. The number may be placed upon the structure containing the dwelling
unit or business or upon the mailbox or upon a fence, wall, post, rod or
other type of fixture of substantial nature such that the number shall
clearly indicate the location of the dwelling unit or business in
accordance with the requirements of this section.
A. Legal owner;
B. Equitable owner;
C. Lessee or tenant;
§ 10-1.7 HARRIS CODE § 10-1.10
AO:224
§ 10-1.11. Exemptions.
The following buildings and uses shall be exempt from the requirements of
this article:
§ 10-1.12. Violations and penalties.92
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs, and, in default
of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section
of this article which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a
separate offense.
D. Occupant;
E. Trustee in possession.
A. Farm buildings and structures which are accessory to a farm use,
except that buildings used for the retail sale of products grown on the
farm and farm residences shall be numbered.
B. Home occupations.
C. Buildings, structures and uses accessory to the primary use of a
commercial, industrial, institutional, governmental or other
nonresidential use or structure.
D. Unoccupied farmland or lots containing no dwellings or businesses.
92.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 10-1.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-1.12
AO:225

ARTICLE II
Uniform Construction Code
[Adopted 6-14-2004 by Ord. No. 247; amended in its entirety
10-10-2011 by Ord. No. 29893]
§ 10-2.1. Intent and purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this article to promote the general health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of this municipality and to conform to
the requirements of Act 45, the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, and
regulations to the Act promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry (hereinafter sometimes collectively referred to as the
"code") and in the Township of Harris.
§ 10-2.2. Adoption of standards.
For the purposes set forth in § 10-2.1, the Township of Harris hereby elects
to administer and enforce the provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction
Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101 to 7210.1103, as amended from
time to time, the Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code
Chapters 401 to 405, as amended from time to time.
§ 10-2.3. Modifications and amendments to code.
A. Amendments to Chapter 403, Administration. The Township of Harris
hereby adopts the following amendments, alterations and deletions to
Chapter 403, Administration, of Part XIV, Uniform Construction Code:
(1) Section 403.1(b), Exclusions and exemptions, is amended as
follows: (Adopted by the Township Supervisors of the Township of
Harris December 8, 1997, by Ordinance No. 191.)
(a) Section 403.1(b)(3) is amended to read as follows:
(3) The following structures if the structure has a building
area less than 150 square feet and is accessory to a
detached one-family dwelling except as might be required
by an ordinance adopted under Section 503 of the Act (35
P.S. § 7210.503):
(i) Carports.
(ii) Detached private garages.
(iii) Greenhouses.
(iv) Sheds.
(b) Section 403.1(b)(8) is deleted.
(c) Section 403.1(b)(9) is deleted.
93.Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Article II, Electrical Code, adopted
4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 228.
§ 10-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-2.3
AO:227
§ 10-2.4. Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals is hereby established in accordance with the Centre
Region Council of Governments Centre Region Housing and Code Board of
Appeals Articles of Agreement dated May 20, 2004.
§ 10-2.5. Fees.
Fees assessable by the municipality for the administration and enforcement
undertaken pursuant to this article and the code shall be established by the
governing body by resolution from time to time.
B. Amendments to the International Building Code. The Township of
Harris hereby adopts the following amendments, alterations and
deletions to the International Building Code, 2003 Edition, and its
successor codes as adopted by the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act
or Uniform Construction Code:
(1) Section 903.2.14 is added to read as follows: (Adopted by the
Township Supervisors of the Township of Harris May 12, 1997, by
Ordinance No. 185.)
903.2.14 Group B. An automatic fire-suppression system shall be
provided throughout all buildings of Use Group B when more than
three stories or 35 feet in height or more than 10,000 square feet
per floor in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.
(2) Section 1608.2 is hereby amended to add the following sentence to
this section: "Since the ground snow load for the Centre Region as
defined by Figure 1608.2 is defined as "CS" by virtue of elevation,
the ground snow load Pg to be used in determining the design snow
loads for roofs in accordance with this code is 40 per square foot."
(Adopted by the Township Supervisors of the Township of Harris
May 12, 1997, by Ordinance No. 185.)
C. Amendments to the International Residential Code. The Township of
Harris hereby adopts the following appendixes of the International
Residential Code, 2003 Edition, and its successor codes as adopted by
the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act or Uniform Construction Code:
Appendix K, Sound Transmission.
§ 10-2.3 HARRIS CODE § 10-2.5
AO:228
ARTICLE III
Property Maintenance and Fire Code
[Adopted 9-11-2017 by Ord. No. 32894]
§ 10-3.1. Intent and purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this ordinance to adopt a modern property
maintenance code, which will prescribe effective standards and minimum
requirements for buildings and premises in the Township. This code is
designed to cover every facet of housing and property maintenance in order
to insure that persons in or visiting the Township are provided with a safe
and sanitary environment.
§ 10-3.2. Repeal of Ordinances.
The provisions of Ordinances 288 as amended that provide for the adoption
and modification of the Centre Region Building Safety and Property
Maintenance Code/2010 are hereby repealed.
§ 10-3.3. Adoption of Centre Region Building Safety and Property
Maintenance Code, 2017 edition:
It is hereby adopted by Harris Township for the purposes set forth in
§ 10-3.1 that certain code known as the Centre Region Building Safety and
Property Maintenance Code, 2017 edition, as promulgated by the Centre
Region Council of Governments, except such provisions which may be
in conflict with the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the
regulations issued by an agency of the commonwealth by virtue of such
laws and which provide a more stringent standard and which are required
to be observed by the Township or the provisions of other ordinances of
this jurisdiction which are in conflict with the provisions of this chapter,
regardless of the strictness of the provisions. The provisions of the Centre
Region Building Safety and Property Maintenance Code, 2017 edition, as
amended, are set forth in the copy presently on file in the office of the
Harris Township Municipal Manager, and are hereby adopted as fully as if
set forth in length herein, and from the date on which this chapter shall
take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of
the municipality, except as modified by this chapter and any subsequent
amendments thereto.
§ 10-3.4. Deletions from Code.
The following sections of the Centre Region Building Safety and Property
Maintenance Code, 2017 edition, as amended, are deleted in their entirety:
A. Section 302.11, Trees.
94.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. III, Property Maintenance and Fire
Code, adopted 10-11-2010 by Ord. No. 288.
§ 10-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-3.4
AO:229
§ 10-3.5. Amendments and alterations.
The following sections of the Centre Region Building Safety and Property
Maintenance Code, 2017 edition, are amended to read as follows:
B. Table 404.5.1, Minimum Habitable Space applies to all properties
receiving a rental housing permit for the first time between January 1,
1998 and December 31, 2002.
C. Table 404.5.2, Minimum Habitable Space applies to all properties
receiving a rental housing permit for the first time after January 1,
2003.
D. Section 702.6.1, Three story one or two family dwelling.
E. Section 708.3.3, Open burning.
F. Section 805, Rental housing permit suspension for zoning violations.
G. Section 806, Rental housing permit suspension for nuisance and
criminal violations.
H. Section 807, Student home license.
I. Section 902.1, Permit required.
J. Section 902.2, Permit required.
A. Alter Section 101.2 Scope. To read:
Exception: Owner-occupied single-family dwellings that do not require
a rental housing permit are exempted from all sections of this code
except Sections 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111,
112, 302.1, through 302.7, 302.9, 302.10, 303, 304.1, 304.3 through
304.12, 304.19 through 304.21, 306, exterior provisions of 307.1, 312,
604, and chapters 2, 9, 10, and 11 of this code.
B. Alter: Section 404.3 Minimum ceiling heights. To read:
Exceptions: 4. Structures constructed prior to 1996
C. Alter: Table 404.5. Minimum habitable space applies to all properties
receiving a rental housing permit.
D. Alter: Section 714.2 L-P Gas containers. To read:
714.2 L-P Gas containers. Under no circumstances shall any LP-gas
container or compressed gas fuel cylinder with a water capacity greater
than 2-1/2 pounds [nominal 1 pound (0.454 kg) LP-gas capacity] be used
on any balcony or area that does not have a direct means of egress that
does not require entry to a structure nor in areas covered by a roof or
partially enclosed area no matter what the construction type.
E. Add: Section 805 Rental housing permit revocation. To read:
§ 10-3.4 HARRIS CODE § 10-3.5
AO:230
Section 805 Rental housing permit revocation.
805.1 Violation Notice Required. Within any eighteen-month
period, as specified in Section 805.2 (2), written notices may be
issued as follows:
1. Prior to revocation of a rental housing permit, the Township
shall provide written notice to the owner of any rental property
whenever two or more offenses pertaining to occupancy,
external or internal property maintenance, refuse, dogs,
sidewalk obstructions, noise, drugs, alcohol, disorderly conduct,
or vegetation have occurred individually or in combination at
the property within an eighteen-month period. The written
notice shall state that the property has been identified as a
problem property and that continued offenses could result in
revocation of the rental housing permit.
2. Whenever two or more additional violations occur after the
first notice, a second written notice shall be sent advising the
property owner that his/her property has again been identified
as a problem property and that further offenses at said property
may result in rental housing permit revocation. To afford the
property owner an opportunity to correct problems identified in
the first notice, the second notice shall not be sent before 30
calendar days following the first notice.
3. Whenever two or more additional violations occur for a total of
six or more offenses, a third written notice shall be sent advising
the property owner that the property has again been identified
as a problem property and the rental housing permit may be
revoked.
805.2. Empowerment and Conditions for Revocation. The code
official of the Centre Region Code Administration is empowered to
revoke the rental housing permit for any property within the Township
whenever all of the following conditions have occurred:
1. The property owner received two written notices from the
Municipality that the property has been determined to be a
problem property;
2. Six or more offenses pertaining to occupancy, external/internal
property maintenance, refuse, dogs, sidewalk obstructions,
noise, disorderly conduct, drugs, alcohol or vegetation have
occurred individually or collectively at the property within an
eighteen-month period;
3. Said offenses resulted in a plea of guilty or conviction or
judgment in favor of the Municipality or warrant for the arrest
of a defendant.
Revocation by the code official shall not be for internal property
maintenance offenses, except those that are deemed life-safety
offenses.
§ 10-3.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-3.5
AO:231
When a complaint made by the property owner, their property
manager, person in charge, or by the tenants of the premises results
in prosecution against another at the premises, such violation shall not
be counted toward revocation of the rental housing permit.
805.3 Revocation Procedures. The code official shall notify the
property owner of the revocation by written notice sent by a parcel
service with delivery receipt, delivered in person, or posted on the
property. The notice shall advise the property owner of the property
address, the effective dates of the revocation, the reason for the
revocation, the effect of the revocation on the property, penalties that
can be imposed for violation of the revocation and appeal rights and
procedures.
The code official shall set forth the effective date of the revocation in
such manner so that revocation commences on the first day following
expiration of the lease or leases in force provided such lease or leases
are not for more than a one-year period. When there is no lease in
force or when the lease or leases are for periods greater than one year,
revocation shall commence upon the first day following the annual
permit renewal date. No housing permit shall be renewed for six
months for the first revocation and 12 months for each subsequent
revocation beginning on the effective date of the revocation.
805.4 Effect of Revocation. Upon the commencement of revocation,
the property shall be secured and no person, firm or corporation shall
operate or rent/lease to another for residential occupancy any dwelling
unit or rooming unit during such time that the rental housing permit
for such unit is revoked.
805.5 Appeal Procedure from Code Official. Appeals of revocation
initiated by the code official shall be heard by the Centre Region
Building and Housing Code Board of Appeals in accordance with the
procedures established for appeals to that Board, as referenced in
Section 111, "Means of Appeals." The Board of Appeals is empowered
to sustain, withdraw or modify the revocation.
805.6 Offenses. For purposes of this section, offenses are those as
set forth in the following ordinances or statutes:
Occupancy: Refers to applicable definitions within Chapter 12,
Article XI, of the Harris Township Code of Ordinances, as amended.
Refuse. Refers to Municipal Solid Waste regulations enforced by
the Ordinance Enforcement Officer pursuant to Chapter 5 of the
Harris Township Code of Ordinances, as amended.
Property Maintenance (Interior and Exterior). Refers to regulations
for the maintenance of residential property contained in the Centre
Region Building Safety and Property Maintenance Code, as
generally enforced by the Centre Region Code Office.
Sidewalk Obstruction. Refers to regulations for clearing snow, ice
and other obstructions from sidewalks pursuant to Chapter 7,
Article II, of the Harris Township Code of Ordinances, as amended.
§ 10-3.5 HARRIS CODE § 10-3.5
AO:232
§ 10-3.6. (Reserved)
§ 10-3.7. Effective date.
The effective date of this ordinance shall be September 1, 2017.
§ 10-3.8. Severability.
Nothing in this article or chapter or in the Centre Region Building Safety
and Property Maintenance Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect
any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or
liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing,
under any act or ordinance hereby repealed, as cited in § 10-3.2 of this
article, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost,
impaired, or affected by this article.
Vegetation. Refers to enforcement of grass and weeds pursuant to
Chapter 5, Article I, of the Harris Township Code of Ordinances, as
amended.
Disorderly Conduct. Refers to enforcement by the State College
Borough Police Department of Section 5503, Crimes Code, Act of
Dec. 6, 1972, P.L. 1482, No. 334.
Drugs. Refers to enforcement by police of "The Controlled
Substance; Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act," of April 14, 1972, P.L.
233, No. 64, as amended.
Alcohol. Refers to possession or consumption by a minor pursuant
to Section 6308, Crimes Code, Act of Dec. 6, 1972, P.L. 1482, No.
334, or furnishing to a minor, Section 493, Liquor Laws, Act of
April 12, 1951, P.L. No. 90, as amended.
Dogs. Refers to enforcement of dog offenses pursuant to Ordinance
No, 159, the Harris Township Dog Ordinance, and the Pennsylvania
State Dog Law.
805.7 Assignment of Offenses. Offenses, as set forth in Section
805.6 of this ordinance, shall apply towards revocation of the rental
housing permit for any one-family house, duplex, multiple-family
dwelling unit, rooming unit or fraternity, as the case may be, in
accordance with the following:
One-Family House or Fraternity House: Section 805.6 offenses that
occur anywhere on the property, including sidewalk obstruction on
sidewalks contiguous to the property, shall apply to the house or
the fraternity.
Two-Family (Duplex), Multiple-Family or Rooming Unit: Section
805.6 offenses that occur within an individual dwelling or rooming
unit shall apply to that unit. Offenses committed by a tenant shall
apply to the tenant's dwelling or rooming unit. Offenses committed
by the property owner shall be assigned to the property in general.
§ 10-3.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-3.8
AO:233
Chapter 11
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 7.
Sewers — See Ch. 9.
Construction codes — See Ch. 10.
Zoning — See Ch. 12.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 13.
§ 10-3.8 HARRIS CODE § 10-3.8
AO:234
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 11-1.1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Harris Township
Subdivision Regulations."
§ 11-1.2. Statutory authority.
This chapter is enacted and ordained under the grant of powers by the
General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the "Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code," Act of 1968, July 31, P.L. 805, as amended,
53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 11-1.3. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted for the following purposes:
A. To protect and provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the
Township.
B. To guide the future growth and development of the Township in
accordance with the Comprehensive Plan.
C. To protect the character and the social and economic stability of all
parts of the Township and to encourage the orderly and beneficial
layout and development of the Township; to establish reasonable
procedures for subdivision review; and to insure proper legal
descriptions and monumenting of subdivided land.
D. To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the Township and
the value of buildings and improvements upon the land, and to minimize
the conflicts among the uses of land and buildings.
E. To guide public and private policy and action in order to provide
adequate and efficient transportation, water, sewerage, fire protection,
and other public requirements and facilities; to provide the most
beneficial relationship between the uses of land and buildings and the
circulation of traffic throughout the Township, having particular regard
to the avoidance of congestion in the streets and highways, and the
pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the various uses of land
and buildings, and to provide for the proper location and design of
streets; to insure that public facilities and easements are available and
will have a sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision or land
development.
F. To minimize pollution of streams and ponds; to assure the adequacy of
drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table; and to encourage the
wise use and management of natural resources.
§ 11-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-1.4
AO:235
§ 11-1.4. Establishment of controls.
In their interpretation and application, the regulations set by this chapter
shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of
the purposes of this chapter.
A. Type of control. This chapter contains regulations governing the
following: submission procedures for the review and disposition of
subdivision and land development plans; graphic and written
information to be contained on, or filed with, such plans; and
regulations governing the design and installation of required
improvements, the layout and arrangement of lots and blocks, the
reservation of land for public use, and methods of handling storm
drainage and erosion and sedimentation.
B. New subdivisions and land developments.
(1) No subdivision or land development of any lot, tract, or parcel of
land shall be made, no street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water
main, or other improvements in connection therewith shall be laid
out, constructed, opened, or dedicated for public use or travel, or
for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon,
except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) This chapter shall apply to all plans submitted for initial approval of
a subdivision or land development after the date of enactment of
this chapter.
C. Existing subdivisions and land developments.
(1) Any preliminary plan approved within three years prior to the date
of enactment of this chapter shall be entitled to final plan approval,
within three years of the date of approval of the said preliminary
plan, according to the terms of said plan.
(2) Any plan submitted for preliminary plan approval prior to the date
of enactment of this chapter shall be reviewed under the terms of
Ordinance No. 18.
(3) This chapter shall apply to any subdivision or land development
which occurred without obtaining approval required under this
chapter or previous subdivision ordinances of this Township.
(4) The provisions of this chapter governing the design and installation
of improvements shall apply to any unbuilt portion of a subdivision
or land development for which a preliminary or final plan was
approved more than three years prior to the date of the enactment
of this chapter. Where final plan approval was preceded by
preliminary plan approval, the three-year period shall be counted
from the date of the preliminary plan approval.
D. Relationship with other restrictions. The provisions of this chapter are
not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul other rules,
§ 11-1.4 HARRIS CODE § 11-1.4
AO:236
regulations, or ordinances, provided that where this chapter imposes a
greater restriction than that imposed by such other rules, easements,
covenants, restrictions, regulations, or ordinances, the provisions of
this chapter shall control.
E. Exemptions. This chapter shall not apply to any subdivision or land
development exempted by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., or other laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or to the design and installation of improvements for
developments governed by Chapter 12, Article XIII, Mobile Home
Parks, of the Code of the Township of Harris or to property owned by
the Township.
§ 11-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-1.4
AO:237

ARTICLE II
Plan Review Procedures
§ 11-2.1. General procedures.
Tentative subdivision and land development plans shall be reviewed by
the Township Planning Commission and the Centre County Planning
Commission and shall be approved or not approved by the Township Board
of Supervisors in accordance with the procedures specified in this article.
Unless specifically exempted, all plans shall be reviewed in two stages,
preliminary and final.
§ 11-2.2. Preapplication conference. [Amended 10-9-1995 by Ord.
No. 169]
Applicants for subdivision or land development are encouraged to request a
preapplication conference with the Harris Township Planning Commission
for the purpose of discussing or reviewing such proposed subdivision or
land development.
A. The preapplication conference shall not be mandatory and shall not be
regarded as formal application for subdivision or land development.
The filing of any report, sketch plan, plat, or map prior to or at such
conference shall not constitute submission of a plan or application for
land development or subdivision.
B. Any sketch plan presented as part of a preapplication conference need
not be drawn by a certified surveyor/engineer, but shall be drawn to a
scale of 100 feet to the inch or larger and contain the following
elements, where applicable.
(1) Proposed road cartways, rights-of-way, curve radii, reverse curve
lengths, slopes of grade,
(2) Existing utilities.
(3) Existing topography (USGS) with steep slopes highlighted.
(4) Soils information, based on Centre County SCS Soil Survey.
(5) Mapped floodplain, alluvial soils and wetland areas, sinkholes and
watercourses.
(6) Proposed lot lines.
(7) Limits of existing wooded/forested areas, and existing fences and
fence row vegetation.
(8) Perimeter boundary, total acreage, tax map numbers, existing
roads.
(9) A signed statement by the owner certifying ownership.
(10) Names of adjacent property owners.
§ 11-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-2.2
AO:239
§ 11-2.3. Preliminary review of plan.
All applications for Harris Township approval of subdivision and land
development plans shall commence with the official submission of a plan
and all required supplementary data to the Township Secretary. All
applications for preliminary review of a plan shall be acted upon by the
Township within such time limits as established in this chapter, provided
that the Board of Supervisors shall render its decision and communicate
it to the applicant no later than 90 days after the date of the next regular
meeting of the Planning Commission following the filing of the application,
the said ninety-day period shall be measured from the 30th day following
the day the application was filed. At any time during the review process,
the applicant may substitute an amended plan for that originally submitted
solely for the purpose of correcting the original plan to the extent necessary
to meet the requirements of this chapter.
(11) A written statement of a qualified professional addressing sanitary
sewage disposal, water supply, and stormwater management.
(12) If the development is intended to be phased, a statement regarding
the phasing schedule should be provided.
(13) Additional information as may be deemed appropriate by the
Harris Township Zoning Officer in accordance with the Township
regulations.
C. The potential applicant shall provide three copies of the sketch plan and
all related documents. The Harris Township Secretary shall distribute a
copy of the same to the Harris Township Planning Commission and the
Centre Regional Planning Commission.
D. The Centre Regional Planning Commission and/or Harris Township
Planning Commission shall be under no obligation to make
recommendations to the potential applicant as the result of the
preapplication conference. Any recommendations made by the Planning
Commission at or in response to the preapplication conference shall not
be binding upon the Planning Commission in its review of the plan after
formal application.
A. A plan shall be deemed to have been submitted for preliminary review
when the applicant has furnished to the Township Secretary the
following documents:
(1) One copy of a completed application for subdivision or land
development, plus payment of all application fees.
(2) Seven black- or blue-on-white prints of the plan, which shall fully
comply with § 11-3.1 and Article IV of this chapter.
(3) A copy of the completed planning module for land development, as
required by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
§ 11-2.2 HARRIS CODE § 11-2.3
AO:240
Protection; if an on-site sewage facility is planned, soil log and
percolation test data shall be included for each lot.95
(4) Three prints of the required street cross-section drawings and
street profiles and, where access is planned through an adjacent
municipality, a copy of the agreement as required in § 11-4.2F.
(5) Two copies of all other information and plans required by this
chapter but not included on the documents listed above, except
that only one copy is required of the erosion and sedimentation
control plan that may be required under § 11-4.10A.
B. Upon receipt of the above, the Harris Township Secretary shall forward
immediately one copy of the plan to the Township Board of Supervisors;
the Township, Centre Regional, and Centre County Planning
Commissions; the Township Engineer; and, if the proposed subdivision
or land development is to have direct access to a state or federal
highway, the district office of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation in Clearfield, Pennsylvania.
C. Review by the Township Planning Commission.
(1) At its next regular meeting, provided such application was made at
least 10 days prior to the meeting, or at a special meeting called for
that purpose after receipt of the plan, the Planning Commission
may review the plan to determine its conformance to the provisions
contained in this chapter.
(2) The Planning Commission shall notify the Township Board of
Supervisors in writing of any recommended action, changes, or
modifications to the plan after such decision is made, provided that
the Planning Commission shall make such recommendations within
45 days after the beginning of the ninety-day review period
stipulated above. If review by the Township Planning Commission
results in an unfavorable recommendation because the
requirements of this chapter have not been met, notification to the
Township Board of Supervisors should specify the defects found in
the plan and describe the requirements which have not been met
and should cite the provisions of this chapter from which such
defects or requirements originate.
D. Review by the County Planning Commission. A copy of the plan shall be
forwarded to the Centre County Planning Commission for review and
report, together with a fee (paid by the applicant) established by the
County Planning Commission to cover the costs of the review and
report. The County Planning Commission or its designated agent may
review the plan to determine its conformance to the provisions
contained in this chapter. The Township Board of Supervisors shall take
no official action on such application until the county report is received
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 11-2.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-2.3
AO:241
or until expiration of 45 days from the date the plan was forwarded to
the county, whichever comes first.
E. Review by the Township Board of Supervisors. Upon receipt of the
recommendations of the Planning Commission or upon expiration of 45
days from the beginning of the ninety-day review period stipulated
above, whichever comes first, the plan shall be placed upon the agenda
of the Board of Supervisors for review at its next regularly scheduled
public meeting or, at the Board of Supervisors discretion, at a special
meeting to be held for that purpose.
(1) The Board of Supervisors shall review the plan and the written
reports thereon of the Township Planning Commission and the
Centre County Planning Commission to determine if the plan meets
the provisions contained in this chapter. Before acting on any plan,
the Board of Supervisors may hold a public hearing thereon after
public notice. Prior to final review of a plan for which off-site sewer
or water service is proposed, the Board of Supervisors may require,
as a condition of preliminary approval, that the applicant furnish
written confirmation from the appropriate bodies that such service
is and will be made available to the site under review.
(2) The decision of the Township Board of Supervisors shall be in
writing and shall be communicated to the applicant personally or
mailed to him at his last known address not later than 15 days
following the decision.
(a) If the plan receives preliminary approval by the Township
Board of Supervisors, the action of the Board shall be noted,
together with the date of action and signature of the Chairman
and Secretary, on two copies of the plan. One copy of the plan
shall be given to the applicant, while the other copy shall be
retained in the Township files. After the signatures are
obtained, the applicant may immediately begin to lay out all
lots, parcels, blocks, easements, and rights-of-way, and
construct all streets, sanitary sewage disposal systems, water
supply systems, storm drainage facilities, and monuments in
accordance with the approved plan, but no parcel or lot may be
conveyed or recorded until after final approval of the plan.
(b) If the plan is not approved, the decision shall specify the
defects found in the plan and describe the requirements which
have not been met and shall, in each case, cite the provisions of
this chapter from which such defects or requirements
originate.
(c) Within 45 days after the issuance of the decision, the applicant
may submit a corrected plan for review by the Township Board
of Supervisors. If submitted, the Board shall consider the plan
at a regularly scheduled meeting or at a special meeting held
within 45 days after resubmission. A plan resubmitted under
§ 11-2.3 HARRIS CODE § 11-2.3
AO:242
§ 11-2.4. Final review of plan. [Amended 1-13-1983 by Ord. No. 97;
9-14-1987 by Ord. No. 111]
A plan shall be officially submitted to the Township Secretary for final
Township review after all improvements indicated on the plan receiving
preliminary approval have been installed or, in lieu of the completion of the
improvements, after deposit with the Township of a corporate bond or other
security acceptable to the Township Board of Supervisors in accordance
with Subsection C below. All plans which have received preliminary
approval shall be entitled to final approval in accordance with the terms of
the approved preliminary application for a period of five years from the date
of the preliminary approval.
this section need not be sent to any planning commission prior
to consideration by the Board.
[1] If the plan as resubmitted corrects all the defects cited in
the denial, the Township Board shall approve the
corrected plan.
[2] If changes are made by the applicant which were not cited
as defects in the plan by the Township Board in its decision
disapproving the plan, such plan may be considered as a
new plan and must be submitted for approval in
accordance with this section.
(3) Failure of the Township Board of Supervisors to render a decision
and communicate it to the applicant within the time and in the
manner required herein shall be deemed an approval of the plan in
terms as presented unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an
extension of time or change in the prescribed manner of
presentation of communication of the decision, in which case
failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of
presentation of communication shall have like effect.
A. All applications for final approval of a plan shall be acted upon by the
Township within such time limits as established in this chapter,
provided that the Board of Supervisors shall render its decision and
communicate it to the applicant not later than 90 days after the date of
the next regular meeting, which, if it should occur more than 30 days
following the filing of the application, the said ninety-day period shall
be measured from the 30th day following the day the application was
filed. The plan shall conform to that which received preliminary
approval by the Township Board of Supervisors, including all conditions
and modifications attached thereto.96
(1) In the case where subdivision and land development is projected
over a period of years, the Board of Supervisors may authorize final
review of the plan by sections or stages of development, subject to
96.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 11-2.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-2.4
AO:243
such requirements or guarantees as to improvements in future
sections or stages of development as it finds essential for the
protection of any finally approved section or stage of development.
In each such case, prior to preliminary approval of the plan, the
Board of Supervisors and the developer shall enter into a written
agreement specifying the sequence of development of sections
or stages, the maximum time permitted the developer for final
submission of the plan for each subsection, and any other such
requirements or guarantees as are applicable to that particular
development. Where development is permitted in stages, all
improvements installed subsequent to the third anniversary of
preliminary approval of the plan shall conform to standards for
such improvements in effect at the time of installation of the same.
(2) Final official submission of the plan to the Township Board of
Supervisors shall consist of seven black- or blue-on-white prints of
the plan, which shall fully comply with § 11-2.2 of this chapter and
the conditions for which the plan received preliminary approval,
plus financial security specified in Subsection C below, all offers of
dedication and deeds of easements to the Township, and all other
required documents.
B. Review by the Township Board of Supervisors. Upon receipt of the
materials listed in Subsection A(2) of this section, the Township
Secretary shall forward one copy of the plan to the Township Board of
Supervisors; the Centre Regional and Centre County Planning
Commissions; the Township Engineer; and, if the proposed subdivision
or land development is to have direct access to a state or federal
highway, the district office of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation in Clearfield, Pennsylvania.
(1) The final review of the plan shall be conducted by the Township
Board of Supervisors in the same manner as prescribed for
preliminary review of the plan specified in § 11-2.3E, except that
final review shall be limited to determining if:
(a) The plan conforms to the plan which received preliminary
approval, including all conditions and modifications required
by the Township Board of Supervisors; and
(b) The requirements for final plan review as listed under this
section have been met.
(2) As a condition of approval, the applicant shall permit the Township
Engineer to make periodic site inspections of such nature and
extent as is necessary to insure that the required improvements are
being installed and constructed in conformity with the design
standards contained herein or otherwise specified in the
preliminary approval of the plan.
(3) If the applicant has completed all of the required improvements, he
shall notify the Township Board of Supervisors in writing, by
§ 11-2.4 HARRIS CODE § 11-2.4
AO:244
certified or registered mail, of the completion of the improvements
and shall send a copy thereof to the Township Engineer. The Board
of Supervisors hereby directs and authorizes the Township
Engineer to make a final inspection of all the aforesaid
improvements after receipt of such notice. The Township Engineer
shall, thereupon, file a written report with the Board of Supervisors
and shall promptly mail a copy of the same to the applicant by
certified or registered mail. The report shall be made and mailed
within 30 days after receipt by the Township Engineer of the
aforesaid authorization from the Board of Supervisors. The report
shall be detailed and shall indicate approval or rejection of said
improvements, either in whole or in part, and if the improvements
or any portion thereof shall not be approved or shall be rejected
by the Township Engineer, the report shall contain a statement of
the reasons for such nonapproval or rejection. For subdivisions and
land developments served by off-site sewer and water service, the
Engineer shall coordinate his review with that of the appropriate
authorities and/or companies providing such service to insure that
the provisions of this chapter are met.
(a) The Board of Supervisors shall notify the applicant in writing,
by certified or registered mail, of action taken with relation to
the improvements.
(b) If the Board of Supervisors or the Township Engineer fail to
comply with the time limitation provisions contained herein, all
improvements will be deemed to have been approved, and the
applicant shall be released from all liability, pursuant to its
performance guaranty, bond or other security agreement.
(c) If any portion of the said improvements shall not be approved
or shall be rejected by the Board of Supervisors, the applicant
shall proceed to complete the same, and, upon completion, the
same procedure of notification, as outlined herein, shall be
followed.
C. Completion of improvements or guarantee thereof prerequisite to final
plat approval.97
(1) No plat shall be finally approved unless the streets shown on such
plat have been improved to a mud-free or otherwise permanently
passable condition, or improved as may be otherwise required by
this chapter, and any walkways, curbs, gutters, streetlights, fire
hydrants, shade trees, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers
and other improvements as may be required by this chapter have
been installed in accordance with this chapter. In lieu of the
completion of any improvements required as a condition for the
final approval of a plat, including improvements or fees otherwise
required by this chapter, the developer may deposit with the
97.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 11-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-2.4
AO:245
Township financial security in an amount sufficient to cover the
costs of such improvements or common amenities, including basins
and other related drainage facilities, recreational facilities, open
space improvements, or buffer or screen plantings which may be
required.
(2) When requested by the developer, in order to facilitate financing,
the Township Board of Supervisors shall furnish the developer with
a letter indicating approval of the final plat contingent upon the
developer obtaining a satisfactory financial security. The final plat
or record plan shall not be signed nor recorded until the financial
improvements agreement is executed. The resolution or letter of
contingent approval shall expire and be deemed to be revoked if
the financial security agreement is not executed within 90 days,
unless a written extension is granted by the Township Board of
Supervisors; such extension shall not be unreasonably withheld
and shall be placed in writing at the request of the developer.
(3) Without limitation as to other types of financial security which the
Township may approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld, federal- or commonwealth-chartered lending institution
irrevocable letters of credit and restrictive or escrow accounts in
such lending institutions shall be deemed acceptable financial
security for the purposes of this section.
(4) Such financial security shall be posted with a bonding company or
federal- or commonwealth-chartered lending institution chosen by
the party posting the financial security, provided said bonding
company or lending institution is authorized to conduct such
business within the commonwealth.
(5) Such bond or other security shall provide for, and secure to the
public, the completion of any improvements which may be required
on or before the date fixed in the formal action of approval or
accompanying agreement for completion of the improvements.
(6) The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of
the required improvements shall be equal to 110% of the cost of
completion estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for
completion by the developer. Annually, the Township may adjust the
amount of the financial security by comparing the actual cost of the
improvements which have been completed and the estimated cost
for the completion of the remaining improvements as of the
expiration of the 90th day after either the original date scheduled
for completion or a rescheduled date of completion. Subsequent to
said adjustment, the Township may require the developer to post
additional security in order to assure that the financial security
equals said 110%. Any additional security shall be posted by the
developer in accordance with this subsection.
§ 11-2.4 HARRIS CODE § 11-2.4
AO:246
(7) The amount of financial security required shall be based upon an
estimate of the cost of completion of the required improvements,
submitted by the applicant or developer and prepared by a
professional engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and
certified by such engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of
such cost. The Township, upon the recommendation of the
Township Engineer, may refuse to accept such estimate for good
cause shown. If the applicant or developer and the Township are
unable to agree upon an estimate, then the estimate shall be
recalculated and recertified by another professional engineer
licensed as such in this commonwealth and chosen mutually by the
Township and the applicant or developer. The estimate certified by
the third engineer shall be presumed fair and reasonable and shall
be the final estimate. In the event that a third engineer is so
chosen, fees for the services of said engineer shall be paid equally
by the Township and the applicant or developer.
(8) If the party posting the financial security requires more than one
year from the date of posting of the financial security to complete
the required improvements, the amount of financial security may
be increased by an additional 10% for each one-year period beyond
the first anniversary date from posting of financial security or to an
amount not exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the required
improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the
preceding one-year period by using the above bidding procedure.
(9) In the case where development is projected over a period of years,
the Township Board of Supervisors may authorize submission of
final plats by sections or stages of development, subject to such
requirements or guarantees as to improvements in future sections
or stages of development as it finds essential for the protection of
any finally approved section of the development.
(10) As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the
party posting the financial security may request the Township
Board of Supervisors to release or authorize the release, from time
to time, of such portions of the financial security necessary for
payment to the contractor or contractors performing the work. Any
such requests shall be in writing addressed to the Township Board
of Supervisors, and the Township Board of Supervisors shall have
45 days from receipt of such request within which to allow the
Municipal Engineer to certify, in writing, to the Township Board of
Supervisors that such portion of the work upon the improvements
has been completed in accordance with the approved plat. Upon
such certification, the Township Board of Supervisors shall
authorize release by the bonding company or lending institution of
an amount as estimated by the Municipal Engineer fairly
representing the value of the improvements completed, or, if the
Township Board of Supervisors fails to act within said forty-five-day
period, the Township Board of Supervisors shall be deemed to have
§ 11-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-2.4
AO:247
§ 11-2.5. Record plan.
After completion of the procedures required by this chapter, and after final
approval by the Board of Supervisors, all endorsements shall be so indicated
on the approved plan and on as many other copies of the plan as may
be desired by the Board of Supervisors. Upon approval and signing of the
approved the release of funds as requested. The Township Board
of Supervisors may, prior to final release at the time of completion
and certification by its Engineer, require retention of 10% of the
estimated cost of the aforesaid improvements.
(11) Where the Township Board of Supervisors accepts dedication of all
or some of the required improvements following completion, the
Township Board of Supervisors may require the posting of financial
security to secure structural integrity of said improvements as well
as the functioning of said improvements in accordance with the
design and specifications as depicted on the final plat for a term not
to exceed 18 months from the date of acceptance of dedication.
Said financial security shall be of the same type as otherwise
required in this section with regard to installation of such
improvements, and the amount of the financial security shall not
exceed 15% of the actual cost of installation of said improvements.
(12) If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with
apparatus or facilities related thereto, are to be installed under the
jurisdiction and pursuant to the rules and regulations of a public
utility or municipal authority separate and distinct from the
Township, financial security to assure proper completion and
maintenance thereof shall be posted in accordance with the
regulations of the controlling public utility or municipal authority
and shall not be included within the financial security as otherwise
required by this section.
(13) If financial security has been provided in lieu of the completion of
improvements required as a condition for the final approval of a
plat as set forth in this section, the Township shall not condition the
issuance of building, grading or other permits relating to the
erection or placement of improvements, including buildings, upon
the lots or land as depicted upon the final plat upon actual
completion of the improvements depicted upon the approved final
plat. Moreover, if said financial security has been provided,
occupancy permits for any building or buildings to be erected shall
not be withheld following the improvement of the streets providing
access to and from existing public roads to such building or
buildings to a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable
condition, as well as the completion of all other improvements as
depicted upon the approved plat, either upon the lot or lots or
beyond the lot or lots in question if such improvements are
necessary for the reasonable use of or occupancy of the building or
buildings.
§ 11-2.4 HARRIS CODE § 11-2.5
AO:248
plan by the Board of Supervisors, a record plan shall be recorded in the
office of the Recorder of Deeds of Centre County by the applicant within
90 days of such approval and signing. Such recording shall be otherwise
in conformity with Section 513 of the Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S.
§ 10513. Within 10 days after the Recorder of Deeds has properly recorded
the subdivision or land development plan, a copy of such shall be forwarded
to the Township Secretary by the applicant, including the endorsement of
the Recorder of Deeds.
§ 11-2.6. Minor subdivisions. [Amended 9-14-1987 by Ord. No. 111]
All subdivisions or land developments which do not require the installation
of streets, off-site water and sewage facilities, storm drainage facilities,
curbs, or sidewalks as stipulated in Article IV of this chapter are exempt
from the requirement to have a preliminary review and may commence
final approval procedures with submission of a plan as stipulated in § 11-2.4
of this article, provided that the additional information required in
§ 11-2.3A(1), (3) and (5) is submitted with the plan. No construction may
commence until the plan has received final approval by the Harris Township
Board of Supervisors.
§ 11-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-2.6
AO:249

ARTICLE III
Plan Requirements
§ 11-3.1. Preliminary plan contents.
All plans submitted for preliminary review shall be drawn to a scale of one
inch equals 50 feet or larger (one inch equals/less than 50 feet) and contain
the following information:
A. General data:
(1) Name of proposed subdivision or land development.
(2) North point.
(3) Graphic scale.
(4) Day, month, year plan prepared and revised.
(5) Name of owner.
(6) Name and address of individual or firm preparing plan.
(7) Names of abutting property owners and their deed book and page
numbers.
(8) Key map showing location of proposed subdivisions or land
development and all roads within 1,000 feet therefrom.
B. Existing features:
(1) Perimeter boundaries of the total property, showing bearings to the
nearest minute and distance to the nearest hundredths of a foot,
except that tract boundaries are not required for residual parcels of
more than 10 acres when used for agricultural purposes and not
involving any new street or easement of access, provided the
general location of the perimeter boundary of such land is shown
on the key map.
(2) Total acreage of property.
(3) Zoning district, as stipulated in Chapter 12, Zoning, of the Code of
the Township of Harris.
(4) Natural features:
(a) Sinkholes, watercourses, and tree masses.
(b) Floodplain and steep slopes as defined by Chapter 12, Zoning,
of the Code of the Township of Harris.
(c) Topographic contour lines at vertical intervals of two feet for
land with average undisturbed slope of 4% or less and at
intervals of five feet for land with average natural slope
exceeding 4%, including source of topographic data.
§ 11-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-3.1
AO:251
(5) Man-made features in or within 50 feet of the property:
(a) Sewer lines.
(b) Water mains and fire hydrants.
(c) Electrical lines and poles.
(d) Culverts and bridges.
(e) Railroads.
(f) Buildings.
(g) Streets, including right-of-way and cartway widths and
approximate grades.
C. Proposed development:
(1) Street information, including:
(a) Location and width of rights-of-way and cartways.
(b) Statement of intention to dedicate streets to Township. If
streets are to remain private, see § 11-4.2B.
(c) Proposed street names.
(d) Typical cross section showing materials for base and surfacing
and method of construction.
(e) Profiles along center line of each proposed street, showing
finished grade at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet horizontal
and one inch equals five feet vertical.
(f) Radius of horizontal curves.
(g) Length of tangents between reverse curves.
(h) Curb radii at intersections.
(i) Vegetation to be planted between curb or shoulder and rightof-
way line.
(j) Curbs and gutters, location and typical design.
(k) Topographic contour lines for proposed finished grades within
rights-of-way at intervals specified in Subsection B(4)(c) above.
(2) Lot lines to the nearest foot and area of each lot to the nearest
square foot.
(3) Sidewalks, including location, width, grades, and ramps for
handicapped.
(4) Walkways between blocks, as required in § 11-4.3C.
§ 11-3.1 HARRIS CODE § 11-3.1
AO:252
§ 11-3.2. Final plan contents.
Plans submitted for final review shall include all information required in
§ 11-3.1 above, plus the following:
(5) Yard setback lines as required by Chapter 12, Zoning, of the Code
of the Township of Harris.
(6) Proposed use of all lots within residential zoning.
(7) Location of streetlights, street name signs and traffic control signs.
(8) Proposed house numbers and lot numbers.
(9) Utility and drainage easements.
(10) Location and species of shade trees within street rights-of-way.
(11) Location and pipe diameter (ID) of sewer and water mains and
laterals to each lot; location of soil log holes for on-site sewerage
systems, plus a statement indicating the type of on-site systems
permitted for each soil log hole as specified in the approved plan
module.
(12) Fire hydrants.
(13) Land to be reserved or dedicated for public use.
D. Signature:
(1) Signature or seal of a licensed engineer or land surveyor certifying
the accuracy of the plan.
(2) Signed, notarized statement by the owner certifying ownership of
the property and acknowledging all offers of dedication of lands
and/or facilities to the Township, and acknowledging that the
owner will be responsible for maintenance of lands and/or facilities
until they are completed and accepted for dedication by the
Township.
(3) Space for approval signatures by the Chairman and Secretary of
the Board of Supervisors, including date of such approval.
A. Final perimeter boundaries of each lot with distance to hundredths of a
foot and bearings to one minute, determined by accurate survey in the
field, balanced and closed with an error of closure not to exceed one
foot in 2,000.
B. Location of installed monuments and markers.
C. Final dimensions and bearings of right-of-way lines and easements,
including radii of curves and arcs and delta angles of all curves.
D. Final house numbers and lot numbers as approved by the Township.
§ 11-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-3.3
AO:253
§ 11-3.3. Record plan contents.
All record plans shall be clear and legibly drawn to scale on a reproducible
tracing of linen or dimensionally stable film. All record plans shall contain
the following information, such being an exact replica of corresponding
information found on the plan receiving final approval. Additional
information from such plan may also be included on the record plan as the
applicant so desires, provided that under no circumstances may information
shown on the record plan be at variance or conflict with the plan as finally
approved.
A. All general data required in § 11-3.1A.
B. Perimeter boundaries required in § 11-3.1B(1).
C. Total acreage of property.
D. Zoning district, as stipulated by Chapter 12, Zoning, of the Code of the
Township of Harris.
E. Floodplains and steep slopes as required in § 11-3.1B(4)(b).
F. Location and width of street rights-of-way.
G. Approved street names.
H. Lot lines as required in § 11-3.1C(2).
I. Walkways as required in § 11-3.1C(4).
J. Yard setback lines as required by Chapter 12, Zoning, of the Code of the
Township of Harris.
K. Approved house and lot numbers.
L. Utility and drainage easements.
M. Lands reserved or dedicated for public use.
N. Location and elevation of monuments and markers.
O. Completed signature blocks as required in § 11-3.1D(3).
P. A signature block for review signature of the Chairman and Director of
the Centre County Planning Commission.
Q. The following statement: "This record plan conforms with the plan
receiving final approval by the Harris Township Board of Supervisors on
_____ (date). All improvements are or will be installed in accordance
with such plan in a manner and time so specified therein."
§ 11-3.3 HARRIS CODE § 11-3.3
AO:254
ARTICLE IV
Design and Improvement Standards
§ 11-4.1. General requirements. [Amended 10-9-1995 by Ord. No.
169]
A. Design and improvements. The design and physical improvements to
the property being subdivided shall be provided, constructed, and
installed by the subdivider as shown on the approved plan in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter. If any provisions of
this chapter are found to be unreasonable and cause undue and
unnecessary hardship as they apply to a proposed subdivision, the
Board of Supervisors may waive or vary the strict terms of such
provisions. The criteria for the Board of Supervisors to apply in
determining whether to waive or vary the strict application of a
provision are:
(1) That there exist special physical circumstances or conditions which
render the strict application of the requirements as undue
unnecessary hardship.
(2) That the hardship created cannot be ameliorated by a reasonable
change in plans.
(3) That the unnecessary or undue hardship has not been created by
the applicant.
(4) That the waiver or varying of the strict terms of this chapter will
not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this
chapter.
(5) That the property cannot be reasonably developed without the
waiver or the varying of the strict terms of this chapter.
(6) That the waiver or varying of the strict terms of this chapter will
represent the minimum deviation that will afford relief and will
represent the least modification possible of the regulations in issue.
B. Land requirements.
(1) All portions of a tract being subdivided shall be taken up in lots,
streets, public lands or other proposed uses so that remnants and
landlocked areas shall not be created.
(2) Reserve strips preventing access to lots, public rights-of-way,
public lands, or adjacent private lands are prohibited.
(3) Applicants shall preserve, to the maximum extent feasible, trees,
groves, waterways, scenic points, historic landmarks and other
assets and landmarks significant to the community.
§ 11-4.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4.1
AO:255
(4) Subdivisions and land developments shall be laid out so as to avoid
the necessity for excessive cut or fill, as determined by the Harris
Township Engineer.
(5) Land which the Board of Supervisors finds to be unsuitable for
building purposes due to flooding, improper drainage, steep slope,
rock formations, adverse earth formations or topography, utility
easements, or other features which will reasonably be harmful to
the safety, health, and general welfare of the present or future
inhabitants of the subdivision and/or its surrounding areas shall not
be subdivided or developed unless adequate methods are
formulated by the applicant and approved by the Board of
Supervisors, upon recommendation of the Township Planning
Commission and Engineer, to solve the problems created by the
unsuitable land conditions. Such land shall be set aside for uses
that shall not involve such a danger or shall be incorporated into
other suitable lots.
(6) The following factors are to be considered as supplemental to the
above sections and shall be shown on plans where applicable:
(a) Visual resources. Integration of visual resources within the
development is to be shown. Visual resources are items that
are reflective of the character of Harris Township and include
but are not limited to:
[1] Hedgerows along edges of farm fields that have become
established over time.
[2] Rights-of-way and cartways that have been established as
farm lanes, paths, and other forms of access.
[3] Woodlot areas representing significant tree growth (tree
size or age) or animal habitat locations.
[4] Trees, shrubs and vegetation on slopes of 15% or steeper
that are beneficial to erosion control.
[5] Prominent knolls and hilltops.
(b) Cultural and historic resources. Cultural and historic resources
of local heritage, state, and/or national importance shall be
preserved wherever possible and integrated into the overall
development. Applicants shall refer to "Historic Resources of
the Centre Region" and "Harris Township Register of Historic
Sites and Landmarks," as revised, as a guide for identifying
buildings, sites, and landmarks of local heritage, state, and/or
national importance.
(c) Hydric soils as identified in the Centre County Soil Survey,
1981, as amended.
§ 11-4.1 HARRIS CODE § 11-4.1
AO:256
§ 11-4.2. Streets. [Amended 2-9-2004 by Ord. No. 242]
(d) Prime agricultural soils, Classes I and II, in an open/cleared
condition, from both the Centre County Soil Survey, 1981, and
the 1990 Land Use Survey and subsequent updates of both
documents.
(e) Properties participating in the State Agricultural Conservation
Easement Program or are part of an Agricultural Security
Area, Clean and Green Program, Farmland Preservation Trust,
Pennsylvania State Forest Stewardship Program, or any formal
conservation easement program.
A. Relationship to other plans and ordinances. The location of all streets
shall conform to the Official Map or Comprehensive Plan adopted by the
Township.
B. Dedication of private streets. Dedication of any street is permitted only
if it is totally accessible via a public street and meets the design
standards of this chapter. Private streets are permitted only if the
Township Engineer certifies that the proposed street has sufficient
right-of-way width, grade, and other conditions which will make future
construction possible in accordance with Township standards; and that
the subdivider submits, prior to preliminary approval, to be recorded
with the plan, a copy of an agreement made with the Board of
Supervisors on behalf of his heirs and assigns establishing the
conditions under which the street may later be offered for dedication,
stipulating, among other things, that:
(1) The private street, unless or until built to Township standards, shall
provide sole access for no more than five units and shall be
surfaced with a hard material sufficient to insure a mud-free or
otherwise permanently passable condition.98
(2) The street shall conform to the Township standards or that the
owners of the abutting lots include with the offer of dedication
sufficient funds, as estimated by the Township Engineer, to restore
the street to conformance with the Township standards prior to
dedication.
(3) Any offer to dedicate the street shall be made only for the street as
a whole.
(4) The method of assessing repair costs prior to dedication shall be as
stipulated in the agreement.
(5) Should dedication be proposed, agreement by owners of 51% of the
front footage thereon shall be binding on the owners of the
remaining lots.
98.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 11-4.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4.2
AO:257
C. Street layout. Residential streets shall be so laid out as to discourage
through traffic. The arrangement of streets shall provide for
continuation of existing or recorded streets. Streets shall be related
appropriately to the topography, arranged so as to obtain usable
building sites with as many as possible located at or above the street
grade. Grades of streets shall conform as closely as possible to the
original topography, and a combination of steep grades and curves shall
be avoided.
D. Street names. Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment with
others existing and named shall bear the names of the existing streets.
(1) In no case shall the name of a proposed street duplicate or
approximate phonetically existing or recorded street names in the
Centre Region, or approximate such names by the use of suffixes
such as "lane," "way," "drive," "court," or "avenue."
(2) All street names shall be subject to the approval of the Board of
Supervisors.
(3) All house numbers shall be assigned and approved by the Zoning
Officer prior to filing the plan for final approval.
E. Access to arterial streets. Where a subdivision or land development
borders on or contains an existing or recorded arterial, the Board of
Supervisors may require that access to such streets be limited by one of
the following means:
(1) The subdivision of lots so as to back onto the arterial and front onto
a parallel local or collector street; no access shall be provided from
the arterial.
(2) A series of culs-de-sac, U-shaped streets, or short loops entered
from and designed generally at right angles to such a parallel
street, with the rear lines of their terminal lots abutting the
arterial.
(3) A marginal-access road constructed parallel to the arterial right-ofway
meeting all applicable standards contained herein.
F. Access through adjacent municipalities. Whenever access to a
subdivision or land development is required to cross land in another
Township, assurance shall be provided that such access shall be
permitted by the adjacent Township. The street shall be adequately
improved for access through agreement between the property owner
and the adjacent Township prior to final approval of the plan.
G. Slope along banks. Along streets, the slope of earthen banks, measured
perpendicular to the street center line, shall be no steeper than a 1:3
vertical-horizontal measurement for fills and a 1:2 vertical-horizontal
measurement for cuts.
§ 11-4.2 HARRIS CODE § 11-4.2
AO:258
H. Other streets. Unless otherwise stated, all standards for local streets
shall apply to alleys and marginal-access streets.
I. Street widths. Minimum street right-of-way and cartway widths are
detailed in Subsection V of this section.
(1) Right-of-way and cartway widths in excess of those shown in
Subsection V of this section may be requested by the Board of
Supervisors for the purpose of promoting the public safety and
convenience, or to provide additional parking in commercial and
industrial areas and in areas of high-density residential
development.
(2) Where a subdivision abuts an existing street with a right-of-way
less than that required herein, the subdivider shall expand such in
an amount equal to 1/2 the difference between the existing right-ofway
width and that required herein. Where a subdivision contains
an existing street with a right-of-way width less than that required
herein, that subdivider shall expand such equally on each side in an
amount necessary to meet the standards contained herein.
J. Street grades.
(1) There shall be a minimum center-line grade of 1%.
(2) Center-line grades shall not exceed the following: local streets,
10%; collector streets, 8%; and arterial streets, 6%.
(3) Exceptions. The maximum grade at any intersection or cul-de-sac
turnaround shall not exceed 1%. Intersections shall be approached
on all sides by a straight leveling area, the grade of which shall not
exceed 4% within 50 feet of the intersection of the nearest right-ofway
lines.
K. Horizontal curves.
(1) Whenever street lines are deflected in excess of 5°, connection
shall be made by horizontal curves.
(2) The minimum radius of horizontal curves shall be 100 feet for local
streets, 200 feet for collector streets, and 300 feet and 500 feet for
secondary and primary arterials, respectively.
(3) The minimum length of tangents between reverse curves shall be
100 feet for local, 150 feet for collector streets, and 300 feet for
arterial streets.
L. Sight distance.
(1) The following shall be minimum stopping sight distances
considering a driver's eye level at 3.5 feet above grade: local
streets (30 mph maximum speed), 200 feet; collector streets (40
mph maximum speed), 325 feet; arterial streets, as required by the
§ 11-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4.2
AO:259
Township and other applicable state and federal agencies. Sight
distances for other speed limits shall be computed according to
the PennDOT Design Manual, Part 2, most recent edition. All sight
distance computations shall be submitted with the plan.
(2) At intersections, all earth banks and vegetation shall be cut and
removed when such will impede vision between a height of 2 1/2
and 10 feet above the center-line grades of the intersecting streets
and within an area bounded by the street right-of-way lines of such
corner lots and a line joining points on these street right-of-way
lines 25 feet from their intersection. All intersection sight distances
shall be in accordance with PennDOT Design Manual, Part 2, most
recent edition. All sign distance triangles shall be shown on the
plans, and sight distance computations shall be submitted with the
plan.
M. Intersections.
(1) Cartways shall intersect at a ninety-degree angle for a minimum of
50 feet from the intersection.
(2) No more than two streets shall intersect at the same point.
(3) Wherever possible, local streets shall not intersect directly with
arterial streets, but shall be linked by means of a collector street.
(4) Wherever possible, intersections of two streets on opposite sides of
a street shall be cross intersections. Any street intersecting with a
local street shall be located no closer than 200 feet from another
street intersecting the same local street; any street intersecting
with a collector street shall be located no closer than 300 feet from
another street intersecting the same collector street; and any
street intersecting with an arterial street shall not be located closer
than 1,000 feet from another street intersecting the same arterial
street, regardless of whether the two intersecting streets are on
the same side or on opposite sides of said local, collector or arterial
street (except where the intersected street has an unbroken
median barrier). Distances shall be measured from the center line
of the two intersecting streets along the center line of said local,
collector, or arterial street.
(5) Street curb intersections where curbs are installed shall be
rounded by a tangential arc with a minimum radius of 20 feet for
intersections involving only local streets, 30 feet for all
intersections involving a collector street, and 40 feet for all
intersections involving an arterial street.
N. Alleys. Alleys are prohibited in developments of single-family detached
residences, but may be permitted in other types of development,
provided the applicant produces evidence satisfactory to the Board of
Supervisors of the need for such alleys, and provided these are not
primary means of access.
§ 11-4.2 HARRIS CODE § 11-4.2
AO:260
O. Culs-de-sac and dead-end streets.
(1) Dead-end streets are prohibited unless designed as permanent culde-
sac streets or for future access to adjoining properties as
stipulated in Subsection O(2) of this section. The Board of
Supervisors may require extension of a proposed cul-de-sac to
permit access to adjacent property or to connect such street with
an adjoining existing or proposed street.
(2) Any street dead-ended for access to an adjoining property or
because of authorized stage development shall be provided with a
temporary, all-weather cul-de-sac, within the subdivision, and the
use of such cul-de-sac shall be guaranteed to the public until such
time as the street is extended. The plan shall note that land outside
the normal street right-of-way shall revert to abutters whenever the
street is continued.
(3) The center-line grade on a cul-de-sac street shall not exceed 10%.
(4) The Board of Supervisors may require the reservations of
easements sufficient to accommodate drainage facilities,
pedestrian traffic, or utilities from the cul-de-sac to adjoining lands.
P. Half streets. Half streets will not be permitted. Where an existing half
street is adjacent to a proposed subdivision or land development, the
other half of the street shall be improved by the subdivider in
accordance, wherever possible, with the standards of this chapter.
Q. Paving. Streets must be surfaced to the grades and dimensions shown
on the plans, profiles, and cross sections approved by the Board of
Supervisors. All streets intended to be dedicated for public use shall be
paved to full cartway width, and paving materials and methods of
construction for cartways and shoulders shall conform to Township
standards or applicable standards of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
(1) All property pins or monuments removed, destroyed, or altered by
construction shall be accurately replaced in accordance with the
approved plan.
(2) After the street has been constructed and before such streets are
dedicated, the earthen areas between the shoulders or curbs and
the right-of-way line shall be finish graded and seeded with grass or
other appropriate vegetation to prevent erosion.
R. Curbs and gutters. Curbs and gutters shall be installed along both sides
of all streets when such are necessary to control runoff and erosion,
stabilize cartway edges, enhance public safety, or continue an existing
curb or gutter to the next intersection. No portion of the required
cartway shall be covered with curbs or gutters. Curbs and gutters shall
be either plain cement concrete or slip form mountable concrete as
detailed herein.
§ 11-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4.2
AO:261
S. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be installed within the right-of-way of
proposed streets as follows: along one side of all local streets and
collector streets; along both sides of all arterial streets.
(1) The minimum width of all sidewalks shall be four feet. There shall
be a minimum five-foot-wide planting strip of grass between the
curb or shoulder and the sidewalk which may be used for the
location of the underground utilities, streetlights, street signs, and
trees.
(2) The grades and paving of the sidewalks shall be continuous across
driveways except in nonresidential and high-density residential
developments and in certain other cases where heavy traffic
volume dictates special treatment.
(3) All other applicable standards of this chapter shall apply to the
construction of sidewalks.
(4) Sidewalks shall be laterally pitched at a slope not less than 1/8 inch
per foot to provide for adequate surface drainage.
(5) At corners and pedestrian street crossings, sidewalks shall be
extended to the curbline with an adequate apron area for
anticipated pedestrian traffic and curb cuts and ramps for
wheelchairs designed in accordance with state and/or federal
standards.
(6) Sidewalks shall not exceed a seven-percent grade. Steps or a
combination of steps and ramps shall be utilized to maintain the
maximum grades, where necessary. Where sidewalk grades exceed
5%, a nonslip surface texture shall be used.
T. Street signs. The applicant shall install street name and traffic control
signs required by Harris Township at all street intersections. Street
name signs which differ from the design of conventional municipal
signs may be permitted, provided the design and size is approved by the
Board of Supervisors, all costs are borne by the applicant, and such are
installed prior to final approval of the plan.
U. Streetlights. When deemed necessary by Harris Township for the
promotion of public safety, or when desired by the applicant, the
applicant shall cause to be installed, at the applicant's expense,
streetlights adequate for the area and type and intensity of use. Such
installation shall be in accordance with a plan prepared by the
applicant's engineer and approved by the electric utility provider in
consultation with the Township Engineer. The applicant shall be
responsible for all costs involved in lighting the streets until such time
that the streets are accepted as public streets by the Township.
V. Road design standards. The street construction standards contained
herein are minimum standards, which are adequate to provide safe,
durable roads for all streets within the Township. Designs in excess of
§ 11-4.2 HARRIS CODE § 11-4.2
AO:262
these standards could be required when conditions warrant. Design
criteria to be used shall be as given in Subsection V(4), Reference
standards, of this section, and construction methods shall comply with
the latest edition of PennDOT Specifications, Publication 408.
(1) All streets, whether designed or developed under the following
standard criteria, must be reviewed and approved by the Township
Engineer.
(2) Streets on the state or federal system must be designed to the
specification required by the appropriate agencies, these standards
notwithstanding.
(3) Standards for pedestrian circulation and stormwater management
are not included herein.
(4) Reference standards. The following reference standards were used
to develop and are made a part of these standards. The latest
edition after the date listed shall be implied as the one to be used.99
(a) Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT):
[1] Design Manual Part 2, Highway Design, Publication 13,
latest edition.
[2] Guidelines for Design of Local Roads and Streets,
Publication 70, latest edition.
[3] Pavement Policy Manual, Publication 242, latest edition.
[4] Roadway Specifications, Publication 408, latest edition.
[5] Roadway Construction Standards (RC 0-99 Stds.), 1994,
latest edition.
(b) American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials (AASHTO):
[1] A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets
(AASHTO "Green Book"), latest edition.
[2] AASHTO Guide for Design of Pavement Structures, latest
edition.
(5) Street classifications. Streets shall be classified as arterial,
collector, local, and private. The Township shall determine final
classification of any Township street. For the purpose of this
standard, general classification shall be by the following:
99.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 11-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4.2
AO:263
Rural Area System
Interstate/other limitedaccess
freeways
1. Provide limited-access facilities
Arterials 1. Serve statewide or interstate
travel
2. Serve all urbanized areas
3. Provide integrated movements
without stub connections
4. Link cities, larger towns, and other
traffic generators
5. Provide integrated interstate and
intercounty service
6. Spaced at proper intervals
consistent with population density
7. Corridor movements consistent
with four through six with greater
trip lengths and travel densities
than those served by rural
collector or local systems
Major collectors 1. Provide service to county seats,
larger towns, and other traffic
generators
2. Connect routes of higher
classification
3. Serve intercounty travel corridors
4. Spaced at intervals to collect
traffic from local roads
5. Provide services to remaining
smaller communities
6. Link local traffic generators with
rural hinterland
Local streets 1. Provide access to land adjacent to
collector network
2. Serve travel over relatively short
distances
3. Constitute all rural mileage not
classified in one of the higher
systems
NOTE: A "private road" shall be any road not proposed for
dedication that serves as the sole means of access for more than
one but not more than five dwellings.
§ 11-4.2 HARRIS CODE § 11-4.2
AO:264
(6) Width, length, and layout requirements. Street widths shall be as
described in the street standards table herein. Other requirements
shall be as described in this chapter. All sight distances shall meet
the requirements of the PennDOT Design Manual, Part 2.
W. Culs-de-sac.
(1) Cul-de-sac cartway and right-of-way widths shall be the same as
local street widths.
(2) Cul-de-sac radius shall be a thirty-five-foot cartway and fifty-foot
right-of-way.
(3) Cul-de-sac streets, permanently designed as such, shall not exceed
750 feet in length. Cul-de-sac streets in excess of 750 feet in length,
but not longer than 1,500 feet in length, may be considered by the
Township, provided the following conditions are met:
(a) Public streets in areas serviced by public water:
[1] Provide hydrant spacing as required herein.
[2] ADT of cul-de-sac shall not exceed 200 vehicles per day.
[3] Provide calculations prepared by a professional engineer
certifying that proposed hydrants will provide minimum
pressure and flow as required by NFPA standards, latest
edition.
[4] Provide boulevard-style entrance for cul-de-sac streets
serving side cul-de-sac streets. The length of the
boulevard-style street shall extend from the beginning of
the main cul-de-sac street to the furthest side of the cul-desac
street. Each travel lane of the boulevard shall be at
least 16 feet wide.
[5] Plans shall include a note indicating that increase of the
cul-de-sac length to accommodate further subdivision of
the lots served by the cul-de-sac shall be prohibited.
[6] In the case that minimum hydrant pressure and/or flow,
according to current NFPA standards, cannot be achieved,
structures on lots so affected shall install an approved
automatic fire sprinkler system in accordance with NFPA
and applicable Building Code standards.
(b) Public streets in areas not served by public water:
[1] ADT of proposed cul-de-sac street shall not exceed 200
vehicles per day.
[2] Provide boulevard-style entrance for cul-de-sac streets
serving side cul-de-sac streets. The length of the
boulevard-style street shall extend from the beginning of
§ 11-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4.2
AO:265
the main cul-de-sac street to the furthest side of the side
cul-de-sac street. Each travel lane of the boulevard shall
be at least 16 feet wide.
[3] Plans shall include a note indicating that increase of the
cul-de-sac length to accommodate further subdivision of
the lots served by the cul-de-sac street shall be prohibited.
[4] Water supply requirements for fire-protection purposes, as
listed in § 11-4.13C(1) and (2) of this chapter, shall apply to
all subdivision and land development plans.
(c) Private streets:
[1] ADT of proposed cul-de-sac street shall not exceed 50
vehicles per day.
[2] Street shall be constructed in accordance with Harris
Township standards for private streets.
[3] A hydrant shall be provided at the entrance of the private
street when public water is located within the adjacent
public right-of-way of the connecting Township street.
[4] Plans shall include a note indicating that increase of the
cul-de-sac length to accommodate further subdivision of
the lots served by the cul-de-sac street shall be prohibited.
X. Loop lane standards.
(1) Loop lanes, as illustrated in Figure No. 1, shall be not longer than
250 feet in length and shall serve not more than seven residential
lots.
(2) Cartway width for loop lanes shall be not less than 18 feet and shall
be constructed to public street standards.
(3) A minimum inside turning radius of 30 feet shall be provided in all
loop lane designs.
(4) On-street parking on loop lanes shall be prohibited. As a result, a
minimum of four off-street parking spaces shall be required per
dwelling.
(5) One off-site parking space shall be provided for each dwelling of a
loop lane to accommodate visitor parking needs. Such spaces shall
be located at the end of the loop lane contiguous to the open space
area or at other appropriate locations, but shall not be permitted as
on-street parking.
(6) To ensure that the open area between the lanes functions as a park
or open space area, the minimum width of such area shall be not
less than 60 feet and shall be designed as an active recreation area,
with no grading or slopes that prevent its intended use.
§ 11-4.2 HARRIS CODE § 11-4.2
AO:266
(7) The open area shall be landscaped with a mixture of deciduous and
conifer trees. See § 11-4.9, Shade trees.100
(8) Prior to submission of a plan to the Township that proposes a loop
lane design, the applicant shall discuss with the Township Engineer
the proposed design and existing site characteristics. When
deemed appropriate by the Township Engineer, loop lanes may be
constructed without the use of typical curb and gutter systems.
Y. Cross section and design for public streets.
(1) Pavement design may be required for streets to be dedicated to the
Township. The determination of when a pavement design will be
required shall be made by the Township Engineer in either the
sketch plan or preliminary plan stage and will be based upon area
soils and the functional classification and anticipated use of the
proposed streets.
(2) The minimum pavement sections shown below shall be used
whenever a pavement design is not required or when the pavement
design yields a lesser pavement section.
(3) All pavement design for Township streets must comply with
PennDOT or AASHTO criteria according to the standards
referenced herein.
(4) All pavement designs not based on standard tables and details shall
consider a twenty-year design life accommodating school bus,
commercial bus, and other traffic as may reasonably be expected.
(5) Designs for bridges or other special structures shall meet PennDOT
requirements as referenced.
Z. Street construction criteria.
Street Construction Criteria
Arterials Collectors Locals
ID-2 wearing course*
(inches)
3.5** 3.5** 1.5
Bituminous concrete
base course* (inches)
4 4 4.5
2A stone subbase*
(inches)
6 6 6
Cartway width w/curb
(feet)
26 24 20
Cartway width w/
shoulders (feet)
24 minimum
(12 per lane)
24 20
100. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 11-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4.2
AO:267
Street Construction Criteria
Arterials Collectors Locals
Pavement out to out
width, concrete curb
with gutter
27 feet, 4
inches
27 feet, 4
inches
27 feet, 4
inches
Pavement out to out
width, concrete curb
27 feet, 4
inches
27 feet, 4
inches
27 feet, 4
inches
Shoulder width (feet) 8 6 4
Pavement cross-slope
(percent)
3% minimum
4.5%
maximum
3% minimum
4.5%
maximum
3% minimum
4.5%
maximum
Shoulder cross-slope
(percent)
6% 6% 6%
Parking lanes (add
widths to those shown
above) (feet)
10 10 8
Right-of-way (feet) 100 primary
70 secondary
60 50
NOTES:
* Minimum depths unless approved by Township Engineer.
** For arterials and collectors, wearing course can be 1 1/2 inches
ID-2 wearing and 2 inches ID-2 binder course.
*** See additional width and right-of-way information elsewhere
herein.
(1) Pavement design submission. Standard cross sections or pavement
tables may not be used in any of the following circumstances unless
proof of their applicability is submitted to the Township Engineer,
including testing of the subgrade soils by a certified laboratory and
design computations by a registered professional engineer:
(a) Areas of hydric or hydric component soils, as shown in the Soil
Survey for Centre County and listed by the Centre County
Conservation District.
(b) Areas of soils with a unified classification of OL, MH, CH, and
OH as shown and listed in the Soil Survey for Centre County.
Soils classified as CL or ML may be acceptable upon prior
consultation with the Township Engineer or certification of
adequacy by a registered engineer with geotechnical
expertise.
(c) Areas of soils with a CBR value less than five.
§ 11-4.2 HARRIS CODE § 11-4.2
AO:268
(d) Proposed streets expecting significant industrial traffic such as
tractor trailers, quarry trucks, logging trucks, etc.
(e) Proposed streets with a projected daily design ESAL exceeding
16 for a local street and 35.5 for a collector or arterial street.
(f) Areas of proposed cuts/fills with slopes steeper than 2:1
horizontal to vertical.
(2) Pavement design accessory regulations.
(a) The least suitable soil on the site shall be considered against
the above standards for street design for the entire site unless
the street is designed in segments for different soil areas and
the requirements for each soil type are met. Suitable transition
pavement cross sections between segments must be designed
by a registered professional engineer.
(b) In areas of rock or strong subbase, the developer may wish to
submit an alternate pavement design which is less than the
standard cross section provided herein. All such designs must
be completed by a registered professional engineer with
expertise in pavement design and shall meet PennDOT
standards and width and all other design criteria listed above.
Suitable testing of the subbase by a certified laboratory shall
be submitted with the design.
(c) Where it is proposed to use a street prior to the placement of
the wearing course, the base course of the street must be
structurally designed to support all anticipated loads.
(d) For new subdivisions, shoulders on local and collector streets
shall be permitted only in residential zoning districts.
Shoulders on major streets shall be permitted where the
Township, at its discretion, deems them to be acceptable.
(e) Parking lanes shall be provided where required by the
Township. Thickness requirements for parking lanes shall be
the same as the thickness requirements for the cartway. Refer
to the "Street Construction Criteria" for width requirements.
(f) Required right-of-way widths shall be in accordance with those
listed in the "Street Construction Criteria" for width
requirements.
(g) Bicycle lanes shall be installed where deemed to be necessary
by the Township.
(h) Drainage for public streets shall meet the requirements of the
PennDOT Design Manual, Part 2, Chapter 10, and Chapter 13,
Stormwater Management, of the Code of the Township of
Harris.
§ 11-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4.2
AO:269
(3) Private streets.
(a) The minimum width of a private street shall be 16 feet.
(b) The minimum length of a private street shall be as determined
in Subsection V(6) of this section.
(c) If the private road is to remain unpaved, the minimum
construction specification shall include removal of topsoil and
compaction of subgrade with rolling equipment, placement of
filter fabric to manufacturer's specifications (fabric to be
Retmay Typar 3401 or the equivalent) at the discretion of the
Township Engineer, and placement and compaction by roller of
nine inches of well-graded, durable crushed stone.
(d) If the private road is to be paved, the minimum construction
specification shall include removal of topsoil and compaction of
subgrade with rolling equipment, placement and compaction
by roller of six inches of well-graded, durable crushed stone,
and placement and compaction of four inches of asphalt.
(Pavement section to include base course and wearing course.)
(e) Either paved or unpaved construction specification may be
altered if the street is designed by a registered professional
engineer based upon site soil condition and the design is
reviewed and approved by the Township Engineer. The design
method must follow the procedures recommended by
PennDOT, AASHTO, or the Asphalt Institute.
(f) Construction shall not take place during prolonged wet periods
or when the subgrade is excessively wet or frozen.
(g) Adequate drainage must be provided to convey upslope runoff
along and away from the street. Drainage for a private street
shall be part of the stormwater management plan for the entire
site and shall meet the requirements and criteria for Chapter
13, Stormwater Management, of the Code of the Township of
Harris. When the private street is the only drainage
consideration for the site, the culvert and channels must be
designed by accepted standards. Culverts shall be located at
low points in the road profile and at the following minimum
distances where no low points are encountered:
Road Grade
(%)
Minimum Culvert Spacing
(feet)
Up to 3% 500
3% to 4% 400
4% to 5% 350
5% to 6% 300
§ 11-4.2 HARRIS CODE § 11-4.2
AO:270
Road Grade
(%)
Minimum Culvert Spacing
(feet)
6% to 8% 250
8% to 11% 200
11% to 14% 150
Over 14% 100
(h) All culverts and roadside channels shall be maintained
periodically to correct erosion and collected debris problems.
If periodic review of channels indicates continuous erosion, the
channel shall be lined with rock or other suitable material.
(i) Upon inspection, the Township may notify the owner that a
private street and/or its drainage facilities are in need of repair
or maintenance. If this work is not completed within a
reasonable time, the Township may perform the work and bill
the owner for the costs of materials and labor.
AA. Road construction standards. All construction specifications and details
for construction shall be submitted to the Township Engineer for review
and approval prior to approval of any plan. All construction materials,
equipment, procedures, and methods shall conform to the requirements
of the PennDOT Specifications, Publication 408, unless specifically
stated otherwise in these specifications.
(1) Subgrade.
(a) Refer to PennDOT Specifications, Section 210.
(b) All borrow material shall have, at a minimum, bearing capacity
equal to other soils at the site.
(c) Subgrade construction.
[1] Form the roadbed to the established subgrade elevation,
both longitudinally and in cross section, and compact to a
minimum of 98% of maximum dry density as determined
by PTM 106.
[2] Completed subgrade shall be maintained and protected in
advance of the succeeding operation. Prior to placement of
pavement structure, promptly and satisfactorily reshape
and recompact, or remove and replace, damaged or
unsatisfactory areas.
[3] Correct all surface irregularities exceeding 1/2 inch by
loosening the surface and removing or adding material as
required. Compact the corrected area and surrounding
surface by rolling.
§ 11-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4.2
AO:271
(d) Subgrade approval.
[1] The subgrade shall be approved by the Township prior to
the placement of the subbase.
[2] For streets to be dedicated to the Township, the
developer's contractor shall conduct a proof roll of the
subgrade in the presence of the Township Engineer, using
a fully loaded tri-axle truck. The contractor shall repair all
unacceptable areas as marked by the Township Engineer.
Repairs may include reworking of existing materials or the
replacement of unacceptable material with acceptable
foreign borrow.
(2) Subbase.
(a) Refer to PennDOT Specifications, Section 350.
(b) Subbase material shall be Type C or better, No. 2A, as specified
in PennDOT Specifications, Section 703.2.
(c) Subbase construction.
[1] Subbase shall be placed on a prepared subgrade as
specified herein. Subbase material shall not be placed on
soft, muddy, or frozen areas. Correction or unsatisfactory
subbase conditions shall occur prior to base and paving
operations by scarifying, reshaping, and recompacting, or
by replacement if so directed.
[2] Subbase shall meet the same compaction and grade
control requirements as stated herein. Where the material
is too coarse to use the compaction method stated,
determine compaction based upon nonmovement of the
material under the compaction equipment.
[3] Subbase shall be approved by the Township before placing
base material.
[4] Developer shall provide compaction and density testing in
accordance with PennDOT Specifications, Section 350.3.
(3) Bituminous concrete base course (BCBC).
(a) Refer to PennDOT Specifications, Section 305.
(b) Bituminous material shall be asphalt cement Class AC-20 as
specified in PennDOT Specifications, Section 702. Aggregates
shall conform to PennDOT Specifications, Section 305.2.
(c) Construction shall meet the requirements of PennDOT
Specifications, Section 305.3. BCBC shall be approved by the
Township prior to placement of the wearing course.
§ 11-4.2 HARRIS CODE § 11-4.2
AO:272
(d) Developer shall provide compaction and density testing in
accordance with PennDOT Specifications, Section 401.3.
(4) ID-2 bituminous binder course.
(a) Refer to PennDOT Specifications, Section 421.
(b) Material shall conform to PennDOT Specifications, Section
421.
(c) Construction shall meet the requirements of PennDOT
Specifications, Section 421.3. Binder course shall be approved
by the Township prior to placement of the wearing course.
(d) Developer shall provide compaction and density testing in
accordance with PennDOT Specifications, Section 401.3.
(5) ID-2 bituminous wearing course.
(a) Refer to PennDOT Specifications, Section 420.
(b) Material shall conform to PennDOT Specifications, Section
420.2a, b and c. Skid resistance level shall be as required by
the PennDOT Design Manual, Part 2, Publication 13.
(c) Construction shall conform to PennDOT Specifications, Section
401.3. A tack coat shall be applied to the surface of any
pavement that has been in place for more than seven days
prior to placement of subsequent course.
(d) Developer shall provide compaction and density testing in
accordance with PennDOT Specifications, Section 401.3.
(6) Curb and curb gutter.
(a) Plain cement concrete curb and gutter.
[1] Refer to PennDOT Specifications, Sections 630 and 641.
[2] Material shall conform to PennDOT Specifications, Section
630.2 for plain cement concrete curb, and Section 641.2
for plain cement concrete curb gutter.
[3] Construction shall conform to PennDOT Specifications,
Section 630.3 for plain cement concrete curb, and Section
641.3 for plain cement concrete curb gutter.
(b) Slip form mountable concrete curb.
[1] Refer to PennDOT Specifications, Section 633.
[2] Materials.
[a] For concrete curb, PennDOT Class A concrete (3,300
psi at 28 days); for concrete curb gutter, PennDOT
§ 11-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4.2
AO:273
Class AA concrete (3,750 psi at 28 days), except with
a maximum slump of 1 1/2 inches. Mix design for the
concrete must be approved by the Township before
the placement of any curb. Note: admixtures may be
used to improve work ability with the approval of the
Township.
[b] Concrete curing compound: refer to PennDOT
Publication 408, Section 711.2(a).
[c] Longitudinal joint sealer: refer to PennDOT
Publication 408, Section 430.2(a).
[3] Construction.
[a] Use curb detail as specified herein.
[b] Broom surface before placing curb. Wet broom if
necessary at the direction of the Township Engineer or
inspector to remove all dirt and foreign materials.
[c] Contraction joints: refer to PennDOT Publication 408,
Section 630.3(e).
[d] Cure curb in accordance with PennDOT Publication
408, Section 501.3(k).
[e] Provide cones, barricades, or other acceptable method
to protect curb for a seven-day period.
[f] Backfill behind curb no sooner than seven days and no
later than 14 days after the curb has been placed.
[g] If wearing course is not to be placed within 30 days,
seal along the curb and street surface.
[h] Curb must be installed using an automatic grade
control curb machine approved by Harris Township.
[i] After placement of wearing course, apply six-inchwide
sealant uniformly and continuously along the
entire face of the curb in accordance with PennDOT
Publication 408, Section 401.3(j)3.
[4] Testing (for curb, curb gutter, and nonmountable curb).
[a] Developer shall provide testing for the following
items, to be witnessed by the Township Engineer or
inspector:
[i] Air entrapment, in accordance with mix design
and PennDOT Publication 408, Section 704.3(e)1.
§ 11-4.2 HARRIS CODE § 11-4.2
AO:274
[ii] Slump, in accordance with PennDOT Publication
408, Section 704.3(e)1.
[iii] Cylinders.
[A] Fifty cubic yards or less: six cylinders.
[B] More than 50 cubic yards: six cylinders from
first batch and six cylinders from last batch.
[C] Township Engineer or inspector has the
option to require additional cylinders to be
taken at his discretion.
(7) Type 3 shoulder.
(a) Refer to PennDOT Specifications, Section 653.
(b) Material shall conform to PennDOT Specifications, Section
653.2.
(c) Construction shall conform to PennDOT Specifications, Section
653.3.
(8) Sidewalks.
(a) Refer to PennDOT Specifications, Section 676.
(b) Material shall conform to PennDOT Specifications, Section
676.2.
(c) Construction shall conform to Section 676.3, except that
aggregate for bed shall be a four-inch-deep foundation.
BB. Inspection.
(1) The Township Engineer shall be notified 72 hours prior to
construction of any public or private street so that a site inspection
can take place. Costs for the reviews and inspections are the
responsibility of the owner/developer.
(2) The contractor shall not, under any circumstances, proceed with
subsequent stages of construction until authorization to proceed
has been granted by the Township.
CC. Maintenance guarantee. The owner shall provide the Township with a
performance bond or agreement guaranteeing the performance of all
aspects of the newly constructed street and appurtenances for a period
of 18 months from completion of the project. The Township will not
accept any responsibility for maintenance of the street, drainage
facilities, or appurtenances until the same have been officially accepted
by ordinance.101
101. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 11-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4.2
AO:275
DD. Acceleration, deceleration, and turning lanes.
(1) Deceleration or turning lanes may be required by the Township
along existing and proposed streets as determined by a traffic
impact study required by this section or where the Township can
justify the need.
(2) Deceleration lanes shall be designed according to PennDOT
standards.
(3) Acceleration lanes are only required when indicated as needed by a
traffic impact study. The design shall be as per the recommendation
of the Township Engineer. A paved taper for right-hand turns may
be required.
EE. Driveways.
(1) Driveways to single-family lots shall adhere to standards contained
in Chapter 12, Zoning, of the Code of the Township of Harris.
(2) Shared driveways for multifamily development.
(a) All entrance drives serving two to four dwelling units may be
designed to private road standards unless future development
of the site is planned.
(b) All entrance drives serving five or more dwelling units shall be
laid out to conform to the design, service, and access standards
established in this chapter for local streets.
(c) All entrance drives which may be expected to convey greater
than 1,000 ADT shall be laid out to conform to the minimum
design, service, and access standards specified in this chapter
for collector streets.
FF. Roadway hazard areas. Streets shall be laid out to avoid hazard areas
such as floodplains, cliffs, steep slopes, or large ravine. A secondary
means of access to a higher-order street which does not traverse the
same hazard areas shall be provided when one of the access streets into
a subdivision of more than 20 dwellings units crosses through a hazard
area.
GG. Signage and signalization. The developer shall provide all necessary
roadway signs and traffic signalization as may be required by the
Township, based upon Township standards, state standards, and traffic
impact studies, if required.
HH. Construction standards. All street and related improvements shall be
constructed in accordance with the construction standards of Harris
Township.
§ 11-4.2 HARRIS CODE § 11-4.2
AO:276
II. Trip generation rates. The following chart shall be used to determine
the anticipated average daily traffic levels of proposed residential
development:
Housing Type Average Weekday Trip Rates
Single-family detached 10.0 trips per DU
Duplex, multiplex, etc. 8.1 trips per DU
Apartment 5.4 trips per DU
Mobile home 5.38 trips per DU
Retirement village 3.3 trips per DU
JJ. Traffic impact study. All proposed developments of 100 or more
dwelling units shall be accompanied by a traffic impact study to
determine the need, if any, for additional traffic lanes (acceleration,
deceleration, or turning), signalization, and other street improvements.
The traffic impact study shall be prepared in accordance with this
section.
§ 11-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4.2
AO:277
§ 11-4.2 HARRIS CODE § 11-4.3
AO:278
§ 11-4.3. Blocks.
§ 11-4.4. Lots and parcels.
A. Length. Blocks shall have a minimum length of 300 feet and a maximum
length of 1,500 feet.
B. Depth. Residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth to accommodate
two tiers of lots, except:
(1) Where reverse frontage lots are required along an arterial street.
(2) Where prevented by the size, topographical conditions or other
inherent conditions of property, in which case the Board of
Supervisors may approve a single tier of lots.
C. Walkways.
(1) Walkways shall be required between adjacent residential streets in
excess of 1,000 feet in length wherever necessary to facilitate
pedestrian and bicycle circulation to give access to community
facilities such as schools and parks. Such walkways shall extend
through the approximate center of the block.
(2) Such walkways shall have the right-of-way widths of not less than
10 feet and a sidewalk designed and constructed in accordance
with § 11-4.2I, except that the width of such shall be eight feet.
A. General.
(1) Lot lines. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles
to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines.
(2) Municipal boundaries. Where practical, lot lines shall follow
municipal boundaries rather than cross them.
(3) Residential lot depth. Generally, the depth of residential lots shall
be not less than one nor more than 2 1/2 times their width.
(4) Lot drainage. Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive
drainage away from all buildings, and individual lot drainage shall
be coordinated with the Township's storm drainage plan for them.
B. Lot frontage and access.
(1) Access to public streets. All lots shall have direct access to a public
street (or to a private street if it meets the requirements of this
chapter).
(2) Double or reverse frontage. Double or reverse frontage lots shall be
avoided except where required to prevent direct access to arterial
streets, or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography or
orientation.
§ 11-4.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4.4
AO:279
§ 11-4.5. Sanitary sewage disposal. [Amended 12-13-1993 by Ord.
No. 157; 10-9-1995 by Ord. No. 169]
Developers shall submit a sewage disposal planning module or other
documentation as may be required by Chapter 71 of the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act (Act 537).102 The 1990 Centre Region Act 537 Sewage
Facilities Plan, as amended, shall be utilized by the Township to determine
the appropriate means of sewage disposal for each property.
(3) Arterial streets. Where a lot abuts an arterial street and an existing
local and/or collector street, access shall be from the local or
collector street only. Where this chapter requires installation of a
local, marginal-access, or other type of street parallel to an arterial
street, all lots abutting such local, marginal-access, or other type
shall derive access solely therefrom. Lot dimensions and areas shall
be not less than specified by the dimensions of Chapter 12, Zoning,
of the Code of the Township of Harris, unless a variance is first
granted under the provisions of said Chapter 12. No parcel may be
subdivided which will create a nonconforming lot or building
setback. No parcel may be subdivided which would require, for
building purposes, encroachment into floodplains or steep slopes in
order to meet other requirements of Chapter 12, Zoning, of the
Code of the Township of Harris.
A. Public sanitary sewer. All lots located within the designated sewer
service area of the 1990 Centre Region Act 537 Sewage Facilities Plan,
as revised, shall connect to the public sanitary sewer system of the
appropriate sewer authority. If sewer service is not presently available
to lots in the service area, sewer system facilities shall be installed by
the developer for connection, unless off-site sewer is exempted by the
Township Board of Supervisors by revision of the sewage facilities plan.
All components of the system infrastructure shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the standards of the applicable sewer
authority.
B. Lots located outside of the Centre Region sewer service area. Lots for
any approved use(s) located outside of the sewer service area
designated in the Centre Region Act 537 Sewage Facilities Plan shall
not be approved for connection to the public sanitary sewer system.
These lots shall utilize other available technologies for sewage disposal
purposes which do not entail a connection to the public sanitary sewer
system and/or discharge to a high-quality stream. These technologies
may include, but are not limited to:
(1) Spray irrigation.
(2) Use of community or individual subsurface disposal systems. When
subsurface sewage disposal systems are utilized, areas shall be
identified for the location of primary and secondary drain fields.
102. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 11-4.4 HARRIS CODE § 11-4.5
AO:280
§ 11-4.6. Water supply. [Amended 9-14-1987 by Ord. No. 111;
10-13-1997 by Ord. No. 186]
C. For lots located outside of the sewer service area, developers are
encouraged to evaluate innovative sewage disposal technologies which
do not entail a connection to the public sanitary sewer system. A
narrative containing an analysis of each alternative shall be provided to
the Township. This analysis shall include a detailed review of the
technical and environmental implications of each alternative and shall
contain a comparative ranking of the alternatives under consideration.
D. All lots which will not have off-site sewage disposal shall provide on-site
systems approved by the Sewage Enforcement Officer, except for lots
intended to remain undeveloped and so exempted by the Board of
Supervisors. No lot may be subdivided unless so exempted or found
suitable for an approved system. All proposed sanitary sewage disposal
systems shall comply with applicable rules and regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.103
A. All water supply systems shall meet applicable state and/or local water
authority/company standards.
(1) All lots located within the designated water service area of the
Centre County Comprehensive Water and Sewer Plan, 1970, as
revised, shall connect to public water authority/company mains
when such is feasible and/or permitted by the appropriate water
authority/company. All water mains and laterals shall meet the
design and installation specifications of said water authority/
company.
B. Fire hydrants.
(1) Fire hydrants shall be located within 600 feet of the farthest point
of any structure with a value in excess of $15,000 where a
municipal water system exists within 1,500 feet of that structure.
The 600 feet shall be measured from the hydrant to a line
extending from the structure perpendicular to the road right-ofway
or other legal access to the property.
(2) Except for single-family detached dwellings, all structures
exceeding 4,500 square feet in area or over 35 feet in height above
grade shall have a hydrant located within 300 feet of the farthest
point of the structure measured from the hydrant to a line
extending from the structure perpendicular to the road right-ofway
or other legal access to the property.
(3) Structures equipped with automatic sprinklers shall have a hydrant
located within 600 feet of the structure as measured above.
103. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 11-4.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4.6
AO:281
§ 11-4.7. Easements.
(4) A hydrant shall be placed at each entrance to a development, the
exact location of which is to be subject to the approval of the Chief
of the Boalsburg Fire Company, or its successor. Additional
hydrants shall be sited so that the probable route of travel of
arriving fire apparatus shall pass the hydrants en route to the
structure, preferably at right-of-way intersections. All hydrant
locations shall be reviewed by the Chief of the Boalsburg Fire
Company or its successor.
(5) Where rights-of-way or other legal accesses include curbing, the
hydrants shall be placed no less than three feet and no more than
six feet from the back of the curb. Where no curb exists, the
hydrant shall be set no less than six feet and no more than eight
feet from the edge of the pavement.
(6) Hydrants serving all structures containing 30,000 square feet shall
be sited after review and comment by the Chief of the Boalsburg
Fire Company or its successor.
(7) Water mains serving new subdivisions and land developments shall
have a diameter of at least eight inches or as determined by the
appropriate water authority. Water mains shall be sized to allow
adequate water flow for firefighting based upon the building square
footage served by the main and hydrants.
(8) Hydrants shall meet the current NFPA and water authority
standards and shall have national standard threaded residential
and steamer connections.
A. Utility easements. In subdivisions containing five or more lots, all
electric, telephone, and cable television utility lines shall be placed
underground. All utilities shall be installed in a manner which will allow
safe and ready access for the installation and maintenance of other
utilities.
(1) Utility easements outside street rights-of-way shall be a minimum
of 15 feet in width or as otherwise determined by the appropriate
utility company, except that easements lying parallel and abutting
street rights-of-way may be reduced to a minimum width of 7 1/2
feet. All other easements outside street rights-of-way shall be
centered on or adjacent to rear or side lot lines where feasible.
(2) Lines connecting utility service to each lot shall be installed in
accordance with the standards of the utility company providing
such service.
(3) No structures, trees, or shrubs shall be placed or planted within a
utility easement.
§ 11-4.6 HARRIS CODE § 11-4.7
AO:282
§ 11-4.8. Monuments and markers.
All monuments and markers required herein shall be accurately placed by a
licensed civil engineer or land surveyor prior to final approval of the plan.
§ 11-4.9. Shade trees.
B. Drainage easements. Where a subdivision or land development is or will
be traversed by a drainageway, there shall be provided a drainage
easement conforming with the line and width of such adequate to
preserve unimpeded flow of natural drainage or for the purpose of
installing a stormwater sewer. The owner shall grade and seed the
slopes of such after construction where necessary to prevent erosion
and sedimentation and in a manner which will not adversely alter the
functioning of the drainageway. Nothing shall be placed or planted
within the drainage easement which will impede the flow of natural
drainage.
A. Monuments.
(1) Monuments shall be at least four inches square or four inches in
diameter and shall be 36 inches long. Monuments shall be made of
concrete, stone, or be set in a four-inch cast-iron or steel pipe filled
with concrete. They must be set so that the top is level with the
finished grade of the surrounding ground and marked on top with a
securely embedded copper or brass dowel or other approved
material, scored to coincide exactly with the point of intersection of
the lines.
(2) Monuments shall be placed at the following points along street
rights-of-way: on corners of each intersection, at changes in
direction of street lines (excluding curb arcs), at the beginning and
end of curves, and at intermediate points wherever topographical
or other conditions make it impossible to sight between two
otherwise required monuments. Land to be conveyed for public use
shall have monuments placed at similar locations.
B. Markers.
(1) Markers shall consist of iron pipes or steel bars at least 36 inches
long and 3/4 inch in diameter.
(2) Except where monuments are required, markers shall be set at all
lot corners, at all changes in direction of lot lines (except curve
arcs), and at the beginning and end of curved lot lines.
C. All property pins or monuments removed, destroyed, or altered by
construction shall be accurately replaced in accordance with the
approved plan.
§ 11-4.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4.9
AO:283
A. Shade trees may be planted by the subdivider within the rights-of-way
of all new streets. Trees may be planted on both sides of the street,
spaced no closer than the following:
Height of Tree at Maturity
(feet)
Distance
(feet)
Under 30 30 to 40
31 to 50 41 to 50
51 + 51 to 70
B. No tree may be planted within 25 feet from the intersection of two
street right-of-way lines or within five feet of proposed driveway
entrances or two feet from the cartway or shoulder edge. If the same
tree species is used for an entire street, such species may not be used
again unless the streets are separated by two streets with different
species.
C. Existing trees. Existing trees within the proposed right-of-way may be
retained and counted toward fulfillment of the requirements specified
above, provided the location requirements specified above are not
violated.
D. Tree selection. All new trees shall be certified nursery stock,
symmetrical in growth, and free of pests and disease. Tree trunks shall
have a caliper of at least 1 1/2 inch, measured six inches above ground
level. Trees shall be planted and protected in accordance with
procedures specified in "Street Trees" by Roland Daniels (published in
1975 by the Pennsylvania State University). Trees shall not be planted
until final construction and grading within the right-of-way is
completed.
(1) Where overhead utility lines are present within the right-of-way,
tree species shall be those which do not exceed 30 feet at maturity,
including the following:
Common Name Botanical Name
Hedge maple Acer campestre
Amur maple Acer ginnala
Globe Norway maple Acer platanoides globosum
Paperbark maple Acer griseum
Baumann horsechestnut Aesculus hippocastanum
baumannii
Downy shadblow serviceberry Amelanchier canadensis
Allegheny serviceberry Amelanchier laevis
American hornbeam Carpinus caroliniana
Flowering dogwood Cornus florida
§ 11-4.9 HARRIS CODE § 11-4.9
AO:284
Common Name Botanical Name
Red flowering dogwood Cornus florida rubra
Kousa dogwood Cornus kousa
Lavalle hawthorn Crataegus lavallei
Washington hawthorn Crataegus phaenopyrum
Winter King hawthorn Crataegus viridis 'Winter King'
Russian olive Elaeagnus angustifolia
Flowering ash Fraxinus ornus
Golden raintree Koelreuteria paniculata
Siberian crabapple Malus baccata
Japanese crabapple Malus floribunda
Snowdrift crabapple Malus 'Snowdrift'
Kwanzan Japanese flowering
cherry
Prunus serrulata 'Kwanzan'
Callery pear Pyrus calleryana
Japanese tree lilac Syringa amurensis japonica
Katsura tree Cercidiphyllum japonicum
Japanese stewartia Stewartia pseudocamellia
Japanese snowbell Styrax japonica
Sourwood Oxydendrum arboreum
(2) Where overhead utility lines are not present within the right-of-way,
tree species may include those listed above, as well as the
following:
Common Name Botanical Name
Norway maple Acer platanoides
Columnar maple Acer platanoides 'Columnare'
Erect Norway maple Acer platanoides 'Erectum'
Schwedler Norway maple Acer platanoides 'Schwedleri'
Red maple Acer rubrum
Ruby horsechestnut Aesculus carnea briotii
European hornbeam Carpinus betulus
Upright European hornbeam Carpinus betulus fastigiata
Yellowwood Cladrastis lutea
Green ash Fraxinus Pennsylvanica lanceolata
Upright ginkgo (males) Ginkgo biloba fastigiata
Thornless honey locust Gleditsia triacanthos (inermis)
§ 11-4.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4.9
AO:285
§ 11-4.10. Erosion and grading control.
Common Name Botanical Name
Sweetgum Liquidambar styraciflua cultivars:
'Moraine,' 'Burgundy,' 'Festival,'
'Palo Alto,' L.s. aurea
American hophornbeam or
ironwood
Ostrya virginiana
Amur corktree Phellodendron amurense
Columnar sergeant cherry Prunus sargentii columnaris
Red oak Quercus borealis
Pin oak Quercus palustris
Willow oak Quercus phellos
Pyramidal English oak Quercus probus fastigiata
Scarlet oak Quercus coccinea
Shingle oak Quercus imbricaria
Bur oak Quercus macrocarpa
Regent Japanese pagoda tree Sophora japonica 'Regent'
Littleleaf European linden Tilia cordata
Crimean linden Tilia euchlora
Silver linden Tilia tomentosa
Chinese elm Ulmus parvifolia
Village green zelkova Zelkova serrata 'Village Green'
Hackberry Celtis occidentalis
Sourgum or tupelo Nyssa Sylvatica
Bald cypress Taxodium distichum
American planetree or
sycamore
Platanus occidentalis
Tulip tree Liriodendron tulipifera
(3) Other tree species may be proposed by the subdivider, provided
such are first approved by the Planning Commission. Such species
shall be appropriate for local climate extremes, resistant to urban
pollution, storm, and disease damage, relatively maintenance free,
and shall present little danger of disrupting utility lines or
upheaving sidewalks and driveways.
E. Tree dedication. Upon dedication of the right-of-way to the Township,
all trees within such right-of-way shall revert to Township ownership.
A. Erosion and sedimentation control plans. Whenever earthmoving
activities are proposed for a subdivision or land development which
§ 11-4.9 HARRIS CODE § 11-4.10
AO:286
§ 11-4.11. Storm drainage.
requires preparation of an erosion and sedimentation control plan
under the rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, the Board of Supervisors may require that
a copy of such plan be submitted along with the plan submitted for
preliminary approval. Review and approval of such erosion and
sedimentation control plan by the Department of Environmental
Protection, or its designated agent, shall, in such cases, be required for
preliminary approval of the plan.104
B. Grading.
(1) Blocks and lots shall be graded to secure proper drainage away
from buildings. Alterations to existing storm runoff patterns and
amounts shall conform to § 11-4.11 of this chapter.
(2) No excavation shall be made resulting in a slope steeper than 1:3
vertical-horizontal, and no fill shall be made resulting in a slope
steeper than 1:1 1/2 vertical-horizontal, except in the following
circumstances:
(a) Such excavation and/or fill is for street grading governed in
§ 11-4.2 of this article.
(b) The excavation is located so that a line having a slope of 1:3
and passing through any portion of the cut face will be entirely
inside the property lines of the property on which the
excavation was made.
(c) The fill is located so that settlement, sliding, or erosion will not
result in fill being deposited on adjoining property by any
means.
(d) The materials and methods used to finish such grading are
sufficiently stable to sustain a slope steeper than 1:1.
(e) The Township Engineer shall review all methods and materials
used for such cut and fill operations and shall affirm that such
deviation from the slope standard will not result in erosion,
sedimentation or injury to persons or damage to adjacent
property.
(3) In all cases, the bottom edge of excavations or fill shall be a
minimum of five feet from property lines of developed lots.
A. Storm sewers, culverts and related installations shall be provided, as
necessary, to:
(1) Permit unimpeded flow of natural watercourses.
104. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 11-4.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4.11
AO:287
§ 11-4.12. Parkland dedication requirements; fee-in-lieu option.
[Added 8-9-1999 by Ord. No. 206; amended 3-14-2005 by Ord. No.
252]
(2) Insure adequate drainage of all low points along the line of streets.
(3) Intercept stormwater runoff along streets at intervals related to the
extent and grade of the area drained.
(4) Provide positive drainage away from on-site sewage disposal
facilities.
B. Storm sewers and related installations shall be required only when the
runoff stormwater cannot be satisfactorily handled within the street
cartway.
C. Where existing storm sewers are reasonably accessible, proposed
subdivisions shall be required, if necessary, to connect therewith.
D. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed not only to handle the
anticipated peak discharge from the property being subdivided, but
also the anticipated runoff that will occur when property at a higher
elevation in the same watershed is fully developed.
E. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel, or stream, there shall be provided a drainage easement
conforming substantially with the line of such watercourse,
drainageway, channel, or stream and of such width as will be adequate
to preserve the unimpeded flow of natural drainage, or for the purpose
of widening, deepening, relocating, improving or protecting such
drainage facilities. Any changes in the existing drainageway shall be
subject to the approval of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.105
F. Appropriate grates shall be designed for all catch basins, stormwater
inlets and other entrance appurtenances to insure that maximum
openings do not exceed six inches on a side.
G. All storm drainage facilities constructed along or crossing state or
township roads shall conform to the applicable requirements of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation specifications related to
such drainage facilities.
A. This section shall apply to all subdivision and/or land development
plans which include any use.
B. The Board of Supervisors shall require for all residential developments,
as a condition of final plan approval, the dedication of parkland at an
appropriate size and location to meet the needs of the development. As
an option, the Township may allow the developer to provide a payment
105. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 11-4.11 HARRIS CODE § 11-4.12
AO:288
in lieu of parkland to the Township. The procedures for the use of the
fee-in-lieu option are provided in Subsections F and G of this section.
C. Amount of parkland required. For any residential development or
subdivision larger than five dwelling units, the amount of parkland to be
dedicated as a condition of plan approval shall be five acres of parkland
per 100 dwelling units, or 0.05 acre of parkland per dwelling unit. To
prevent minor subdivisions which could serve to circumvent the
parkland requirement, these regulations shall apply to all parent tracts
(as defined in Chapter 12) of 10 acres or larger at the time of adoption
of this section.
D. If land is to be offered for public dedication, the subdivider or developer
shall place the following note on the subdivision or land development
plan:
"No more than _______ (insert number) dwelling units may be
constructed on the land which is the subject of the plan, unless
additional land is dedicated and/or the Township Board of Supervisors
accepts an additional fee in lieu of dedication of parkland."
E. The Harris Township Board of Supervisors, upon recommendation of
Harris Township staff, the Centre Regional Planning Agency, the Harris
Township Planning Commission, the Harris Township Parks and
Recreation Committee, the Centre Region Parks and Recreation
Department, and the Harris Township Engineer, shall determine if the
land proposed by the developer is acceptable for dedication based upon
the adopted recreation plan and other relevant criteria, including, but
not limited to, the following:
(1) General design. Areas shall be designed as neighborhood parks or
natural areas to provide recreation opportunities for residents
within the proposed subdivision or for residents living in proximity
to the proposed park. Exceptions may be made when dedications
are made to a regional park which is located within two miles of the
center of the subdivision.
(2) Access. The parkland shall be accessible from a public street or
shall adjoin and become part of an already existing park area which
is accessible from a public street. Where access to the park is by a
public road, the width of the frontage shall be a minimum length
deemed necessary by the municipality for access, visibility of the
site, and public safety. Depending upon the parkland size or shape,
the Board may require access from an additional public street.
(3) Shape and slope. The majority (51% or greater) of the parkland
shall have a lot length to width ratio no greater than 2.5 to one.
Steep slopes, floodplains, and drainageways may not be used for
parkland. Yards, court areas, setbacks, and other open areas
required by zoning and other regulations are not to be included as
part of the acreage to be dedicated.
§ 11-4.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4.12
AO:289
(4) Stormwater management facilities. Stormwater basins shall not be
considered as parkland, nor should any credit be given for the
stormwater detention basin land toward the required parkland.
(5) Shared-use paths. The dedication and construction of shared-use
paths may be accepted as parkland if they meet all of the following
conditions: [Amended 4-23-2014 by Ord. No. 310]
(a) The minimum width of the parkland right-of-way or easement
shall be 20 feet. If a parkland easement is proposed, the
developer shall enter into an agreement with Harris Township
which stipulates how shared-use paths will be maintained and
repaired.
(b) Shared-use paths offered in place of parkland shall meet the
standards outlined in the AASHTO Guide for the Development
of Bicycle Facilities 2012, Fourth Edition.
(c) Credit towards parkland dedication requirements shall be
given at the ratio of 75 linear feet of shared-use path for each
dwelling unit in the proposed development. If additional
parkland is required in excess of any shared-use path provided,
the developer shall provide parkland in the amount required in
Subsection C of this section or through the offering of a fee-inlieu
payment, if approved by the municipality.
(d) Construction of shared-use paths identified on the Official Map
of Harris Township or those that are required within the
Corridor Overlay District may be accepted as parkland if the
requirements of this section are met.
(e) The shared-use paths shall have logical beginning and ending
points that provide appropriate means of access to a park or
other facilities residents of the development are likely to use.
Other facilities can include existing shared-use paths,
bikeways, Pennsylvania Bike Route G, hiking trails, schools,
etc.
(f) The cost of constructing the shared-use path shall be provided
by the developer in order to accommodate its intended use.
The cost of development shall not be considered as a credit
towards a fee in lieu of land dedication.
(g) The provisions of Subsection E(3), Shape and slope, of this
section must still be met by the proposed development.
(6) Trails or linear parks. The Township may accept the dedication of
linear trails or parks if they connect to existing trails identified by
the Centre Regional Planning Commission, or if they are adjacent
to Cedar Run, Spring Creek, Slab Cabin Run, Roaring Run or
Galbraith Run and meet the following criteria:
§ 11-4.12 HARRIS CODE § 11-4.12
AO:290
(a) Actual dedications of land shall have an average width of at
least 75 feet.
(b) The trail or linear park shall conform to any applicable
municipal park and open space plan, any county-wide trail and
recreation master plan, and appropriate Township and County
Comprehensive Plans.
(c) The cost of improving a trail or linear park shall be provided by
the developer in order to accommodate its intended use. This
shall not be considered a credit towards a fee in lieu of land
dedication. This requirement is necessary since the dedication
of narrow strips of land has relatively little value compared to a
larger parcel.
(7) Utilities. The majority of dedicated land shall be accessible to
electric, water, and sewer utilities. No aboveground utilities shall
be placed on the parkland unless granted specific permission by
the Board of Supervisors. If any of these facilities are placed
underground, no part of the facilities and their supportive
equipment shall protrude above ground level.
(8) Stormwater. The developer shall be responsible for complying with
the provisions of Chapter 13, Stormwater Management, of the
Code of the Township of Harris. The stormwater management plan
submitted to the Township for the subject development must
provide mechanisms to ensure effective stormwater management
for the dedicated parkland property.
(9) Unity. It is desirable for the parkland to be in well-placed,
adequately sized areas within the Township so that they can
accommodate the anticipated uses.
(10) Dedication. If it is determined that the land proposed for dedication
is acceptable, the Township may officially accept the land at the
time of final approval of the development plan. At such time, a deed
shall be recorded for the dedicated land, and it shall contain the
following restrictive clause: "This land was acquired for perpetual
public park purposes through the implementation of the Harris
Township Subdivision Ordinance."
(a) The Township or its designee shall be responsible for
maintaining all dedicated and accepted areas. Formation of
and cooperation with homeowners' associations or similar
organizations, for the purpose of maintenance, shall be
encouraged. The responsibility for ensuring that all required
work is completed shall remain with the Township.
(11) A note shall be added to the subdivision or land development plan
for land specifically designated as parkland and shall state the
following:
§ 11-4.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4.12
AO:291
"The land shown on this plan as parkland, consisting of _______
acres, shall be deeded to Harris Township by a deed of general
warranty, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, and at
a date no later than the date of dedication of the streets shown
on this land development/subdivision plan. Said land shall be
available for Harris Township use consistent with its ordinances
and regulations with no restriction, except that the purposes of
the conveyance shall be public park and recreation uses. It shall
be used for such purposes, and Harris Township may also, at
its sole discretion, sell this land, provided that the proceeds of
such sale are specifically restricted for use for public park and
recreation purposes in connection with a continuing program for
such purposes in Harris Township or in connection with existing
park facilities or to obtain additional park facilities in Harris
Township."
F. Fee-in-lieu option. A fee in lieu of parkland may be offered by the
developer if at least one of the following conditions exist:
(1) The proposed development does not contain land suitable for
parkland dedication.
(2) The proposed development is too small for a suitable amount of
land to be dedicated.
(3) The location of parkland within the proposed subdivision is not
consistent with the adopted Harris Township parks and recreation
plan.
(4) A fee in lieu of parkland dedication will not be contrary to the
public interest.
G. Fee in lieu of land dedication.
(1) The payment of fee in lieu of land dedication shall be in accordance
with the requirements of Article V, Section 503(11), of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247), as amended,
53 P.S. § 10503(11). The fee in lieu of parkland shall be used to
enhance public recreation areas which will directly or indirectly
benefit future inhabitants of the development or subdivision
providing the fee.
(2) After receiving the recommendation of Harris Township staff, the
Centre Regional Planning Agency, the Harris Township Planning
Commission, the Harris Township Parks and Recreation
Committee, the Centre Region Parks and Recreation Agency, and
the Harris Township Engineer, the Harris Township Board of
Supervisors may, at its option and with the developer's agreement,
determine that a fee in lieu would be more beneficial to the
Township residents than a land dedication for parkland. The
§ 11-4.12 HARRIS CODE § 11-4.12
AO:292
§ 11-4.13. Fire-protection standards. [Added 2-9-2004 by Ord. No.
241]
following procedure shall be utilized to determine the appropriate
fee in lieu:
(a) As part of the plan approval process, the Township Manager,
under the direction of the Board of Supervisors, shall send
written notice to the developer that the Board has determined
a fee in lieu would be more beneficial to the Township's
residents than the dedication of parkland.
(b) The fee-in-lieu payment shall be determined using the
following procedure:
DU x Parkland Fee = Parkland Fee in Lieu
DU = Number of Dwelling Units
Parkland Fee = Fee established by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors
(3) In some instances, there may be insufficient suitable land available
within a proposed development to meet park and recreation
requirements. In those cases, the Board may elect, at its option and
with the developer's agreement, to require the dedication of land
for a portion of the required amount and the payment of a fee for
the balance to satisfy the parkland dedication requirements of this
section.
A. Plan preparation requirements.
(1) The applicant shall contact the applicable community water
system(s) to obtain fire flow rates for the water system(s) proposed
to serve the subdivision or land development. These flow rates shall
be noted on the plan.
(2) The location, construction detail, and ownership/maintenance
information of any water storage system shall be provided on the
plan. Approved design specifications for underground storage
tanks shall be obtained from the Centre Region Fire Administrator.
(3) Details for all existing and proposed Fire Department connections
shall be provided on the plan.
(4) A note shall be provided on the plan indicating if any structure
within the proposed development will have a built-in firesuppression
system, including, but not limited to, automatic
sprinkler systems.
(5) Details for all existing and proposed fire apparatus access routes
shall be noted on the plan.
§ 11-4.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4.13
AO:293
B. Fire-protection plan review procedure.
(1) The Township shall provide a copy of all subdivision and land
development plans to the Fire Chief of the Boalsburg Fire
Company, or its successor, at the time plans are provided to the
Centre Regional Planning Agency (CRPA) and Township Engineer
for review. The Fire Chief shall be provided with the same time
period for review of the plan as the other Township consultants.
(2) The Fire Chief shall review subdivision and land development plans
and provide written comments for the following fire-protection
features:
(a) Fire flow and/or water supply available for firefighting.
(b) The location and available flow of fire hydrants.
(c) The location, design, and capacity of water storage facilities.
(d) Fire apparatus access.
(e) The location of fire lanes, as necessary.
(f) The locations of any Fire Department connections provided.
(g) The presence of any built-in fire-suppression systems.
(3) The Fire Chief shall sign a signature block provided on the plan
indicating that the plan satisfies applicable fire-protection
standards. The note shall state as follows:
(a) The Boalsburg Fire Company has reviewed this plan for
compliance with applicable fire-protection standards and does
hereby certify that compliance with those standards has been
demonstrated.
Signature of Chief or other designated Fire Company official
C. Water supply requirements. Developments served by community water
systems.
(1) Existing fire hydrants on public streets may be considered
available; existing fire hydrants on adjacent private streets shall
not be considered available.
(2) The minimum fire flow requirements for proposed developments of
one- and two-family dwellings with front, side, and rear building
setback requirements of at least 15 feet, or building separation
distances of at least 30 feet, shall be 750 gallons per minute.
(3) The minimum fire flow requirements for developments of one- and
two-family dwellings with any building setback requirement of less
§ 11-4.13 HARRIS CODE § 11-4.13
AO:294
than 15 feet, or building separation distances of less than 30 feet,
shall be 1,000 gallons per minute.
(4) The minimum fire flow requirements for developments other than
one- and two-family dwellings shall be determined using the
needed fire flow method described in the Fire Suppression Rating
Schedule published by the Insurance Services Office, Inc. (ISO).
(5) If the required fire flow is not provided in a development proposed
to be served by a community water system, all dwellings and
occupied structures shall be provided with an approved automatic
fire sprinkler system installed in accordance with the applicable
NFPA standard.
(a) The Fire Chief may accept a deficiency of up to 10% of the
required fire flow where existing fire hydrants provide all or a
portion of the required flow. Written notice of the deficiency
and the Fire Chief's approval of such shall be noted on the
plan.
(b) Subdivisions and land developments of one- and two-family
dwellings located outside of the Regional Growth Boundary
and served by a community water system may utilize water
storage systems, as described in Subsection D of this section,
to satisfy the water supply requirements.
D. Water supply requirements; developments not served by community
water systems.
(1) The minimum water supply requirements for developments of oneand
two-family dwellings shall be met with either the installation of
a four-thousand-gallon approved water storage source located
along required fire apparatus accessed roads or the installation of
an approved automatic fire sprinkler system installed in
accordance with the applicable NFPA standard. The spacing
between the four-thousand-gallon water storage sources shall not
exceed 1,500 feet measured along the center line of the fire
apparatus access roads. The distance from any building setback
line to a four-thousand-gallon water storage source shall not
exceed 750 feet. [Amended 8-13-2007 by Ord. No. 271]
(2) The minimum water supply requirements for developments other
than one- and two-family dwellings shall be determined using NFPA
Standard 1142, Water Supplies for Suburban and Rural Fire
Fighting. If the needed water supply is not provided in
developments outside of the community water system area, all
dwellings and occupied structures shall be provided with an
approved automatic fire sprinkler system installed in accordance
with the applicable NFPA standard.
(3) The minimum water supply requirements for fire protection shall
be met at the time of subdivision or land development and as a
§ 11-4.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4.13
AO:295
§ 11-4.14. Riparian buffer area. [Added 4-11-2011 by Ord. No. 292]
condition of approval of any subdivision or land development plan.
If a developer desires to delay construction of any improvements
necessary to meet the fire-protection requirements until such time
as structures actually are constructed on the property, the
developer must post, prior to receiving final approval of any
subdivision or land development plan, a surety in a form and
amount agreeable to the Township Engineer. This surety can be
posted in increments of five years, with such surety being
renewable at the end of the five-year term. At least six months
prior to the expiration of the financial security, the developer must
renew the financial security or have constructed all improvements
secured thereby. To the extent not inconsistent with this section,
all other terms and conditions relating to the financial security
required by this section shall be the same as for other financial
security posted pursuant to this Chapter 11. [Added 8-13-2007 by
Ord. No. 271]
E. Fire apparatus access.
(1) Facilities, buildings, or portions of buildings hereafter constructed
in subdivisions or land developments approved after the effective
date of this section shall be accessible to Fire Department
apparatus by way of an approved fire apparatus access road with
an asphalt, concrete, or other approved driving surface capable of
supporting the imposed load of fire apparatus. An exception shall
be granted for private roads that serve five or fewer dwellings.
(2) The paved cartway width for all public streets shall meet Township
standards. Minimum paved cartway width for fire apparatus access
roads shall be 20 feet. An exception shall be granted for private
roads that serve five or fewer dwellings.
A. Chesapeake Bay Tributary Strategy goals and objectives.
(1) In order for Pennsylvania to meet the aggressive goals of the
Chesapeake Bay Tributary Strategy, communities located within
this drainage area will need to implement best management
practices (BMPs) to address point and nonpoint pollution sources;
riparian buffers are one of the BMPs that will help the Centre
Region meet these goals; and
(2) The Centre Region is fortunate to contain high-quality waterways
which make significant contributions to our environment and
quality of life; and
(3) Recent events have stressed the importance of local efforts to
maintain and protect the community's waterways; and
(4) The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) is
moving forward with the implementation of the Chesapeake Bay
§ 11-4.13 HARRIS CODE § 11-4.14
AO:296
Tributary Strategy, which established aggressive goals for
reductions in the amount of sediments and nutrients such as
nitrogen and phosphorus; and
(5) Our local streams contribute to the Susquehanna River drainage
area and ultimately the Chesapeake Bay; and
(6) The potential exists for DEP to establish total maximum daily load
(TMDL) regulations in order to prevent further increased sediment
and nutrient loadings to our waterways; and
(7) If local measures such as riparian buffers are not evaluated and
implemented to reduce loadings to our streams, the community's
healthy economy and environmental well-being could be
permanently threatened; and
(8) The region is located at the top of the watershed, and, since there
are no upstream communities discharging nutrients and sediments
to our local waterways, their protection and preservation rests with
us; and
(9) These point to the need for a more coordinated effort at the local
municipal level to protect our streams and waterways; and
(10) The Centre Region municipalities have evaluated and taken the
opportunity to pursue the following riparian buffer measures that
will help to ensure the future health of our valuable water
resources. The implementation of a regional riparian buffer
program is an important step in our cooperative water
management efforts.
B. Legislative intent.
(1) Under the authority granted by Article I, Section 27, of the
Pennsylvania Constitution, Act 247, the Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended,106 and other commonwealth and federal
statutes, the following riparian buffer regulations have been
enacted to govern the restoration, conservation, disturbance and
management of riparian buffer areas in Harris Township.
(2) For purposes of this section, "riparian buffers" are defined as the
areas surrounding perennial and intermittent streams and
jurisdictional wetlands in Harris Township, whether identified by
the United States Geologic Survey (USGS) or U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers and illustrated on the Harris Township Riparian Buffer
Map (Appendix A),107 or identified by the property owner at the
time of development through subdivision or land development
planning.
106. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
107. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 11-4.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4.14
AO:297
(3) The specific purpose and intent of this section is to:
(a) Conserve, by natural processes (including filtration,
deposition, absorption, adsorption, plant uptake, and
denitrification), the natural features of riparian areas to reduce
the amount of nutrients, sediment, organic matter, pesticides,
and other harmful substances that reach watercourses,
wetlands, subsurface, and surface water bodies; regulate the
temperature of watercourses and surface water bodies; and
contribute to groundwater recharge.
(b) Improve and maintain the safety, reliability, and adequacy of
the Spring Creek Watershed's water resources.
C. Applicability.
(1) The riparian buffer regulations shall apply to all subdivisions and
land developments created after the date of this section that
contain an intermittent or perennial stream or jurisdictional
wetland as defined herein.
(2) Adoption of this section does not grant public access to private
property. Any grant of public access remains the prerogative of
each individual property owner.
(3) Within the riparian buffer, all existing zoning, land use, and
building regulations now in place shall continue to apply, except
where the regulations of this section are more restrictive.
(4) Riparian buffer mitigation is recommended, but not required, when
a building or zoning permit is needed for activities that do not
require subdivision or land development approval and that are
within or touching the riparian buffer area.
(5) This section shall not apply to the footprints of any existing primary
and accessory uses, including but not limited to all agricultural
uses and research related thereto, buildings, transportation
facilities, fences, lawns, gardens, utility lines, roads, driveways,
sidewalks, bikeways, decks, piers, water, septic and sewage supply
facilities and their related appurtenances (well houses, utility pump
and lift stations, manholes, etc.).
(6) Establishment, preservation and maintenance of riparian buffer
areas shall remain the sole responsibility of the individual property
owner.
D. Width determination/delineation.
(1) The measurement of the riparian buffer area shall extend a total
width of 50 feet from each defined edge of a perennial stream,
intermittent stream, or jurisdictional wetland, or shall equal the
extent of the one-hundred-year floodplain, whichever is greater.
§ 11-4.14 HARRIS CODE § 11-4.14
AO:298
(2) Subdivision and land development plans submitted to the Township
for approval shall clearly identify the riparian buffer areas or
include a note that there are no riparian buffer areas identified on
the property. This initial determination shall be subject to review
and approval by the Township.
(3) At the discretion of the property owner/developer, the riparian
buffer may be included as part of the proposed building lots, or the
riparian buffer may be a separate lot of record and designated as
open space.
(4) Within 30 days of final plan approval, but in any case prior to any
site development or disturbance, the property encompassing the
riparian buffer area shall be clearly delineated using fiberglass
boundary markers (Carsonite or the equivalent) placed at a
minimum of every 50 feet and extending a minimum of three feet
above ground.
(5) The fiberglass boundary markers shall clearly indicate "riparian
protection area."
(6) Where a riparian buffer area width reduction has been granted in
accordance with Subsection G of this section, the fiberglass
boundary markers shall be placed at the corners of the reduced
width areas, as well as along the riparian buffer boundary at the
minimum fifty-foot distance required in Subsection D(4).
(7) Riparian buffer area boundary markers shall remain in place for a
minimum of three years, the establishment period for new
plantings.
E. Uses permitted within the riparian buffer areas. Riparian buffer areas
are to be left in their natural state; however, the following uses, which
are primarily passive in character, may occur within the riparian buffer
area. Any use not authorized in this section shall be prohibited within
the riparian buffer area.
(1) Agricultural uses in compliance with the Pennsylvania Clean
Streams Law,108 specifically rules and regulations promulgated
under 25 Pa. Code Chapters 102 (erosion and sediment control)
and 91 (manure storage and management). Agricultural uses
include stream crossings for farm vehicles and/or livestock if part
of a federal, state and/or privately funded Centre County
Conservation District and/or local nonprofit riparian buffer
improvement project.
(2) Forestry uses, provided a Centre County Conservation District
approved erosion and sedimentation control plan has been
prepared and in accordance with the best management practices
108. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 11-4.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4.14
AO:299
for forestry found in the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection's Chapter 93, Water Quality Standards.
(3) Removal of noxious or invasive species or removal of trees where
such removal is necessary as a means to eliminate dead, diseased
or hazardous stands of trees that jeopardize public safety, in
accordance with the best management practices for forestry found
in the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection's
Chapter 93, Water Quality Standards.
(4) Wildlife sanctuaries, nature preserves, nature trails, forest
preserves, fishing areas, passive areas of public and private
parklands.
(5) Stream bank stabilization, habitat enhancement and/or native
planting and native tree reforestation.
(6) Research and monitoring devices such as staff gages, water
recording, water quality testing, cross vanes, weirs and related
demonstration facilities.
(7) New stream crossings for roads, railroads, centralized sewer and/
or water lines and public utility transmission lines and/or their
related appurtenances (i.e., towers, well houses, pump and lift
stations), constructed in accordance with stream crossing
standards, as specified in Subsection J of this section.
F. Uses prohibited within the riparian buffer area. Any use not authorized
within Subsection E of this section shall be prohibited within the
riparian buffer area. Without limiting this general statement of
prohibition, the following activities and facilities are specifically
prohibited:
(1) Removal or disturbance of vegetation in a manner that is
inconsistent with erosion and sedimentation control and riparian
buffer protection.
(2) Changing the existing grade as a result of earth disturbance,
including cutting and filling.
(3) Storage of any hazardous or noxious materials, except those used
during emergencies for the treatment and/or maintenance of sewer
and water treatment facilities (i.e., generator sets and alternative
drive units).
(4) Use of fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, and/or other chemicals in
excess of federally prescribed industry standards and/or the
recommendations of the Centre County Conservation District.
(5) Roads or driveways, except where permitted as stream crossings.
(6) Motor or wheeled vehicle traffic in any area not designed to
adequately accommodate the type and volume.
§ 11-4.14 HARRIS CODE § 11-4.14
AO:300
(7) Parking areas.
(8) Structures.
G. Buffer width reduction and mitigation.
(1) A property owner may petition the Board of Supervisors for a
reduction of the riparian buffer width requirements. Such request
must be accompanied by evidence that strict compliance cannot be
achieved because of unique circumstances of the property. The
Board of Supervisors shall consider the recommendation of the
Township Engineer prior to granting any request to reduce the
riparian buffer width; however, the minimum width of any riparian
buffer shall not be less than 35 feet at any one location, except at
approved stream bank crossings. Those areas having a minimum
total width of 35 feet (or less at approved stream crossings) shall
comprise no more than 50% of the entire buffer length of the
subject parcel.
(2) Should a reduction in the riparian buffer width be granted, the
Board of Supervisors shall require riparian buffer mitigation
elsewhere on the subject property. In such cases, mitigation of the
buffer area shall be at a 2:1 square foot replacement ratio.
(3) Mitigation shall be applied to each side of the stream
independently (i.e., if a property encompasses both sides of a
stream, buffer mitigation can be applied to both sides, but must be
independent of one another for purposes of calculating the size of
the mitigation area).
H. Waiver of the riparian buffer requirements.
(1) If any provisions of the riparian buffer regulations are found to be
unreasonable and cause undue or unnecessary hardship as they
apply to a proposed subdivision and/or land development plan, the
Board of Supervisors may waive the regulations in accordance with
§ 11-4.1A of this chapter. Waiver requests must be accompanied by
evidence that strict compliance cannot be achieved because of
unique circumstances of the property.
(2) A waiver of buffer requirements is prohibited in subdivisions and/or
land development plans that propose the following activities:
(a) Subsurface discharge from a wastewater treatment facility.
(b) Junkyards.
(c) Commercial or industrial storage and/or service of motor
vehicle facilities.
(d) Commercial storage tanks for fuel and fuel oil.
(e) Commercial greenhouses or landscape supply facilities.
§ 11-4.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4.14
AO:301
(f) Commercial or public pools.
(g) Concentrated animal feed operations.
(h) Veterinary hospitals, commercial kennels and/or similar
operations.
I. Riparian buffer mitigation.
(1) All subdivision and land development plans submitted to the
Township shall clearly illustrate the riparian buffer area or include
a note indicating that there is no riparian buffer area on the subject
property.
(2) Riparian buffer areas which remain in their natural state or comply
with the permitted uses identified in Subsection E of this section
are exempt from buffer mitigation; however, earth disturbance
activities proposed for a subdivision or land development must
comply with Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
erosion and sedimentation control regulations (25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102).
(3) Subdivisions and land developments that propose activity involving
grading, tilling, digging or filling of ground or stripping of
vegetation or other activity that causes an alteration to the natural
condition of the land within or touching a riparian buffer area shall
be required to illustrate on the plan the scope of the disturbance to
the riparian buffer area. Mitigation of the disturbed area of the
riparian buffer is required at a 1:1 square foot ratio, in accordance
with the following specifications:
(a) Existing plantings intended to be counted toward mitigation of
riparian buffer disturbance shall be clearly illustrated on
subdivision or land development plan submissions.
(b) Riparian buffer mitigation plantings must include at least four
tree species and two shrub species from the list included in
Appendix B,109 adapted from the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection's Stream ReLeaf Program for
Pennsylvania Native Riparian Tree/Shrub Plant Selection.
Plantings shall occur prior to April 15 or after leaf fall in the
autumn. Plantings shall include a mix of species at a rate of
100 to 125 containerized or ball and burlap trees and shrubs
per acre at approximately twenty-foot by twenty-foot spacing
or 400 bare root trees and shrubs per acre at approximately
ten-foot by ten-foot spacing.
(c) A survival rate of at least 70% after three years is required for
any trees or shrubs planted in the riparian buffer area.
Replanting may be necessary during the three-year period, but
109. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 11-4.14 HARRIS CODE § 11-4.14
AO:302
in any case shall be required at the end of the third growing
season following planting to meet the 70% overall survival rate
requirement.
(d) Riparian buffer mitigation plantings and their location within
the buffer area shall be evaluated to verify their ability to
relieve the effects of any proposed disturbance within the
riparian buffer area. Any mitigation shall identify the existing
conditions (vegetation, floodplain, wetlands, soils, slopes, etc.),
all proposed activities, and, if applicable, any proposed
management techniques.
J. Stream crossing standards. All stream crossings permitted under
Subsection E of this section shall comply with and incorporate the
following minimum standards:
(1) Stream crossings requiring any activity in, under and/or over any
body of water shall first consult the Department of Environmental
Protection's North Central Regional Office, Watershed
Management Permitting and Technical Services Section, or other
appropriate office designated by DEP.
(2) The width of any right-of-way shall not be greater than the
minimum right-of-way width required by this chapter.
(3) Stream crossings shall be designed to cross at direct right angles to
minimize disturbance to the riparian buffer area.
(4) Stream crossings on the same property shall be separated by a
minimum of 1,000 feet of stream length.
(5) Bridges, with the appropriate federal and/or state permits, shall be
used in place of culverts when crossings would require a seventytwo-
inch or greater diameter pipe. When culverts are installed,
they shall consist of slab, arch or box culverts and not corrugated
metal pipe. Culvert bottoms shall be depressed in accordance with
Department of Environmental Protection regulations to allow for
the natural flow of water through the culvert during low-flow or
dry-weather periods.
(6) Any disturbance to the riparian buffer as a result of a stream
crossing shall be mitigated at a ratio of 1:1 for each square foot of
disturbance, in accordance with the riparian buffer mitigation
specifications found in Subsection I of this section. Such mitigation
shall occur immediately adjacent to the stream crossing.
K. Definitions. The following words and/or phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings given to them in this subsection,
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
AGRICULTURAL USE — See "farm use."
§ 11-4.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4.14
AO:303
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — A structural or
nonstructural device designed to temporarily store or treat urban
stormwater runoff in order to mitigate flooding, pollution and reduce
soil loss and water quality degradation caused by nutrients, animal
wastes, toxins, sediments and runoff.
CHESAPEAKE BAY TRIBUTARY STRATEGY — Pennsylvania's
Chesapeake Bay Tributary Strategy is a catalog of measures that, if
applied to the state's Susquehanna and Potomac Watersheds, will
generate appreciable sediment and nutrient reductions in order to
provide cleaner water resources in the state and downstream at the
Chesapeake Bay.
FARM USE — The use of land and structures for one or more of
the following: the tilling of the land, the raising of crops, fruits, and
vegetables, and the raising and keeping of animals and plants,
horticultural uses related to the raising, propagating, and selling of
trees, shrubs, flowers, and other plant materials, forestry uses related
to the harvesting of lumber products.
FORESTRY — The management of forests and timberlands when
practiced in accordance with accepted silvicultural principles, through
developing, cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling of trees
for commercial purposes, which does not involve any kind of land
development.
HERBICIDES — Chemicals developed to control or eradicate plants.
INSECTICIDES — Chemicals developed to control or eradicate insects.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A body of water flowing in a channel or
bed composed primarily of substrates associated with flowing water,
which during periods of the year is below the local water table and
obtains its flow from both surface runoff and groundwater discharges.
JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND — Areas regulated by the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers that are inundated or saturated by surface water or
groundwater at a frequency or duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil.
LEVEL SPREADER — A device used to disperse concentrated
stormwater flow uniformly over the ground surface as sheet flow.
MPC — Acronym for the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
Act 247, as amended.110
NUTRIENT — A substance that provides food or nourishment, such
as usable proteins, vitamins, minerals or carbohydrates. Fertilizers,
particularly phosphorus and nitrogen, are the most common nutrients
that contribute to eutrophication.
110. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 11-4.14 HARRIS CODE § 11-4.14
AO:304
NUTRIENT LOADING — A quantity of nutrients, such as phosphorus
and nitrogen, entering an ecosystem in a given period of time.
OPEN SPACE — A portion of a development site which is permanently
set aside for public or private use and will not be developed with
structures. The space may be used for passive or active recreation, or
may be reserved to protect or buffer natural areas.
PERENNIAL STREAM — Streams which flow continuously.
RIPARIAN BUFFER AREAS — The areas where development is
restricted or prohibited that extend a total width of 50 feet from the
defined edge of perennial and intermittent streams and jurisdictional
wetlands.
RIPARIAN BUFFER MAP — Harris Township map that illustrates the
location of riparian buffer areas once they are established through
subdivision or land development activity.
STREAM — A general term for a body of flowing water; natural
watercourse containing water at least part of the year. In hydrology, it
is generally applied to the water flowing in a natural channel as distinct
from a canal.
STREAM CROSSING — A bridge, ford or structure installed across a
stream or watercourse for temporary and/or permanent use as a means
of ingress and egress, livestock, or construction and/or agricultural
vehicles.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD (TMDL) — A tool for establishing the
allowable loadings of a given pollutant in a surface water resource to
meet predetermined water quality standards.
WATERSHED — All the land area that contributes runoff to a particular
point along a waterway.
L. Boundary interpretation and appeals procedure.
(1) When a landowner or applicant disputes the boundaries of the
riparian buffer or the defined edge of a perennial or intermittent
stream or jurisdictional wetland, the landowner or applicant shall
submit evidence to the Township describing the boundary,
illustrating the landowner or applicant's proposed boundary, and
presenting all justification for the proposed boundary change.
(2) Any challenges to any municipal interpretation of the riparian
buffer regulations may be appealed to the Zoning Hearing Board
under the provisions of Article IX, Zoning Hearing Board and Other
Administrative Proceedings, of the Municipalities Planning Code
(MPC), Act 247, as amended.111 The party contesting the location of
the district boundary shall have the burden of proof in the case of
any such appeal.
111. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10901 et seq.
§ 11-4.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4.14
AO:305
M. Inspection of riparian buffer area.
(1) Lands within or adjacent to an identified riparian buffer area will be
inspected by the Township when a subdivision and/or land
development plan is submitted.
(2) The riparian buffer area may also be inspected periodically by the
Township for compliance with any required riparian buffer
restoration in accordance with recommendations for improvements
identified in Subsection I of this section and when excessive or
potentially problematic erosion, sedimentation, hazardous trees or
an unauthorized activity or structure is brought to the attention of
the Township.
§ 11-4.14 HARRIS CODE § 11-4.14
AO:306
ARTICLE V
Administration and Enforcement
§ 11-5.1. Authority to administer and enforce; fees and costs.
The Township Board of Supervisors, or its duly appointed representatives,
shall have the duty and authority for the administration and general
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, as specified herein. Permits
required by the Township for the erection or alteration of buildings, the
installation of sewage disposal systems, or for other appurtenant
improvements to or use of the land shall not be issued by any municipal
official unless in accordance with the procedures specified herein.
§ 11-5.2. Violations and penalties.
A. Subdivision of land. Fees for submission of subdivision and land
development plans shall be in such amounts as may be established from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.112
B. Costs. The owner or subdivider submitting any intended land
subdivision shall execute an agreement with the Township of Harris,
which agreement shall provide that the owner or subdivider shall
reimburse the Township of Harris for the actual cost of all fees and
expenses for engineering services that the Township may incur in
connection with the review of the plan for land subdivision submitted by
the owner or subdivider, cost of test borings which will be taken to
ascertain compliance with thickness and compaction requirements of
improved roadways to be accepted by the Township, and any additional
expenses incurred by the Harris Township Sewage Enforcement Officer
for required on-site investigations.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a
civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a
judgment of not more than $500, plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township as a result thereof.
No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the
date of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial District
Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable
Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation, unless the Magisterial District Judge
determining that there has been a violation further determines that
there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation
violating this chapter to have believed that there was no such violation,
in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such
violation until the fifth day following the date of the determination of a
violation by the Magisterial District Judge, and, thereafter, each day
that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.113
112. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 11-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-5.2
AO:307
§ 11-5.3. Amendments.
Provisions of this chapter may, from time to time, be amended through
action of the Board of Supervisors in the manner provided by Article V of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, 53 P.S. § 10501
et seq.
B. The Township may initiate and maintain civil action:
(1) To obtain injunctive relief against the owner or agency who
attempts the improper sale or conveyance of land.
(2) To set aside and invalidate any conveyances of land made prior to
plan approval of any subdivision.
(3) To enforce, at law or in equity, any of the provisions of this chapter.
C. Nothing herein shall prevent the Township from taking such other
action necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 11-5.2 HARRIS CODE § 11-5.3
AO:308
ARTICLE VI
Terminology
§ 11-6.1. Word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
§ 11-6.2. Definitions. [Amended 10-9-1995 by Ord. No. 169;
2-9-2004 by Ord. No. 241; 3-14-2005 by Ord. No. 252]
Unless a contrary intention clearly appears, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings given in this section. All words and terms
not defined herein shall be used with a meaning of standard usage.
ACREAGE OF PROPERTY — The area contained within the property lines of
a lot.
ALLEY — A street, usually located to the rear or side of properties otherwise
abutting a street, used primarily for vehicular service access.
AMENDMENT — Any change or revision of this chapter.
APPLICANT — A subdivider, owner, or developer, as hereinafter defined,
who has filed an application for subdivision or land development, including
his heirs, successors, and assigns.
BLOCK — An area bounded by streets and usually divided into lots.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The governing body of the Township of Harris,
County of Centre, Pennsylvania.
BOULEVARD ENTRANCE — Any entrance with two distinct travel lanes
which are separated by a median a minimum of 16 feet wide.
CARTWAY — The portion of a street right-of-way designed or intended for
vehicular use.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender, and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, or any other
similar entity.
D. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
E. The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed,
maintained, or arranged to be used or occupied."
§ 11-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-6.2
AO:309
CENTER LINE — A line running parallel to and equidistant from both sides
of a street.
CENTRE REGION — A geographic area in Centre County, Pennsylvania,
consisting of the Townships of College, Ferguson, Halfmoon, Harris, and
Patton, and the Borough of State College.
CERTIFIED NURSERY STOCK — A guarantee from a nursery that each
shade tree ordered is healthy and true to name.
COMMUNITY SEWAGE SYSTEM — Any system for the collection of sewage
or industrial wastes of a liquid nature from two or more lots, and the
treatment and/or disposal of the sewage or industrial waste on one or more
of the lots or at any other site.
COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM — Any public or private water system that
serves more than 15 homes or 25 residents.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The Harris Township Comprehensive Plan,
adopted September 8, 1976, by Resolution No. R-76-17.
COUNTY — The County of Centre, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
CUL-DE-SAC — Any roadway system with a single means of entry and exit.
The cul-de-sac consists of a stem and a turnaround and is measured from
the end of the turnaround to the point where the stem intersects with a
roadway that has two means of entry and exit.
CUT — The difference between a point on the original ground and
designated point of lower elevation on the final grade; an excavation.
DEAD-END STREET — A street with only one vehicular traffic outlet.
DEDICATION — The conveyance of land or objects to some public use, made
by the owner, and accepted for such use by or on behalf of the public by a
Township, school district, or public authority.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
ELEVATION — Height, in feet, of a point on the ground above sea level.
ENGINEER, TOWNSHIP — A professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the Engineer for the
Township.
EROSION — The removal of soil, stone, or other surface materials by the
action of natural elements.
ESCROW — A deposit of cash in lieu of an amount required and still in force
on a performance or maintenance bond.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
or relocated.
FILL — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar
material is placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported, or moved to a new
§ 11-6.2 HARRIS CODE § 11-6.2
AO:310
location above the natural surface of the ground or on top of the stripped
surface; the difference in elevation between a point on the original ground
and a designated point of higher elevation of the final grade; the material
used to make fill.
FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROAD — A road that provides fire apparatus
access from a fire station to a facility, building, or portion thereof. This is a
general term inclusive of all other terms such as "fire lane," "public street,"
"private street," "parking lot lane," and "access roadway."
FIRE CHIEF — The Chief of the Boalsburg Fire Company or a duly
authorized Assistant Chief.
FIRE DEPARTMENT CONNECTION — Any hose connection utilized by the
Fire Department to supply water to a built-in fire-protection system.
FIRE FLOW — The flow rate of a water supply, measured at 20 pounds per
square inch (psi) residual pressure, that is available for firefighting.
FLOODPLAIN — Areas subject to frequent periodic flooding as defined by
Chapter 12, Zoning, of the Code of the Township of Harris.
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Harris,
County of Centre, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
GRADE — The slope of ground, street, or other public way, specified in
percentage of change in elevation per horizontal distance; the act of
altering the topography of undisturbed land.
HALF STREET — A street, generally parallel with and adjacent to a property
line, having a lesser right-of-way width than required by this chapter for
improvements and use as a street.
IMPROVEMENT — Those physical additions and installations required to
render land suitable for the use intended, and including streets, curbs
and gutters, sidewalks, street signs and lights, walkways, sewer and water
facilities, monuments and markers, shade trees, grading, and stormwater
drainage facilities.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any subdivision or land development activity as
defined by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.114
LICENSED ENGINEER/LAND SURVEYOR — Licensed professional
engineer or land surveyor registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
LOT — An area of land, including watercourses, held in single and separate
ownership; includes tract and parcel.
LOT LINE — A boundary line of a lot; includes property line.
DOUBLE OR REVERSE FRONTAGE LOT — A lot with front and rear
street frontage; a lot extending between, and having frontage on, an
arterial and minor street.
A.
114. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 11-6.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-6.2
AO:311
MUNICIPAL — Of or for the Township of Harris, unless specifically in
reference to another township.
NFPA — The National Fire Protection Association, a national association
established for the purpose of proposing standards that reduce the
opportunity for injury or death from fire.
NORTH POINT — An arrow on a plan depicting true North.
OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS — Public capital improvements which are not
on-site improvements and that serve the needs of more than one
development.
ON-SITE IMPROVEMENTS — All improvements constructed on the
applicant's property, or the improvements constructed on the property
abutting the applicant's property necessary for the ingress and egress to
the applicant's property, and required to be constructed by the applicant
pursuant to municipal ordinance, including, but not limited to, the
Municipal Building Code, this chapter, PRD regulations, and Chapter 12,
Zoning, of the Code of the Township of Harris.
ON-SITE SEWER SERVICE — A sanitary sewage disposal system in which
sewage is treated and discharged on the same lot as the use which it serves.
OWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the owner, or other persons having a
proprietary interest in the land, shall be deemed to be an owner for the
purposes of this chapter; landowner.
PARKLAND — A parcel or parcels of land designed and intended for the use
or enjoyment of the residents of a subdivision or nearby residential area.
Parkland contains that land and encompasses that area upon which active
and/or passive activities are designed to take place. It is also referred to
as the property to be dedicated by the property owner to the municipality
pursuant to § 11-4.12, Parkland dedication requirements; fee-in-lieu option.
PERIMETER BOUNDARY — See "lot line."
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Harris Township Planning Commission,
Township of Harris, County of Centre, Pennsylvania.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A corridor of land set aside for use, in whole or in part,
by a street.
RUNOFF — The surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a given
watershed after a fall of rain, snow, or other form of precipitation that does
not enter the soil but runs off the surface of the land.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by the movement of wind and water or by gravity.
SEED — To plant an area of ground with grass or similar vegetative ground
cover.
§ 11-6.2 HARRIS CODE § 11-6.2
AO:312
SHARED-USE PATH — A bikeway physically separated from motor vehicle
traffic by an open space or barrier and either within the highway rightof-
way or within an independent right-of-way. Shared-use paths may also
be used by pedestrians, skaters, wheelchair users, joggers and other
nonmotorized users. Most shared-use paths are designed for two-way
travel.[Added 4-23-2014 by Ord. No. 310]
SIGHT DISTANCE — The required length of cartway visible to the driver
of a motor vehicle at any given point in the cartway when the view is
unobstructed by traffic.
SLOPE — The angle of the surface of the land to the plane of the horizon.
STEEP SLOPE — Land with a slope as defined by Chapter 12, Zoning, of the
Code of the Township of Harris.
STREET — A public or private corridor used as a means of vehicular and
pedestrian access to two or more lots; a highway, road, or alley.
SUBDIVIDER — The owner of a lot, tract, or parcel of land to be subdivided
under the terms of this chapter.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, transfer of ownership, or building or lot
development. Includes resubdivision, the combining of two or more lots into
one lot. However, the division of land for agricultural purposes into parcels
of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access,
shall be exempted.
ARTERIAL STREET — A major street with fast or heavy traffic of
considerable continuity used primarily as a traffic artery connecting
two or more neighborhoods or areas. Primary arterial streets extend
through the entire urban area, while secondary arterial streets extend
through only a portion of the area. For the purpose of this chapter,
existing primary arterial streets include State College Bypass, including
entrance and exit ramps and the Route 45 spur from the College
Township line to the intersection with U.S. 322; Pa. 45; U.S. 322.
A.
COLLECTOR STREET — A major street which carries traffic from local
streets to arterial streets. For the purpose of this chapter, existing
collector streets include the following: Branch Road; Woodside Drive;
Main Street; Church Street; Boalsburg Pike; L.R. 14061 to L.R. 14020
(Linden Hall Road) to T 345 to L.R. 14021 (Brush Valley Road) to the
Potter Township line.
B.
LOCAL STREET — Any street not herein defined as an alley, arterial,
collector, or marginal-access street.
C.
MARGINAL-ACCESS STREET — A minor street, parallel and adjacent
to a major street, which provides direct access to abutting properties
and control of intersections with the major street.
D.
§ 11-6.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-6.2
AO:313
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Harris, County of Centre, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
WALKWAY — A right-of-way intended to furnish pedestrian and bicycle
access across a block from one street to another.
§ 11-6.2 HARRIS CODE § 11-6.2
AO:314
ARTICLE VII
Land Development Transportation Impact Reports
[Added 10-9-1995 by Ord. No. 169]
§ 11-7.1. Transportation impact report requirements.
A. Study threshold.
(1) A transportation impact report shall be required for any subdivision
or land development projected to generate at least 500 trip ends
per day. The projected number of trip ends will be determined
through use of the unit trip-end values presented in the Institute of
Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Manual, as
amended, multiplied by the size of the proposed development.
Planning staff will determine the appropriate ITE land use category
to be used for a proposed development.
(2) A transportation impact report may also be required due to a
localized safety or capacity deficiency, such as but not limited to the
following:
(a) Current traffic problems in the local area, such as a highaccident
location; confusing intersection, signage or
geometries; or an intersection in need of additional traffic
signals.
(b) The sensitivity of the adjacent neighborhoods or other land
areas that may be impacted.
(c) The proximity of existing or proposed driveways to other
nearby driveways or intersections.
(d) The ability of the adjacent, existing, or planned roadway
system to handle increased traffic; or the feasibility of
improving the roadway system to handle increased traffic.
(e) Other specific problems or deficiencies that may be affected by
the proposed development or affect the ability of the
development to be satisfactorily accommodated.
B. Study content. The extent and scope of a proposed transportation
impact report shall be relative to the size and location of the proposed
development. The costs of preparing such report shall be borne by the
land developer. The delineation of the study area, required data
collection effort, and required analyses will be determined by Harris
Township staff and the developer's consultant. The report shall include
the following, as a minimum:
(1) A description of existing conditions and traffic volumes for the road
network within the study area.
§ 11-7.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-7.1
AO:315
(2) An analysis which shall describe existing levels of service; analysis
and description of projected traffic conditions based on the land
uses proposed within the development at build-out; trip generation
rates for morning and evening peak hours of the project; and
internal/external site trip distribution and intersection analyses.
(3) The report shall evaluate the traffic impacts of the proposed
development and identify the need for road, access and traffic
control improvements as a result of the proposed development.
(4) The analysis shall describe recommended internal, adjacent, and
off-site road improvements. The developer must construct all onsite
improvements. These recommended improvements should be
specific as to location and scope of work required and include a
phased schedule for implementation. Examples of additional items
that should be included in this section are:
(a) Typical cross sections for each category of street.
(b) A phasing plan that identifies the street improvements during
the construction of each development phase.
(5) Evaluation of alternate modes of transportation shall be included in
the traffic impact analysis. Evaluation of traffic mitigation
measures as they relate to public transportation, future site
development, and land use configurations should also be
addressed.
§ 11-7.1 HARRIS CODE § 11-7.1
AO:316
Chapter 12
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Weed removal — See Ch. 5, Art. I.
Open burning — See Ch. 5, Art. VI.
Construction codes — See Ch. 10.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
11.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 13.
§ 11-7.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-7.1
AO:317

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 12-1.1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Harris Township
Zoning Ordinance."
§ 12-1.2. Authority.
This chapter is enacted and ordained under the grant of powers by the
General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act of 1968, July 31, P.L. 805, as amended, 53
P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 12-1.3. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted for the following purposes:
§ 12-1.4. Community development objectives.
The community development objectives of this chapter are the goals,
objectives, and policies of the Harris Township Comprehensive Plan, as
applicable to the purposes of this chapter.
§ 12-1.5. Establishment of controls.
In their interpretation and application, the regulations set by this chapter
within each district shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted
for the promotion of the purposes of this chapter and shall apply with
uniformity to each class of use or structure:
A. To promote, protect, and facilitate public health, safety, morals, general
welfare, coordinated and practical community development, proper
density of population, civil defense, disaster evacuation, airports and
national defense facilities, the provision of adequate light and air, police
protection, vehicle parking and loading space, transportation, water,
sewerage, schools, public grounds, and other public requirements.
B. To prevent the following: overcrowding of land, blight, danger and
congestion in travel and transportation, loss of health, life, or property
from fire, flood, panic, or other dangers. This chapter is made in
accordance with the Harris Township Comprehensive Plan, and with
consideration of the character of the Township, its various parts, and
the suitability of the various parts for particular uses and structures.
A. Types of control. The following regulations shall apply in the respective
districts: use regulations, including primary and accessory uses; lot
requirements, including size, width, and coverage; setback
requirements for front, side, and rear yards; maximum height
requirements; and supplemental regulations.
§ 12-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-1.5
AO:319
B. New lots, uses, and structures. In all districts after the effective date of
this chapter, any new lot, use, or structure shall be constructed,
developed, and used only in accordance with the regulations specified
for each district.
C. Existing lots, uses, and structures. In all districts after the effective date
of this chapter, any existing lot, use, or structure which is not in
conformity with the regulations for the district in which it is located
shall be deemed as nonconforming, and subject to the regulations of
Article VIII.
D. Relationship with other restrictions. The provisions of this chapter are
not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul other rules,
regulations, or ordinances, provided that where this chapter imposes a
greater restriction than that imposed by such other rules, easements,
covenants, restrictions, regulations, or ordinances, the provisions of
this chapter shall control.
E. Exemptions. This chapter shall not apply to any lot, use, or structure
which is owned or leased by the Township of Harris, or which is
exempted from zoning regulations by the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., or other laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 12-1.5 HARRIS CODE § 12-1.5
AO:320
ARTICLE II
Establishment of Districts
§ 12-2.1. Districts established. [Amended 9-14-1987 by Ord. No.
109; 9-14-1992 by Ord. No. 145; 10-9-2000 by Ord. No. 208;
9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 331]
For the purposes of this chapter, the Township is hereby divided into the
following districts.
District Map Symbol
Rural Districts
Agricultural District A
Forest District F
Rural Commercial District RC
Residential Districts
Single-Family Residential
District
R-1
Two-Family Residential
District
R-2
Multifamily Residential
District
R-3
Village District V
Commercial Districts
Residential-Office District RO
General Commercial
District
C-1
Cultural District CU
Village Commercial VC
Industrial Districts
General Industrial District I-1
Corridor Overlay District COD
§ 12-2.2. Annexed territory.
All territory which may hereafter be annexed by the Township shall be
automatically included in the district which most nearly corresponds to the
use of the land at the time of annexation, unless otherwise specified in the
ordinance of annexation.
§ 12-2.3. Official Map. [Amended 9-14-1987 by Ord. No. 109]
The boundaries of the districts in which this Township is divided shall
be shown upon a map entitled the "Official Zoning Map of the Township
§ 12-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.3
AO:321
of Harris." Said map and all notations, references, and other data shown
thereon is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter as if it was
fully described herein.
A. Adoption of the Official Zoning Map. The Official Zoning Map shall be
identified by the signatures of the Township Supervisors, attested by
the Township Secretary, under the following words: "This is to certify
that this is the Official Zoning Map of the Township of Harris referred to
in Chapter 12, § 12-2.3, of the Code of the Township of Harris, Centre
County, Pennsylvania," together with the date of enactment of the
chapter. The Map shall be kept on file with the Township Zoning Officer,
and shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land
and water areas in the Township.
B. Changes in the Official Zoning Map. If, in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, changes are made in district boundaries or
other matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, such changes shall
be entered promptly on said map. All changes shall be certified by
initialing of the Township Supervisors, together with a brief description
of the changes and the date of enactment of such changes, under the
word "Revised." No amendment to this chapter which involves matter
portrayed on the Official Zoning Map shall become effective until after
such change and entry has been shown on said map.
C. Replacement of the Official Zoning Map.
(1) In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, lost,
or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes,
the Board of Supervisors may, by resolution, adopt a new Official
Zoning Map which shall supersede the previous map. The new
Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signatures of the
Township Supervisors, attested by the Township Secretary, under
the following words: "This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map
supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted August 1,
1978, as part of Ord. 80, readopted as part of the Code by Ord. 97,
1-13-1983, of the Township of Harris, Centre County,
Pennsylvania," together with the date of adoption of the resolution.
(2) The previous Official Zoning Map or any significant parts thereof
remaining shall be preserved, together with all available records
pertaining to its adoption or amendment.
D. District boundary lines. The district boundary lines shall be shown on
the Official Zoning Map. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries
of districts, the following rules shall apply:
(1) Boundaries indicated as approximately following center lines of
streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such center
lines.
(2) Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines
shall be construed as following such lot lines.
§ 12-2.3 HARRIS CODE § 12-2.3
AO:322
§ 12-2.4. Use regulations. [Amended 11-18-1981 by Ord. No. 95;
9-14-1987 by Ord. No. 109; 9-14-1992 by Ord. No. 145; 4-12-1993 by
Ord. No. 147; 4-12-1993 by Ord. No. 148; 10-13-1997 by Ord. No.
187; 4-13-1998 by Ord. No. 196; 7-13-1998 by Ord. No. 197;
5-14-2001 by Ord. No. 211; 8-23-2001 by Ord. No. 215; 6-25-2003 by
Ord. No. 235]
(3) Boundaries indicated as approximately following Township limits
shall be construed as following Township limits.
(4) Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed
to be midway between the main tracks.
(5) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streams or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such
center lines and, in the event the stream or other body of water
moves, the boundary shall move with the center line of such.
(6) Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extension of features
indicated in Subsection D(1) through (5) above shall be so
construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Official
Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the map.
(7) Where physical features existing on the ground are alleged to be at
variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other
circumstances not covered by Subsection D(1) through (6) above, it
shall be the function of the Zoning Officer to interpret and apply the
map.
(8) Where one or more district boundary lines divides a lot held in
single ownership, the regulations of one of the districts on either
side of any such boundary line may be chosen by the owner to apply
to the portion of such lot in the district on the other side of such line
for a distance of not more than 50 feet beyond the district boundary
lines, provided lot requirements are met for said portions.
A. The use of land and structures shall be limited to only the primary and
accessory uses permitted in each zoning district, unless specifically
emitted, exempted, or otherwise modified by this or other sections of
this chapter. All other uses not expressly permitted are prohibited. In
addition to the regulations stipulated for each use in Articles II through
VII, the following use regulations shall apply:
(1) Accessory uses. All accessory structures, except where otherwise
permitted by this chapter, shall comply with the lot, yard setback,
and maximum height requirements for the primary use to which it
is accessory. Accessory uses and structures may include, but are
not limited to, the following: [Amended 8-15-2018 by Ord. No.
332]
(a) All properties located in the Village District and single-family
detached dwellings in all zoning districts may include one
§ 12-2.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.4
AO:323
accessory dwelling unit conforming to the following
requirements:
[1] The accessory dwelling unit shall be part of the primary
dwelling or for properties located in the Village District,
part of the primary structure with frontage on Main Street
and/or Church Street.
[2] The total floor area of the apartment shall not exceed
1,000 square feet; in no case shall the area of the
accessory dwelling unit, measured in square feet, equal or
exceed the area of any dwelling to which it is accessory.
[3] Two additional off-street parking spaces shall be provided
for an accessory dwelling unit.
[4] Property owners of dwellings with accessory dwelling
units shall obtain required permits from the Centre Region
Code Administration or its successor prior to occupancy of
the apartment.
(b) Industrial uses may include a retail factory outlet for the sale of
those products produced on the premises, provided that the
floor area of such outlet does not exceed 25% of the total floor
area of the primary structure.
(c) Swimming pools are permitted as accessory structures in any
district, provided that outdoor pools capable of containing
water 18 inches or more in depth shall meet the following
requirements:
[1] No swimming pool may be located in any front or side yard
setback area, but may be located in the rear yard setback
area, provided that no part of the pool, including paved
areas or accessory structures, excluding fencing, be
located within 20 feet or rear property lines nor from the
side lot line of a distance equivalent to the side yard
setback for a structure within the applicable district.
[2] All outdoor swimming pools below ground level shall be
completely surrounded by a fence or wall not less than
four feet in height, which shall be so constructed as not to
have openings, holes, or gaps larger than six inches in
either height or width. Should the wall of the pool be above
ground, the required fence or wall may be securely affixed
to the top of the pool wall so that the total height of the
wall of the pool and the fence or wall shall not be less than
four feet.
[3] All gates or doors opening through such required fence or
wall shall be equipped with a self-latching device capable
§ 12-2.4 HARRIS CODE § 12-2.4
AO:324
of being locked for keeping the gate or door securely
closed at all times when not in use.
(d) Small accessory buildings of not more than 144 square feet in
ground floor area and 10 feet in height are permitted in the
side and rear yard setback areas, provided they are not placed
closer than six feet from any lot line.
(2) Airports and landing strips. All commercial airports and landing
strips shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
standards of the Federal Aviation Agency.
(3) Automobile service stations. In addition to the district regulations
specified, all automobile service stations shall meet the following
regulations:
(a) The dismantling of motor vehicles shall be performed within a
completely enclosed building, and all dismantled motor
vehicles, and parts thereof, shall be stored within such
buildings.
(b) Fuel pumps may be located within the front yard setback area,
provided such are at least 30 feet from any lot line.
(4) Auto wrecking, junk, and scrap establishments. In addition to the
district regulations specified, all auto wrecking, junk, and scrap
establishments shall meet the following regulations:
(a) All material shall be placed in such manner that it is incapable
of being transferred off the premises by wind, water, or other
natural cause.
(b) No material shall be placed within the front, side, or rear yard
setbacks areas. All yard setback areas shall at all times be
clean, vacant, and maintained.
(c) All paper, cloth and rags, and other fibers, and activities
involving the same, other than loading and unloading, shall be
within fully enclosed buildings.
(d) All materials and activities not within fully enclosed buildings
shall be surrounded by a fence or wall at least six feet in
height. Such fence shall be completely sight-obscuring from
any point on the lot line and maintained in good condition. No
such fence may be permitted in any yard setback area. Any
gate in a fence shall be similarly constructed and maintained,
and shall be kept securely locked at all times when the
establishment is not in operation.
(e) All gasoline and oil shall be drained from any junked motor
vehicle into containers and stored at only one location on the
premises. No more than 20 gallons in aggregate shall be stored
above ground.
§ 12-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.4
AO:325
(f) Fire hazards shall be minimized by the segregation of
combustible from noncombustible materials, and the provision
of adequate aisles for escape and firefighting equipment.
(g) The storage of material in piles shall not exceed 10 feet in
height.
(h) The manner of storage and arrangement of junk and the
drainage facilities of the premises shall be such as to prevent
the accumulation of stagnant water.
(i) Every structure erected upon the lot after August 6, 1978, shall
be of fireproof construction.
(5) Child day-care centers. In addition to the district regulations
specified, all child day-care centers shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) Child day-care centers shall be located only on lots with direct
motor vehicle access onto collector or arterial streets in the
districts where they are permitted uses.
(b) All outdoor play areas shall be completely enclosed by a fence
or wall with a minimum height of four feet. Such play areas
shall not be placed in the front or side yard setback area.
(6) Churches and other places of worship and theaters for the
performing arts and auditoriums. Churches and other places of
worship and theaters for the performing arts and auditoriums shall
be located only on lots with direct motor vehicle access onto
collector or arterial streets in the districts where they are
permitted uses.
(7) Convenience food stores. Convenience food stores are defined as
small stores permitted in selected rural and residential districts
which retail food and beverages primarily to the immediately
surrounding population. Sales of additional products, when clearly
incidental and subordinate to the retailing of food and beverages,
may include nonprescription drugs, housewares, periodicals and
tobacco. The sale of gasoline and oil, and food beverages for
consumption on the premises, is expressly prohibited. In addition
to the district regulations specified, all convenience food stores
shall meet the following requirements:
(a) No convenience food store shall have a gross floor area
exceeding 2,500 square feet.
(b) Except for driveways and walkways, all yards shall have a
continuous buffer yard extending 10 feet in depth from the
front lot line and 25 feet in depth from the side and rear lot
lines. The buffer yard shall be planted with a vegetative ground
cover and maintained; and shall also include a continuous,
§ 12-2.4 HARRIS CODE § 12-2.4
AO:326
sight-obscuring evergreen hedge or shrubs planted parallel to
the lot line. Such hedge or shrub shall reach a height of at least
six feet at maturity, unless adjacent to a street, in which case,
such hedge or shrub shall not exceed 2 1/2 feet in height.115
(c) All sales and display shall be within completely enclosed
buildings, and there shall be no display or storage of any
material outside such buildings. No public address systems or
other devices for reproducing or amplifying voices or music
shall be mounted outside such buildings or be audible beyond
any lot line on which the building is situated.
(d) The convenience food store may include one dwelling unit.
(8) Dwelling units, attached. In addition to the district regulations
specified, no buildings used for attached dwelling units shall
exceed 200 feet in length.
(9) Farm uses. In addition to the district regulations specified, the
outdoor storage of silage or hydrated manure in bulk for farm uses
shall not be permitted within 150 feet of any lot line.
(10) Golf courses, pitch putt golf courses, and driving ranges. In
addition to the district regulations specified, all golf courses, pitch
putt golf courses, and driving ranges shall meet the following
applicable regulations:
(a) No golfing green or fairway shall be closer than 100 feet to any
lot line.
(b) Golfing tees and greens for the same hole may not be
separated by a public street.
(c) Driving ranges shall have screens or fences of a height and
location sufficient to prevent golf balls from landing on the
property of another.
(11)Home occupations. Permitted home occupations shall include
professional offices, crafts, and domestic services such as: the
professional practice of medicine and dentistry; architecture and
engineering, law, teaching, accounting, real estate, and insurance;
artists, artisans, and writers; barbers and beauticians; domestic
service such as babysitting (no more than five children who are not
regular members of the household), cooking, and sewing. Under no
circumstances shall home occupation be construed to include
motor vehicle repair and/or maintenance. All home occupations
shall conform to the following regulations:
115. Editor's Note: Former Subsection 12-2.4.1.7.3, providing prohibited hours, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 12-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.4
AO:327
(a) The home occupation shall be carried on completely within the
dwelling unit.
(b) The home occupation shall be carried on only by members of
the immediate family residing in the dwelling unit, plus not
more than one additional employee.
(c) Not more than 25% of the floor area of the dwelling shall be
devoted to home occupations.
(d) Tangible articles sold or offered for sale on the premises shall
be limited to those produced on the premises.
(e) There shall be no use of show windows or display or
advertising visible outside the premises to attract customers or
clients except as permitted in Article XIV, Signs, of this
chapter, nor shall there be any exterior storage of wares or
materials.
(f) No exterior alterations, additions, or changes to the residential
character of the dwelling unit shall be permitted in order to
accommodate or facilitate a home occupation.
(g) The home occupation shall comply with all other provisions of
this chapter.
(12) Mining and quarrying. In addition to the district regulations
specified, all mining and quarrying activity shall meet the following
regulations:
(a) No surface mining shall be conducted closer than 100 feet
from any public right-of-way or within 300 feet of any
residential district included in Article IV of this chapter.
(b) Stockpiles of excavated materials shall not be located closer
than 50 feet to any lot line, and all reasonable precaution shall
be taken to prevent any material or waste deposited upon any
stockpile from being transferred off the premises by wind,
water, or other natural cause.
(c) All drainage from the site shall be controlled by dikes, barriers,
or drainage structures sufficient to prevent any silt, debris, or
other loose materials from filling any drainage course, or
encroaching on public streets or adjacent property.
(13) Public and private nurseries, kindergartens, elementary,
secondary, and postsecondary schools. Public and private
nurseries, kindergartens, elementary, secondary, and
postsecondary schools shall locate in the districts where they are
permitted uses only when adjacent to the following street
classifications:
§ 12-2.4 HARRIS CODE § 12-2.4
AO:328
(a) Nurseries, kindergartens, and elementary schools shall be
located only on lots with direct motor vehicle access onto
collector streets.
(b) Secondary and postsecondary schools shall be located only on
lots with direct motor vehicle access onto collector or arterial
streets.
(14) Family care, group homes, and halfway houses/rehabilitation
centers.
(a) No family care, group home, or halfway house/rehabilitation
center shall be allowed unless it is certified by, and meets all
regulations of appropriate local, state, or federal agency(ies).
(b) No more than one group home or halfway house/rehabilitation
center shall be allowed per block face.
(15) Uses omitted and prohibited. This chapter is intended to apply to
all conceivable uses and structures. Under no circumstances,
however, shall the following uses be permitted in any district in the
Township:
(a) Any dumping, depositing, or filling with refuse, garbage, or
building debris not in accordance with state or Township
regulations or this chapter.
(b) The removal of topsoil and sod, except as part of the
construction, grading, or alteration of an approved building,
street, construction site or other structure, the normal
preparation and maintenance of lawns, mining and quarrying,
or the removal of sod as part of a recognized farm or garden
use.
(16) Uses prohibited in residential districts only. The raising and
keeping of animals of the equine, bovine, ovine and porcine species
even as household pets in a residential district unless as a part of a
farm use meeting the requirements in the appropriate district
regulations.
(17) Nursing homes, personal care homes, and other convalescent
homes. When located within the Forest District, in addition to the
district regulations specified, all nursing homes, personal care
homes, and convalescent homes shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) Off-street parking and aisles shall be prohibited within 50 feet
of adjoining property lines, except for the driveway access to a
street.
(b) All portions and sides of residentially occupied buildings shall
be covered with the same and/or compatible materials as are
§ 12-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.4
AO:329
used on the designated "front." Furthermore, these surfaces
shall be of materials compatible with single-family homes.
(c) This use is prohibited from the portion of any cul-de-sac street
that exceeds the maximum cul-de-sac street length allowed as
per the applicable ordinance.
(d) Standards of tree replacement on the site and screening on all
applicable sides of the parking lots shall be applied, as being
related to § 12-7.10C.
(18) Designated well sites, pump stations, treatment facilities, and
water storage tanks. Designated well sites, potable water and well
pump station facilities, water treatment facilities, and water
storage tanks are permitted as a primary use in the Single-Family
Residential District, Two-Family Residential District, Multifamily
Residential District, Residential-Office District, and Cultural
District. In all of these districts, these uses, in any form, above or
below ground level, shall be permitted if the following standards
and criteria are met:
(a) An ambient sound level study must be provided and the
ambient sound level, at all points along the boundary line of the
property upon which the use is located, shall be no more than
55 decibels [dB(A)].
(b) All items used at a potable water well pump station facility or
water storage tank facility, and being stored at the premises,
shall be stored within a building or structure so to be screened
from view.
(c) An elevation drawing shall be provided for any structure to be
constructed, whether above or below grade, on the premises.
(19) Bed-and-breakfast facilities. In addition to the district regulations
specified, all bed-and-breakfast facilities shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) Exterior alterations, additions, or changes to the dwelling unit
in order to accommodate or facilitate a bed-and-breakfast shall
retain the residential character of the dwelling unit and
surrounding area of the lot.
(b) One off-street parking space shall be provided for each guest
room, except in the Village (V) Zoning District, where the
requirements of § 12-4.4 are applicable.
(c) There shall be no use of show windows or advertising visible
outside the premises to attract customers other than that
allowed by Article XIV, Signs.
§ 12-2.4 HARRIS CODE § 12-2.4
AO:330
(d) In the Agricultural, Forest, and Rural Commercial Zoning
Districts, a maximum number of three guest rooms shall be
permitted for each bed-and-breakfast facility.
(e) In the Agricultural, Forest, and Rural Commercial Zoning
Districts, breakfasts or other meals may only be served to
registered guests of the bed-and-breakfast establishment.
(f) When any structure is to be converted to a bed-and-breakfast
use, the applicant shall comply with applicable sewage-related
regulations as determined by the Department of
Environmental Protection, the College-Harris Joint Authority,
and/or the Harris Township Sewage Enforcement Officer.
[1] Where a bed-and-breakfast facility is proposed on a
property that does or will utilize an on-lot septic disposal
system, the property owner shall be required to execute an
"Agreement for Bed-and-Breakfast Establishments with
On-Lot Septic Systems" with the Harris Township Sewage
Enforcement Officer prior to Township approval of the use;
the form for such agreement shall be obtained from the
SEO or the Zoning Officer.
(g) Parking lots, as defined by Article XI of this chapter, shall not
be required to have a paved surface when required for bedand-
breakfast facilities in the Agricultural, Forest, and Rural
Commercial Zoning Districts.
(20)Wireless communications facilities. [Added 11-13-2017 by Ord.
No. 323116]
(a) Intent. The wireless communications facilities (WCFs)
regulations are intended to achieve the following:
[1] To provide a competitive and wide range of
communications services;
[2] To encourage the shared use of existing communication
towers, buildings and structures;
[3] To ensure compliance with federal and state regulations;
[4] To promote the health, safety and welfare of Township
residents and businesses with respect to wireless
communications facilities;
[5] To address modern and developing technologies,
including, but not limited to, distributed antenna systems,
cable Wi-Fi, and other communications facilities;
116. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection A(20), Communications
towers and antennas.
§ 12-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.4
AO:331
[6] To establish procedures for design, siting, construction,
installation, maintenance and removal of both tower-based
and nontower wireless communications facilities in the
Township, including facilities both inside and outside of
the public rights-of-way; and
[7] To protect Township residents and businesses from
potential adverse impacts of wireless communications
facilities and preserve, to the extent permitted under law,
the visual character of established communities and the
natural beauty of the landscape.
(b) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated:
CO-LOCATION — The mounting of one or more
communications antennas on an existing tower-based WCF, or
on any structure that has been approved by the Township, to
support at least one communications antenna.
COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA (ANTENNA) — Any structure
or device used for the purpose of collecting or transmitting
electromagnetic waves, including, but not limited to,
directional antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes,
satellite dishes and omnidirectional antennas such as whip
antennas. "Communications antenna" shall not include towerbased
WCFs, defined below. This definition excludes antennas
and supportive structures on residential dwellings or
properties used for private, noncommercial amateur purposes,
including, but not limited to, ham radios and citizens band
radios.
COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY BUILDING — The building in
which electronic receiving and relaying equipment for a tower
is housed. Receiving and relay equipment can include, but is
not limited to, in-ground and above-ground cabling and any
equipment associated with the provision of wireless services.
MONOPOLE — A wireless communication facility or site that
consists of a single pole structure, designed and erected on the
ground or on top of a structure, to support communications
antennas and connective appurtenances. Connective
appurtenances can include, but are not limited to, feeder
cables, climb ladders, platforms, ice shields, and other
accessory infrastructure associated with a wireless
communications facility.
RELATED EQUIPMENT — Any piece of equipment related to,
incidental to, or necessary for, the operation of a tower-based
WCF or nontower WCF. By way of illustration, not limitation,
"related equipment" includes generators and base stations.
§ 12-2.4 HARRIS CODE § 12-2.4
AO:332
STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — Camouflaging methods applied to
wireless communication facilities, communications antennas
and other facilities that render them more visually appealing
and virtually indistinguishable to the casual observer. Such
methods include, but are not limited to, using architectural
methods to screen the WCF from view, painting the WCF to
match the building or structure it is mounted to, and designing
and constructing the WCF in a manner to resemble another
object, such as a flagpole, clock tower, chimney, grain silo, etc.
SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGE — A modification to an existing
wireless communications facility that changes the physical
dimensions of a tower-based WCF or base station if it meets
any of the following criteria:
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES, NONTOWER
(NONTOWER WCFS) — All wireless communications facilities
that are not tower-based, including, but not limited to,
communications antennas and related equipment. Nontower
wireless communication facilities shall not include support
For a tower-based WCF outside the public rights-of-way:
It increases the height of the facility by more than
10%, or by the height of one additional antenna array
with separation from the nearest existing antenna, not
to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater;
[a]
It protrudes from the edge of the wireless
communications facility by more than 20 feet, or more
than the width of the tower-based WCF at the level of
the appurtenance, whichever is greater.
[b]
[1]
For a tower-based WCF in the public rights-of-way:
It increases the height of the facility by more than 10%
or 10 feet, whichever is greater;
[a]
It protrudes from the edge of the structure by more
than six feet;
[b]
It involves installation of more than the standard
number of new equipment cabinets for the technology
involved, but not to exceed four cabinets;
[c]
It entails any excavation of deployment outside the
current site of the tower-based WCF; or
[d]
It does not comply with conditions associated with
prior approval of construction or modification of the
tower-based WCF unless the noncompliance is due to
an increase in height, increase in width, or addition of
cabinets.
[e]
[2]
§ 12-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.4
AO:333
structures for communication antennas and related
equipment. Not included are towers and supporting structures
on residential dwellings or properties used for private
noncommercial amateur purposes, including, but not limited
to, ham radios and citizens band radios. In addition, not
included are cable Wi-Fi antennas that are under two cubic
feet in size and that are suspended on cables strung between
utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes by or
for a cable system operator or other communications service
provider authorized to use the public right-of-way (ROW).
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES, TOWER BASED
(TOWER-BASED WCFS) — Any ground-mounted structure that
is constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one
or more communication antennas for wireless communication
purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed
towers or monopole towers.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A freestanding
structure, such as a tower-based wireless communication
facility or any other support structure that could support the
placement or installation of a nontower wireless
communications facility, if approved by the Township.
(c) General regulations. In addition to all other applicable
regulations of this chapter, wireless communications facilities
(WCFs), except those that fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless
Broadband Collocation Act,117 shall be regulated as follows:
[1] Standard of care. All WCFs shall be designed, constructed,
operated, maintained, repaired, modified and removed in
strict compliance with all current applicable technical,
safety, and safety-related codes, including, but not limited
to, the most recent editions of the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, National Electrical
Safety Code, and National Electrical Code, as well as the
accepted and responsible workmanlike industry practices
of the National Association of Tower Erectors. All WCFs
shall at all times be kept and maintained in good condition,
order and repair by qualified maintenance and
construction personnel, so that the same shall not
endanger the life of any person or any property in the
Township.
[2] Wind. All WCF structures shall be designed to withstand
the effects of wind according to the standard designed by
the ANSI, as prepared by the Electronics Industry
Association and Telecommunications Industry (ANSI EIA/
TIA-222-E Code or ANSI EIA/TIA-222-G, as amended).
117. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 12-2.4 HARRIS CODE § 12-2.4
AO:334
[3] Interference. No WCF shall interfere with public safety
communications. All WCFs shall comply with all Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) interference
requirements included in 47 CFR Part 15.
[4] Maintenance. The following maintenance requirements
shall apply:
[a] All WCFs shall be fully automated and unattended on a
daily basis and shall be visited only for maintenance
and emergency repair.
[b] Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the
upkeep of the facility in order to promote the safety
and security of the Township's residents.
[c] All maintenance and activities shall utilize the best
available technology for preventing failures and
accidents.
[5] Radio frequency emissions. No WCF may, by itself or in
conjunction with other WCFs, generate radio frequency
emissions in excess of the standards and regulations of the
FCC, including, but not limited to, the FCC Office of
Engineering Technology Bulletin 65, entitled, "Evaluating
Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure to
Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
The applicant shall provide, upon request, a statement
from a qualified licensed and professional registered
engineer that the non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation
(NIER) emitted from the WCF, when measured in
conjunction with the emissions from all communications
antennas on the tower, does not result in an exposure at
any point on or outside such facility that exceeds the
lowest applicable exposure standards established by the
FCC or the ANSI.
[6] Historic buildings or districts. No WCF may be located on
or within 200 feet of a site that is listed on an historic
register, a site listed for inclusion on the federal historic
register, or in an officially designated local, state or federal
historic district. Additionally, the placement and/or siting
or WCFs in the Village Zoning District is prohibited.
[7] Identification. All tower-based WCFs shall post a notice in
a readily visible location identifying the name and phone
number of a party to contact in the event of an emergency,
subject to approval by the Township. The notice shall not
exceed two square feet in gross surface area and shall be
maintained by the contact party.
§ 12-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.4
AO:335
[8] Lighting. No WCF shall be artificially lighted, except as
required by the Federal Aviation Administration and as
may be approved by the Township. If lighting is required,
the applicant shall provide a detailed plan for sufficient
lighting, demonstrating as unobtrusive and inoffensive an
effect as is permissible under state and federal
regulations. No flag that requires lighting shall be located
on the structure.
[9] Noise. All WCFs shall be operated and maintained so as
not to produce noise in excess of applicable noise
standards under state or local law, except in emergency
situations requiring the use of a backup generator, where
such noise standards may be exceeded on a temporary
basis only.
[10] Aviation safety. All WCFs shall comply with all federal and
state laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
[11] Retention of experts. To the extent permitted by federal
and state law, the Township may hire any consultant(s)
and/or expert(s) necessary to assist the Township in
reviewing and evaluating the application for approval of
the WCF and, once approved, in reviewing and evaluating
any potential violations of the terms and conditions of this
section. The applicant and/or owner of the WCF shall
reimburse the Township for all costs of the Township's
consultant(s) in providing expert evaluation and
consultation in connection with these activities.
[12] Timing of approval.
[a] Tower-based WCFs. Within 30 calendar days of the
date that a conditional use application for a towerbased
WCF is filed with the Township, the Township
shall notify the applicant in writing of any information
that may be required to complete such an application.
All complete applications for tower-based WCFs shall
be acted on within 150 days of the receipt of a fully
completed application for the approval of such towerbased
WCF, and the Township shall notify the
applicant in writing of its decision.
[b] Nontower WCFs that fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act or pertinent
provisions of the FCC's October 2014 Report and
Order. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an
application for a nontower WCF is filed with the
Township, the Township shall notify the applicant in
writing of any information that may be required to
complete such application. Within 60 calendar days of
§ 12-2.4 HARRIS CODE § 12-2.4
AO:336
receipt of a complete application, the Township shall
make its final decision on whether to deny the
application and shall advise the applicant in writing of
such decision.
[13] Nonconforming uses. Nonconforming WCFs that are
hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason or
cause may be repaired and restored at their former
location, but must otherwise comply with the terms and
conditions of this section. Co-location of facilities may be
permitted on nonconforming structures in accordance
with the standards established in the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act.
[14] Removal. In the event that use of a WCF is planned to be
discontinued, the owner shall provide written notice to the
Township of its intent to discontinue use and the date
when the use shall be discontinued. Unused or abandoned
WCFs, or portions of WCFs, shall be removed, as follows:
[a] All unused or abandoned WCFs and related equipment
shall be removed within six-months of the cessation of
the operations at the site unless a time extension is
approved by the Township.
[b] If the WCF and/or the related equipment is not
removed within six months of the cessation of
operations at a site, or within any longer period
approved by the Township, the WCF and accessory
facilities and equipment may be removed by the
Township and the cost of removal assessed against the
owner of the WCF.
[c] Any unused portion of the WCFs, including antennas,
shall be removed within six months of the time of
cessation of operations. The Township must approve
all replacements of portions of a tower-based WCF
previously removed.
[15] Inspection of WCF outside the ROW. The Township
reserves the right to inspect any WCF to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this article and any
other provisions found within the Township Code of
Ordinances, or state or federal law. The Township and/or
its agents shall have the authority to enter the property
upon which a WCF is located at any time, upon reasonable
notice to the operator, to ensure such compliance.
[16] Application fees. The Township may assess appropriate
and reasonable application fees directly related to the
Township's actual costs in reviewing and processing the
application for approval of a WCF, as well as related
§ 12-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.4
AO:337
inspection, monitoring and related costs. The application
fees for any proposed WCF that fall under the
Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act shall not
exceed the statutory limits established by the state
legislature.
(d) Tower-based wireless communications facilities outside of the
right-of-way. These regulations shall apply to tower-based
wireless communications facilities located outside of the rightof-
way (ROW):
[1] Location. Tower-based WCFs located outside of a public
right-of-way shall be permitted in the Agricultural, Forest
and Rural Commercial Zoning Districts.
[2] Evidence of need. It is required that the applicant for the
placement of a tower-based WCF that will exceed 40 feet
in height shall submit to the Township evidence of the
need for the tower-based WCF in the proposed location
and that the applicant has exhausted all alternatives to
locate on an existing tower-based WCF or wireless support
structure (co-location). In addition, the applicant must
demonstrate via evidence from a qualified, licensed and
professional engineer that, in terms of location and
construction, there are no existing towers, tower-based
WCFs, buildings, structures, elevated tanks or similar uses
able to provide the platform for the antenna within a onemile
radius of the chosen location, unless the applicant can
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Township that a
different distance is more reasonable. Co-location is not
possible if:
[a] Coverage diagrams and technical reports demonstrate
that co-location on an existing tower-based WCF or
other wireless support structure is not technically
possible in order to serve the desired need;
[b] Planned equipment would exceed the structural
capacity of existing towers within the Township,
considering existing and planned use of those towers
and existing towers cannot be reinforced to
accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a
reasonable cost;
[c] Planned equipment will cause radio frequency (RF)
interference with other existing or planned equipment
for that tower and the interference cannot be
prevented at a reasonable cost;
[d] Existing or approved tower-based WCF or wireless
support structures do not have the space on which
planned equipment can be placed so it can function
§ 12-2.4 HARRIS CODE § 12-2.4
AO:338
effectively and at least in parity with other similar
equipment in place or planned; and/or
[e] Other reasons can be demonstrated to the satisfaction
of the Township that make it impractical to place the
equipment planned by the applicant on existing and
approved towers.
[3] Setbacks. A tower-based WCF shall be set back a minimum
of that required in the Agricultural District, except that no
tower-based WCFs shall be located closer than 200 feet or
110% of the proposed tower-based WCF height, whichever
is greater.
[4] Height. The maximum height of a tower-based WCF shall
be 175 feet, measured from the mean natural grade of the
approved facility area to the top point of the tower or
antenna, whichever is greater. All tower-based WCF
applicants must submit documentation to the Township
justifying the total height of the structure.
[5] Combined with another use. A tower-based WCF may be
permitted on a property with an existing use or on a vacant
parcel in combination with another permitted use, subject
to the following conditions:
[a] The existing use on the property need not be affiliated
with the communications facility.
[b] The minimum lot shall be that necessary for the towerbased
WCF and any other land use to comply with the
lot and setback requirements of the applicable zoning
district.
[c] Minimum setbacks. The tower-based WCF, related
equipment, and communications facility building shall
comply with the requirements for the Agricultural
District, provided that no tower-based WCFs shall be
located closer than 200 feet or 110% of the proposed
tower-based WCF height, whichever is greater, from
any existing residential lot line.
[6] Notice. Upon submission of a complete application for a
tower-based WCF, the applicant shall mail notice thereof
to the owner or owners of every property within 500 radial
feet of the parcel or property of the proposed facility. The
applicant shall provide the Township with evidence that
the notice was mailed out to applicable property owners.
[7] Design and construction.
§ 12-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.4
AO:339
[a] The tower-based WCF shall employ the most current
stealth technology available in an effort to
appropriately blend into the surrounding environment
and minimize aesthetic impact. The application of the
stealth technology chosen by the applicant shall be
subject to the approval of the Township Board of
Supervisors.
[b] To the extent permitted by federal and state law, any
height extensions to an existing tower-based WCF
shall require prior approval of the Township, subject
to the regulations herein.
[c] Any proposed tower-based WCF shall be designed
structurally, electrically, and in all respects to
accommodate both the WCF applicant's antennas and
comparable antennas for at least two additional users
if the tower is 100 feet or higher or for at least one
additional user if the tower is less than 100 feet in
height. Tower-based WCFs greater than 100 feet in
height must be designed to allow for future
rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to
accept antennas mounted at various heights.
[d] Guy wires are not permitted. The monopole must be
self-supporting.
[8] Surrounding environs. A soil report complying with the
standards of Annex G: Geotechnical Investigations, ANSI/
EIA/TIA-222-G manual, as amended, shall be submitted to
the Township to document and verify design specifications
of the foundation for the tower-based WCFs.
[9] Fence/screen.
[a] A security fence of an approved design, of not less
than six feet in height, shall completely enclose any
tower-based WCF.
[b] Landscaping, consisting of evergreen plantings that
shall reach a height of at least six feet, shall be
required at the perimeter of security fences and
tower-based WCFs.
[c] Existing wooded areas, tree lines, and hedgerows
adjacent to the facility shall be preserved and used to
substitute or meet a portion of the buffer yard
requirements.
[10] Signs. No signs or any form of advertising of any kind shall
be permitted on the WCF or antennas. However, one sign
not to exceed two square feet in gross surface area that
§ 12-2.4 HARRIS CODE § 12-2.4
AO:340
identifies the phone number and contact in the event of
an emergency is permitted. In addition, "No Trespassing"
signs may be placed on the security fencing.
[11] Accessory equipment.
[a] Ground-mounted related equipment associated with,
or connected to, a tower-based WCF shall be located
underground if possible, or located within a building.
In the event that an applicant can demonstrate that
the related equipment cannot be located underground
to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer, then such
related equipment shall be screened from public view
using vegetation, shrubs, or stealth technology.
[b] All buildings and structures associated with a towerbased
WCF shall be architecturally designed to blend
into the environment in which they are situated and
shall meet the minimum setback requirements of the
Agricultural District.
[12] Access road. The vehicular access to the tower-based
WCF, related equipment, and communications facility
building shall meet the applicable municipal street
standards for private streets and/or driveway standards.
Where applicable, the WCF owner shall present
documentation to the Township that the property owner
has granted an easement for the proposed facility.
(e) Tower-based wireless communications facilities inside of the
right-of-way. These regulations shall apply to tower-based
wireless communications facilities located in the right-of-way
(ROW), except those that fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless
Broadband Collocation Act.
[1] Location. Tower-based wireless communications facilities
shall only be located in the right-of-way if the following
conditions are met:
[a] There is overhead utility infrastructure installed above
ground present in the right-of-way. No tower-based
WCFs shall be located in areas along roads where all
other utility infrastructure is installed underground,
and:
[i] The proposed tower-based WCF is located within
the ROW of an arterial street, as classified by
Chapter 11, Article VI, § 11-6.2 of the Harris
Township Code of Ordinances. The distance shall
be measured from the point of where the center
lines of the streets intersect one another; or
§ 12-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.4
AO:341
[ii] The proposed tower-based WCF is located within
the ROW of a collector road as classified by
Chapter 11, Article VI, § 11-6.2 of the Harris
Township Code of Ordinances. The distance shall
be measured from the point of where the center
lines of the streets intersect one another.
[2] Evidence of need. It is required that the applicant for the
placement of a tower-based WCF shall submit to the
Township evidence of the need for the tower-based WCF in
the proposed location and that the applicant has
exhausted all alternatives to locate on an existing towerbased
WCF or wireless support structure (co-location). In
addition, the applicant must demonstrate via written
evidence from a qualified, licensed, professional engineer
that, in terms of location and construction, there are no
existing towers, tower-based WCFs, buildings, structures,
elevated tanks or similar uses able to provide the platform
for the antenna within a 1/4 mile radius of the chosen
location, unless the applicant can demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Township that a different distance is
more reasonable. Co-location is not possible if:
[a] Capacity diagrams and technical reports demonstrate
that co-location on an existing tower-based WCF or
other tall structure is not technically possible in order
to serve the desired need;
[b] Planned equipment would exceed the structural
capacity of existing towers or wireless support
structures within the Township, considering existing
and planned use of those towers and existing towers
cannot be reinforced to accommodate planned or
equivalent equipment at reasonable cost;
[c] Planned equipment will cause radio frequency (RF)
interference with other existing or planned equipment
for that tower, and the interference cannot be
prevented at a reasonable cost;
[d] Existing or approved towers do not have the space on
which planned equipment can be placed so it can
function effectively and at least in parity with other
similar equipment in place or planned; or
[e] Other reasons can be demonstrated to the satisfaction
of the Township that make it impractical to place the
equipment planned by the applicant on existing and
approved towers.
[3] Time, place and manner. The Township shall determine the
time, place and manner of construction, maintenance and
§ 12-2.4 HARRIS CODE § 12-2.4
AO:342
repair and/or removal of all tower-based WCFs in the ROW
based on public safety, traffic management, physical
burden on the ROW and related considerations. For public
utilities, the time, place and manner requirements shall be
consistent with the police powers of the Township and the
requirements of the Public Utility Code.118
[4] Height. A tower-based WCF shall not exceed 35 feet when
located within the ROW.
[5] Equipment location. Tower-based WCFs and accessory
equipment shall be located so as not to cause any physical
or visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or
to otherwise create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or
motorists or to otherwise inconvenience public use of the
ROW as determined by the Township. In addition:
[a] In no case shall ground-mounted equipment, walls or
landscaping be located within 18 inches of the face of
the curb. In the absence of a curb, facilities must be
located outside the safe clear zone of the roadway as
determined by the Township Engineer.
[b] Ground-mounted equipment that cannot be
undergrounded shall be screened, to the fullest extent
possible, through the use of landscaping or other
decorative features to the satisfaction of the
Township.
[c] Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened
to blend in with the surrounding area to the
satisfaction of the Township.
[d] Any graffiti on the tower or any accessory equipment
shall be removed at the sole expense of the owner
within 10 business days of notice of the existence of
graffiti.
[e] Any underground vaults related to tower-based WCFs
shall be reviewed and approved by the Township.
[6] Design and construction.
[a] The WCFs shall employ the most current stealth
technology available in an effort to appropriately
blend into the surrounding environment and minimize
the aesthetic impact. The application of the stealth
technology chosen by the WCF applicant shall be
subject to the approval of the Township.
118. Editor's Note: See 66 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 12-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.4
AO:343
[b] To the extent permitted by state and federal law, any
height extensions to an existing tower-based WCF
shall require prior approval of the Township and shall
not increase the overall height of the tower-based
WCF to more than 35 feet. The Township reserves the
right to deny such requests based (in part) upon
aesthetic impact or any other lawful considerations
related to the character of the Township.
[c] Guy wires are not permitted. The monopole must be
self-supporting.
(f) Nontower-based wireless communication facilities outside of
the right-of-way. The following regulations shall apply to all
nontower wireless communications facilities located outside of
the ROW, except those that fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act:
[1] Location. Nontower WCFs shall be permitted in all zones,
except the Village Zoning District, attached to any
structure except on single-family homes, duplexes and
townhouses, or structures accessory to such.
[2] Setbacks. If the WCF applicant proposes to locate related
equipment in a separate building, such building shall
comply with the minimum requirements for the applicable
zoning district.
[3] Height. To the extent permissible by law, the height of a
nontower WCF shall be no greater than 20 feet above the
roof, parapet or similar structure.
[4] Design regulations. Nontower WCFs shall be designed in a
manner that the antennas and all support equipment
match the supporting structure to which they are attached
or designed to minimize visibility in order to limit the
aesthetic impact. The following additional regulations
shall apply to nontower WCFs located in districts other
than those enumerated above.
[a] The nontower WCFs shall be camouflaged using
stealth technology as defined in Subsection A(20)(b).
[b] If technologically feasible, and to the extent permitted
by federal and state law, any related equipment placed
on the ground shall be located inside a structure that
is designed in a manner to resemble other structures
typically found within the zoning district where the
nontower WCF is proposed.
[5] Removal, replacement and modification.
§ 12-2.4 HARRIS CODE § 12-2.4
AO:344
[a] The removal and replacement of nontower WCFs and/
or accessory equipment for the purpose of upgrading
or repairing the WCF is permitted, so long as such
repair or upgrade does not increase the overall size of
the WCF or the number of antennas.
[b] Any material modification to a WCF shall require prior
amendment to the original permit or authorization.
(g) Nontower-based wireless communications facilities in the
right-of-way. The following additional regulations shall apply to
all nontower-based wireless communications facilities located
in the right-of-way:
[1] Location. Nontower-based WCFs are permitted in the
right-of-way where aboveground utilities are present, or
there are existing streetlights to which the nontowerbased
WCF can be mounted. The placement of nontowerbased
WCFs on ornamental streetlight fixtures is
prohibited.
[2] Design requirements.
[a] WCF installations located above the surface grade in
the public ROW, including, but not limited to, those on
streetlights and joint utility poles, shall consist of
equipment components that are no more than six feet
in height and that are compatible in scale and
proportion to the structures upon which they are
mounted. All equipment shall be the smallest and least
visibly intrusive equipment feasible.
[b] Antennas and all related equipment shall be treated to
match the supporting structure. WCFs and
accompanying related equipment shall be painted, or
otherwise coated, to be visually compatible with the
support structure or wireless support structure upon
which they are mounted.
[3] Equipment location. Nontower WCFs and related
equipment shall be located so as not to cause any physical
or visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or
to otherwise create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or
motorists or to otherwise inconvenience public use of the
ROW, as determined by the Township. In addition:
[a] In no case shall ground-mounted equipment, walls or
landscaping be located within 18 inches of the face of
the curb. In the absence of a curb, the facility must be
located outside the safe clear zone of the roadway, as
determined by the Township Engineer.
§ 12-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.4
AO:345
[b] Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened
to blend in with the surrounding area to the
satisfaction of the Township.
[c] Any graffiti on the tower or any accessory equipment
shall be removed at the sole expense of the owner
within 10 business days of notice of the existence of
the graffiti.
(h) Procedure.
[1] Conditional use authorization required for tower-based
WCFs both inside and outside the public rights-of-way.
[a] Tower-based WCFs are permitted in certain areas by
conditional use, at a height necessary to satisfy their
function in the applicant's wireless communications
system. No applicant shall have the right under these
regulations to erect a tower to the maximum height
specified in this section unless it proves the necessity
for such height. The applicant shall demonstrate that
the antenna/tower/pole for the tower-based WCF is
the minimum height necessary for the service area. In
addition to all other Township procedures and
requirements necessary for the conditional use
process, the applicant shall demonstrate the
following:
[i] Prior to the Board's approval of a conditional use
authorizing the construction and installation of
tower-based WCFs, it shall be incumbent upon the
applicant for such conditional use approval to
prove to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board
that the applicant cannot adequately extend or
infill its communications system by the use of
equipment such as redoes, repeaters, antennas
and other similar equipment installed on existing
structures, such as utility poles, wireless support
structures, and other available tall structures. The
applicant shall further demonstrate that the
proposed tower-based WCF must be located
where it is proposed in order to serve the
applicant's service area and that no other viable
alternative location exists.
[ii] The conditional use application shall be
accompanied by a propagation study evidencing
the need for the proposed tower or other
communication facilities and equipment, a
description of the type and manufacturer of the
proposed transmission/radio equipment, the
§ 12-2.4 HARRIS CODE § 12-2.4
AO:346
frequency range (megahertz band) assigned to
the applicant, the power in watts at which the
applicant transmits, and any relevant related tests
conducted by the applicant in determining the
need for the proposed site and installation.
[iii] The conditional use application shall be
accompanied by documentation demonstrating
that the proposed tower-based WCF complies
with all state and federal laws and regulations
concerning aviation safety.
[iv] Where the tower-based WCF is located on a
property with another principal use, and not sited
in the public rights-of-way, the applicant shall
present documentation to the Board of
Supervisors that the owner of the property has
granted an easement for the proposed WCF and
that vehicular access will be provided to the
facility.
[v] The conditional use application shall be
accompanied by documentation demonstrating
that the proposed tower-based WCF complies
with all applicable provisions in the Township
Zoning Code, and the applicant has fulfilled all
requirements related to the siting and installation
of the proposed facility.
[b] To the extent permitted by state and federal law,
applications for the placement of nontower WCFs only
require zoning and building permits pursuant to the
application and approval procedures for such.
Nontower WCFs located inside the public right-of-way
shall require a road occupancy permit from the
Township.
[2] Use of right-of-way. In additional to all other applicable
regulations enumerated in this chapter, the following
regulations shall apply to those WCFs located within a
public right-of-way:
[a] Compensation for ROW use. In addition to the
applicable permit fees, every WCF in the Township
ROW is subject to the Township's right to fix annually
a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for use
and occupancy of the ROW. Such compensation for
ROW use shall be directly related to the Township's
actual ROW management costs, including, but not
limited to, the costs of the administration and
performance of all reviewing, inspecting, permitting,
§ 12-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.4
AO:347
supervising and other ROW management activities by
the Township. The owner of each WCF in the ROW
shall pay an annual fee to the Township to compensate
the Township for the Township's costs incurred in
connection with the activities described above. The
annual ROW management fee for nontower WCFs
shall be determined by the Township and authorized
by resolution of the Harris Township Board of
Supervisors and shall be based on the Township's
actual ROW management costs as applied to such
WCF.
[b] Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days
following written notice from the Township, or such
longer period as the Township determines is
reasonably necessary, or such other period in the case
of an emergency, an owner of a WCF in the ROW shall,
at its own expense, temporarily or permanently
remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
WCF when the Township, consistent with its police
powers and applicable Public Utility Commission
regulations, shall have determined that such a
removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably
necessary under the following circumstances:
[i] The construction, repair, maintenance or
installation of any Township or other public
improvement in the right-of-way;
[ii] The operations of the Township or other
governmental entity in the right-of-way;
[iii] Vacation of a street or road or the release of a
utility easement; or
[iv] An emergency as determined by the Township.
(21) Industrial parks.
(a) Definitions. The definitions in Article XI of this chapter shall
apply in the interpretation of this article. The following words
and phrases shall have the meanings given in this section:
INDUSTRIAL PARK — An area planned for the integrated
design of two or more primary industrial uses and structures
on a lot held in single ownership or as units in a single
condominium.[Amended 10-8-2018 by Ord. No. 333]
(b) Initial designation as an industrial park.
[1] To be designated as an industrial park as herein defined,
the property owner or his agent shall submit to the Zoning
Officer a site plan, unless the level of proposed
§ 12-2.4 HARRIS CODE § 12-2.4
AO:348
improvements requires a land development plan as
defined in Chapter 11, Subdivision and Land Development.
If the applicant must follow the procedure for land
developments, the site plan requirements of this section
shall be satisfied in the land development process for
designation of an industrial park.
[2] As per Article IX of this chapter, site plans for the
designation of an industrial park shall be reviewed and
approved by the Harris Township Planning Commission
and Board of Supervisors prior to the application for a
zoning permit for the use or change in use.
[3] Following approval of the site plan by the Board of
Supervisors, the owner/agent shall submit a zoning permit
application to use the property as an industrial park, which
shall be considered and acted upon by the Zoning Officer.
(c) Permitted and prohibited uses within industrial parks. All uses
permitted within the General Industrial (I-1) Zoning District
shall be permitted within an industrial park except the
following:
[1] Auto wrecking, junk, and scrap establishments.
[2] Freight and trucking terminals.
[3] The manufacturing, processing, or bulk storage of natural
gas, petroleum, gasoline, and other petroleum derivations
and explosives.
[4] Refractories.
[5] Rendering plants.
[6] Incinerators.
[7] Radio and television studios, transmitters, and towers.
(d) Design standards. In addition to the basic requirements
contained in the chart of permitted uses for the General
Industrial Zoning District in Article VI, § 12-6.1 of this chapter,
the following design standards shall be met for industrial
parks:
[1] Landscape requirements.
[a] Buffer yard plantings as described in this chapter shall
be required on the perimeters and between individual
buildings of all industrial parks.
[b] Raised islands shall be installed at the ends of all
parking rows abutting an aisle or driveway. In
addition, when parking rows contain more than 15
§ 12-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.4
AO:349
parking spaces in a continuous row, a raised island
shall be incorporated within the parking bay after
every 15 parking space. The raised islands shall be
bordered by a concrete curb at least four inches high.
Required islands shall extend the length of and be
equal in width to abutting parking spaces. All islands
shall contain a minimum of two shade trees of at least
two-and-one-half-inch caliper measured 12 inches
from grade, and three shrubs of at least 36 inches in
height.
[c] As an option, raised islands may be clustered to create
larger areas of green space, provided that raised
islands shall be required at the ends of parking rows
abutting aisles and driveways. The required ratio of
landscape islands shall be one island per 15 parking
spaces, with the required numbers of trees and
shrubs.
[d] Pedestrian crosswalks shall be provided in any
location where the Township determines pedestrian
traffic will be funneled through a parking lot.
[e] Clear sight triangles, in conformance with American
Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials Geometric Design, shall be provided at all
intersections between parking lot aisleways,
perimeter roads, driveways, and streets.
[f] All parking lots shall be maintained in good condition
and be kept free of litter and trash.
[2] Access requirements. Industrial parks shall have frontage
on and/or direct motor vehicle access to an arterial
roadway.
(e) Revision, alteration, addition, or change of tenants within a
designated industrial park.
[1] A site plan, as per Article IX, § 12-9.3 of this chapter, shall
be submitted for staff review when revisions, alterations,
or additions to an approved industrial park are proposed.
Such plans, to be prepared and submitted by the park
owner or his agent, shall be submitted and approved prior
to application for a zoning permit for construction and/or
prior to occupancy by the proposed tenants, whichever is
applicable.
[a] When changes of tenants are proposed that will not
require the alteration of buildings, parking lots, and
other facilities, the owner/agent shall submit to the
Township the information required in this section in
§ 12-2.4 HARRIS CODE § 12-2.4
AO:350
narrative form for review by the Zoning Officer and
Centre Regional Planning Agency, along with a list
of current tenants and the name and business
description of the proposed tenant(s). Should it be
determined that physical improvements to the site are
required as the result of a change of tenants, a site
plan showing compliance with the requirements of
this section shall be required.
[2] In addition to the requirements of Article IX, § 12-9.3 of
this chapter, the following information shall be submitted
and included on a site plan:
[a] A written description of the nature and extent of the
proposed revisions, alterations, additions, or changes
of tenants.
[b] Indications of proposed revisions, alterations,
additions, or changes of tenants to:
[i] An approved site plan or existing industrial park.
[ii] An approved/existing grading and drainage plan.
[iii] An approved/existing landscape and/or buffer
yard plan.
[iv] Approved/existing building elevations.
[v] Tabulations of the following:
[A] New total building floor area.
[B] New building coverage.
[C] New impervious surface coverage.
[D] New parking required, with supporting
calculations.
[E] Existing/new estimated peak employee count.
[3] Staff will review the information required in this section
and determine if the proposed revisions are consistent
with Township regulations for industrial parks. If the
proposed revisions comply with applicable regulations,
permits and/or other approvals will be issued to the
industrial park owner. Any improvements to the property
required as a result of the revisions, alterations, additions,
or changes of tenants must be completed and, where
applicable, be inspected by the Township prior to
occupancy of the industrial park by prospective tenants.
§ 12-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.4
AO:351
[4] The owner shall comply with all applicable building code,
Labor and Industry, and Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) requirements.
(22) Boarding kennels. All boarding kennels shall be surrounded by an
opaque fence. This fence must surround the entire exterior of the
kennel and be at least six feet in height.
(23)Wineries and associated activities. It is the intent of this subsection
to provide for the orderly development of wineries and associated
activities within the Agricultural District to promote economic
development opportunities for the agricultural industry and to
preserve agricultural lands within Harris Township. [Added
10-10-2011 by Ord. No. 296]
(a) Farm wineries are permitted, provided they are operated
under the applicable licenses from the Pennsylvania Liquor
Control Board and the appropriate federal agencies. The farm
winery must operate in conformance with all applicable local,
state and federal laws, rules and ordinances.
(b) The minimum parcel size required to construct and operate a
farm winery shall be 10 acres.
(c) The farm winery shall have a minimum of two planted acres of
fruit used in the production of wine on site and maintained
pursuant to generally accepted management practices.
(d) Tasting rooms that allow for the tasting of wine, fruit wines and
nonalcoholic fruit juices at a charge or no charge to the
individual; and the retail sales of winery products, incidental
retail sales of nonfood items, products by the bottle for offpremises
consumption and food items are allowed in
conjunction with the farm winery.
(e) Special events related to wine tasting, wine-making and
instruction are permitted. Such events shall meet all applicable
requirements for sewage disposal, water supply and rest room
facilities. Corporate retreats, weddings and other events not
directly related to wine tasting, wine making or wine
instruction are not permitted.
(24) Landscape contractor businesses. It is the intent of this subsection
to provide for the orderly development of landscape contractor
businesses within specified areas of the Agricultural District within
Harris Township. [Added 4-9-2012 by Ord. No. 302]
(a) Landscape contractor businesses must operate in conformance
with all applicable local, state and federal laws, rules and
ordinances.
§ 12-2.4 HARRIS CODE § 12-2.4
AO:352
(b) The minimum parcel size required to operate a landscape
contractor business shall be 10 acres.
(c) Landscape contractor businesses shall only be permitted to
operate on parcels that are located adjacent to and have direct
vehicular access from an arterial or collector street. Access to
the use shall be provided from the arterial or collector road
which the parcel is adjacent to. In the case of a corner lot,
access shall be provided from the street of highest
classification.
(d) The incidental sale of landscaping materials is permitted from
the property, provided that such sales are not advertised and
are accessory to the landscape contractor business.
(e) All parking areas, storage areas, or other business related
structures shall not be permitted in the required front, side, or
rear setback areas.
(f) The confined storage of landscape materials shall be permitted
on the property, provided that the storage location of materials
is specifically identified on the site plan or land development
plan. The plan shall indicate the means of confinement of any
material to be stored.
(g) The storage or burning of landscape debris and refuse brought
onto the property from off-site locations is prohibited.
(h) The storage of vehicles and equipment used in the operation of
the business shall be permitted on the property, provided that
the storage location is specifically identified on the plan.
(25) Nursing homes, personal care homes, and other convalescent
homes. It is the intent of this subsection to provide for the orderly
development of nursing homes, personal care homes, and other
convalescent homes within the General Commercial District within
Harris Township. [Added 12-10-2012 by Ord. No. 305]
(a) A nursing home, personal care home, or other convalescent
home must have direct motor vehicle access to an arterial or
collector street. Access to an arterial or collector street via a
private street is not permitted.
(b) The minimum parcel size required to operate a nursing home,
personal care home, or other convalescent home in the General
Commercial District shall be two acres.
(c) A nursing home, personal care home, or other convalescent
home shall not provide housing units in more than one
structure on the parcel it is located. No other primary uses are
permitted on a parcel where such a use is located. Accessory
structures for nonresidential accessory uses are permitted.
§ 12-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.4
AO:353
(d) Nursing homes, personal care homes, and other convalescent
homes shall only be occupied by bona fide residents of such
facilities. Rooms or suites may be provided for individuals that
are not considered residents of the nursing home, personal
care home, or convalescent home, so long as units used for that
purpose do not comprise more than 15% of the total beds
provided at the facility. Residents of such rooms or suites must
be permitted to use all on-site services through a rental or
lease contract with the facility.
(e) A minimum of 50% of the parcel on which the use is located
shall be landscaped.
(f) Buffer yard plantings are required in the yard setback areas of
all parcels containing a nursing home, personal care home, or
other convalescent home. The amount of landscape plantings
to be provided shall be determined by utilizing Table 1 in
Chapter 12, Article II, Section 6.11.13.
(g) Parking areas shall not be permitted in the required front, side,
or rear setback areas.
(h) A nursing home, personal care home, or other convalescent
home shall be located within 1,000 feet of a public
transportation station or public transit stop.
(26) Recreational resorts. It is the intent of this subsection to provide
for the orderly development of recreational resorts within specified
areas of the Agricultural District(s) within Harris Township.
[Added 2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 311]
(a) Recreational resorts must operate in conformance with all
applicable local, state and federal laws, rules and ordinances.
(b) The minimum parcel size required to operate a recreational
resort shall be 50 acres.
(c) Recreational resorts shall only be permitted to operate on
parcels that are located adjacent to an arterial or collector
street.
(d) Recreational resorts shall only be permitted on parcels located
within the Regional Growth Boundary and Sewer Service Area.
(e) Parking areas shall not be permitted in the required front, side,
or rear building setback areas.
(f) Outdoor recreational facility requirements. A minimum of 90%
of a parcel containing a recreational resort shall be designated
and used as an outdoor recreational facility as defined by this
chapter.
§ 12-2.4 HARRIS CODE § 12-2.4
AO:354
§ 12-2.5. Lot requirements. [Amended 10-9-1995 by Ord. No. 168;
4-13-1998 by Ord. No. 195; 3-14-2005 by Ord. No. 252]
The lot requirements for any use or structure shall not include any part
of a lot that is required by any other use or structure to comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
[1] The portion of the parcel to be used as an outdoor
recreational facility shall be identified on the associated
land development plan.
[2] No more than 10% of the land area used as an outdoor
recreational facility shall be covered by the ground floor
area of primary and accessory buildings.
(g) Visitor-oriented facilities area. A maximum of 10% of a parcel
containing a recreational resort may contain visitor-oriented
facilities. Visitor-oriented facilities include overnight lodging,
personal services, restaurants, and meeting facilities.
[1] The portion of the parcel that will contain visitor-oriented
facilities shall be identified on associated land
development plans.
[2] The visitor-oriented facilities area shall consist of one
contiguous portion of the parcel. Visitor-oriented facilities
are not permitted on portions of the parcel identified for
use as an outdoor recreational facility.
[3] All required parking for visitor-oriented facilities shall be
provided within the visitor-oriented facilities area
identified on the land development plan.
[4] No more than 50% of the visitor-oriented facilities area
shall be covered by primary and accessory structures,
parking areas, driveways, and other impervious surfaces.
[5] A visitor-oriented facilities area shall be set back a
minimum of 250 feet from all parcel lines, except those
that are adjacent to a public street.
A. Minimum lot size and width. All lots shall conform to minimum lot size
and width requirements stipulated for each use in the district
regulations.
B. Maximum lot coverage. The total ground floor area of all structures
shall not exceed the maximum allowable coverage specified in the
district regulations.
C. Open space rural clustering requirement.
(1) Residential development of land in the Agricultural, Forest, and
Rural Commercial Zoning Districts shall comply with the following
§ 12-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.5
AO:355
requirements for the purposes of preserving large tracts of farm
and forest land and other open spaces for future generations. Open
space rural clustering is established:
(a) To encourage innovative residential development and design
resulting in a coherent overall development pattern and
streetscape.
(b) To conserve and efficiently use open space in rural areas by
maintaining permanent open space through the use of cluster
development techniques, and insuring that this open space is
incorporated as an integral component of community and
neighborhood design. [Amended 12-8-2008 by Ord. No.
281]
(c) To promote the conservation and preservation of the
agricultural, forest, and rural resources of Harris Township.
(d) To promote the creation of pedestrian and bicycle corridors.
[Amended 12-8-2008 by Ord. No. 281]
(e) To preserve environmentally sensitive features.
(f) To preserve historically significant elements.
(g) To minimize the visual impact of new development from
arterial traffic.
(h) To implement the environmental protection policies of the
Centre Region Comprehensive Plan by maintaining areas in
open space which are identified by the Natural Resources Map
adopted in the Comprehensive Plan.
(i) To promote land development beneficial to maintaining high
quality watersheds, as defined in the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection "Special Protection Waters
Implementation Handbook," as amended.
(j) To blend rural and suburban design elements where public
sewer is available, providing transitional residential areas
between higher-density zoning and lower-density development
outside of the public sewer service area identified in the Centre
Region Act 537 Sewage Facilities Plan. [Added 12-8-2008 by
Ord. No. 281]
(k) To decrease or minimize nonpoint source pollution impacts by
reducing the amount of impervious surfaces in site
development. [Added 12-8-2008 by Ord. No. 281]
(l) To promote cost savings in infrastructure installation and
maintenance by such techniques as reducing the distance over
which utilities, such as water and sewer lines, need to be
§ 12-2.5 HARRIS CODE § 12-2.5
AO:356
extended or by reducing the width or length of streets. [Added
12-8-2008 by Ord. No. 281]
(m) To provide opportunities for social interaction and walking and
hiking in open space areas. [Added 12-8-2008 by Ord. No.
281]
(2) Provisions. All land included in any Rural District to be developed
for single-family detached dwellings shall be developed as per the
district regulations contained in Article III, with lot and yard
setback requirements for each lot reduced to those applicable to
single-family detached dwellings with off-site sewer service in the
Single-Family Residential (R-1) Zoning District. When individual
on-lot sewer service is utilized, land development shall comply with
the minimum lot size for single-family detached dwellings with onsite
sewer service in the R-1 Zoning District.
(a) The total number of dwelling units which may be placed on the
tract shall be based on: [Amended 12-8-2008 by Ord. No.
281]
[1] The sewage disposal capacity of the developable portion of
the tract; and
[2] The extent and locations of environmentally sensitive
areas such as steep slopes, wetlands, and floodplains, as
identified on the Natural Resources Map adopted in the
Centre Region Comprehensive Plan. The density of the
cluster development shall not exceed the projected density
of a development using conventional one-acre minimum lot
sizes, except for lands zoned Agriculture (A) within the
Sewer Service Area, as described herein, which are
permitted a density of no more than two dwelling units per
acre.
(b) Areas defined as environmentally sensitive shall be reserved as
open space, unless specifically exempted by agencies
responsible for the permitting of development in wetlands,
floodplains, and steep slopes.
(c) Sanitary sewage disposal shall comply with Chapter 11,
Subdivision and Land Development, § 11-4.5, Sanitary sewage
disposal.
(d) All tracts of land within the Agriculture, Forest, and Rural
Commercial zoning districts which are 10 acres or more in
area at the time of adoption of Ordinance No. 168, enacted
October 9, 1995, shall comply with the open space rural
clustering requirements of this section, except as follows:
[Amended 12-8-2008 by Ord. No. 281]
§ 12-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.5
AO:357
[1] All parent tracts which are 10 acres or more in area at the
time of adoption of Ordinance No. 168, enacted October 9,
1995, may subdivide as many as two residential lots
without compliance to the open space rural clustering
requirements of this section.
[2] Any such exempt lot of less than 10 acres in area shall be
prohibited from further subdivision; such prohibition shall
be plainly noted on the subdivision plan as a condition of
approval.
(e) The total size of the tract for single-family detached dwellings
permitted under this section shall be at least 20 acres.
(f) Rural clustering outside the sewer service area. No more than
50% of the total tract shall be developed for single-family
detached dwelling lots or dwellings utilizing the options below,
including streets and accessory uses. [Amended 12-8-2008
by Ord. No. 281]
(g) Rural clustering within the sewer service area. No more than
70% of the total tract shall be developed for single-family
detached dwelling lots or dwellings utilizing the options below,
including streets and accessory uses. [Amended 12-8-2008
by Ord. No. 281]
[1] The applicant may place single-family semidetached
dwelling(s), single-family attached dwelling(s), two-family
detached dwelling(s), or two-family semidetached
dwellings on the tract; however, density shall not exceed
two dwelling units per acre. Development of this type is
subject to the following requirements:
[a] Single-family semidetached dwellings, single-family
attached dwellings, two-family detached dwellings,
and two-family semidetached dwellings shall conform
to minimum lot sizes, yard setbacks, maximum height
requirements, etc. identified in § 12-4.2, Two-Family
Residential District.
[b] Zero lot line dwellings are permitted as allowed by
§ 12-7.1, Zero lot line dwellings, of this chapter.
[2] The total number of dwelling units which may be placed on
the tract shall be based on the extent and locations of
environmentally sensitive areas such as steep slopes,
wetlands, and floodplains, as identified on the Natural
Resources Map adopted in the Centre Region
Comprehensive Plan. In no case shall the overall density
on lands zoned Agriculture (A) within the sewer service
area exceed two dwelling units per acre.
§ 12-2.5 HARRIS CODE § 12-2.5
AO:358
[3] Workforce housing.
[a] A range of housing options promotes diverse and
thriving neighborhoods, schools, and communities. It
also aids the recruitment and retention of local
businesses and their workforce, which are essential to
the economic welfare of the community. The purpose
of this section is to support the housing goals of the
Centre Region Comprehensive Plan, which
recommends providing a wide range of sound,
affordable and accessible housing; to create a longterm
stock of workforce housing units in Harris
Township; to encourage housing choices for families
of all income levels; to assure that workforce housing
units are similar in appearance and functionally
equivalent to market rate units; and to foster publicprivate
cooperation in the development of workforce
housing units. For parcels of 30 acres or more zoned
Agriculture (A) within the sewer service area and
proposed for residential development, a percentage of
the total number of dwelling units may be designated
as workforce housing. The percentage of workforce
housing required shall be in direct proportion to the
percentage of open space provided, as follows: 40%
open space, 10% workforce units required; 30% open
space, 15% workforce units required.
[i] For the purposes of this section, "workforce
housing" is defined as housing that is affordable
to households making from 60% to 100% of the
area median income, as determined annually by
the U.S. Department of Housing & Urban
Development for Centre County. Housing
affordability is defined by the U.S. Department of
Housing & Urban Development.
[ii] Workforce housing units used as the basis for
approving a density bonus or open space
reduction shall require submission of a housing
development plan, describing the number of
workforce housing units, the percentage of units
between the ranges of 60% and 100% AMI, the
construction requirements, and affordability
restrictions. This plan is to be developed with the
guidelines set forth in the Harris Township
Workforce Housing Policy and Procedures
Manual, as adopted by the Board of Supervisors.
[b] The housing development plan shall be prepared in
consultation with the Centre County Housing & Land
Trust, or other nonprofit housing agency designated
§ 12-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.5
AO:359
by the Township, and approved by the Board of
Supervisors as a condition of plan approval.
[4] Neighborhood commercial uses. For residential
development projects on lands zoned Agriculture (A)
within the sewer service area, a neighborhood commercial
use is permitted. Neighborhood commercial uses shall
comply with the following:
[a] The overall size and type of commercial development
shall be restricted to prevent the establishment of
intensive commercial-type facilities that exceed the
local orientation.
[i] Commercial uses shall not occupy more than 2%
of the total tract size of the parent lot.
[ii] Commercial uses are limited to one location for
parent tracts of less than 40 acres. Commercial
uses may occupy no more than two locations on
parent tracts of 40 to 80 acres, and not more than
three locations for parent tracts or 80 or more
acres in size.
[iii] The lot size for neighborhood commercial uses
shall be no less than 3,000 square feet nor shall
the lot size exceed one acre.
[b] Building coverage area shall not exceed 25% of the
commercial lot size.
Lot Requirements
Yard Setback
Requirements
Minimum
Size
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Coverage
Front
(feet)
Side
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
3,000
square
feet
50 25% Lots
<10,000
square
feet: 20
10 30 35
Maximum
Size
1 acre 50 25% Lots
>10,000
square
feet: 20
15 50 35
[c] Commercial uses shall be designed to provide basic
convenience goods and services to existing and future
nearby residences. Uses permitted by right include:
§ 12-2.5 HARRIS CODE § 12-2.5
AO:360
[i] Retail establishments for food, apparel,
pharmaceuticals, flowers/gifts, hobby/craft
supplies, sporting goods, books, toys and games.
[ii] Beauty and barber shops.
[iii] Seasonal produce/flower market/tree sales.
[iv] Child and adult day care.
[v] Laundromat and dry cleaners (dropoff and pickup
only).
[vi] Medical and dental offices/clinics (excluding
animal hospitals and veterinary offices).
[vii] Business, professional and financial offices.
[viii] Health club.
[ix] Cafe, deli, coffee shop, caterer (excluding drivethrough
facilities).
[x] Bank, ATM.
[xi] Community center.
[xii] Antique dealers.
[xiii] Studios for the arts and handcrafts; photographic
studios.
[xiv] Public libraries, museums, civic buildings
(excluding maintenance facilities).
[d] Neighborhood commercial uses shall provide
convenient pedestrian access and shall accommodate
bicycle facilities. Any necessary parking facilities shall
be located to the side or rear of any structure and
shall include handicap parking. Given the close
proximity of these small neighborhood commercial
uses to the predominately residential area, parking for
commercial uses is not permitted within the setback to
allow for a larger buffer area.
[e] Neighborhood commercial uses shall be centrally
located and within walking distance to residential
uses, community open space, and public transit
facilities to encourage pedestrian/bicycle activity and
to create informal gathering places for residents of
the community. A bus shelter and bus pulloff shall be
provided to accommodate the safe boarding of transit
passengers and smooth transition of traffic.
§ 12-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.5
AO:361
[f] Neighborhood commercial buildings may include one
accessory dwelling unit of no more than 750 square
feet in area.
[g] The design of neighborhood commercial uses shall be
compatible with the community character of the
neighborhood and the surrounding area. All portions
and sides of buildings shall be surfaced with the same
and/or compatible materials as are used on dwelling
units. Site plan elevation drawings shall be required
for all visible surfaces and shall include a description
of the exterior surface building materials. All rooftop
mechanical systems shall be screened by fencing or
other means.
[h] Sign regulations for the neighborhood commercial
uses shall permit signs of adequate size to advertise
the business(es), while respecting the residential
character of the surrounding neighborhood. Signs for
the neighborhood commercial uses shall meet the sign
regulations for the Village Zoning District, as specified
in Article XIV.
[i] One off-premises sign of not larger than 25 square
feet per face is permitted at each arterial or
collector entrance to the development, to
advertise the neighborhood commercial
business(es) within the development and indicate
their general location.
[i] Parking for neighborhood commercial uses, number
and computations. In computing the required number
of spaces, all fractional numbers shall be increased to
the next highest integer.
Use
Number of Required
Parking Spaces
All retail and service
establishments, except
those listed below:
1.5 per 250 square feet of
retail and service floor
area
Barbers and beauticians 2 per chair
Business, professional
and financial offices
1 per 400 square feet of
floor area
Medical/dental offices 5 per practitioner, based
on maximum design
capacity
Cafe, deli, coffee shop,
caterer
1 per 4 persons, based on
maximum design capacity
Child/adult day care 1.5 per client
§ 12-2.5 HARRIS CODE § 12-2.5
AO:362
Use
Number of Required
Parking Spaces
Community center 1 per 3 persons, based on
maximum design capacity
Public library, museum,
civic building
1 per 400 square feet of
floor area
(h) Open space requirements. The undeveloped portion of the
tract shall be used for one or more of the following uses. As
part of plan approval, the Board of Supervisors reserves the
right to require, when deemed appropriate, that the first
option listed herein be mandatory for a portion of the open
space: public park and recreational uses (whenever possible,
open space shall be contiguous with other existing or planned
parks/open space areas); the tilling of the land, the raising of
crops, fruits, vegetables, and the raising and keeping of
livestock and poultry and fish; horticultural uses related to the
raising, propagating, and selling of trees, shrubs, flowers, and
other plant materials; usual farm structures, including barns
and greenhouses (One single-family detached dwelling of the
farm operator shall be allowed. All farm structures shall
comply with applicable zoning and other requirements);
commercial establishments for the processing, storage, and
sale of farm products produced and raised on the premises
(structures shall comply with applicable zoning and other
requirements); the conservation of water, soil, forest, and
wildlife resources, areas for potable water well use, areas for
treatment/disposal of wastewater discharges.
[1] The portion of the tract used in accordance with
Subsection C(2)(h) above shall be a single lot of record.
[2] Minimum lot widths for areas intended to be used as
access to open space shall be no less than 50 feet,
measured at the street. Lot width for areas not intended
for access shall meet or exceed the minimum requirements
for residential lot width in the zoning district where the
development is located.
[3] That portion of the tract to remain in open space shall be
bordered and labeled "Open Space" on the preliminary and
final plans. All such plans shall include the following
statement: "All lands labeled 'Open Space' on this plan
shall be used only as permitted in Article II,
§ 12-2.5C(2)(h) of the Harris Township Zoning Ordinance."
[4] At the time application is made to the Township for
preliminary plan approval, the applicant shall supply a
written agreement to the Township, in a manner and form
acceptable for recording by the Recorder of Deeds, Centre
§ 12-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.5
AO:363
County, Pennsylvania, stipulating the means by which said
open space shall be preserved for the uses permitted by
the subsection.
[a] Such means shall be determined according to the
following hierarchy:
[i] Retention of land by owner at the time of cluster
development with covenants that the open space
portion of the land shall be limited to the uses
allowed in Subsection C(2)(h) or its success in
perpetuity;
[ii] Right of first refusal for acceptance of dedication
of part or all of the open space to the Township
that may also include dedication of easements to
the Township, or other public entity;
[iii] Establishment of a corporate ownership of the
open space by the homeowners of the developed
portion of the tract, incorporating into the deeds
of the homeowners an interest in such open
space, indicating the uses, as permitted above, to
be made of such open space; or
[iv] Disposition of such open space to a private or
nonprofit corporation chartered under the laws of
Pennsylvania to administer and maintain the
facilities subject to an acceptable deed restriction
limiting the eventual disposition of said open
space for one or more of the uses permitted above
and stated in the Articles of Incorporation.
[b] Maintenance and other responsibilities for land
reserved for open space intended to be retained in
private ownership shall be set forth in an agreement
between the owners, or where land is to be retained
by a single owner, shall be set forth in a formal,
written document which shall be binding on the
owner(s), referenced by note on the subdivision plan,
and recorded with the County of Centre.
(3) Procedure for approval. All land to be developed under the zoning
provisions of this subsection shall be subdivided in accordance with
Chapter 11, Subdivision of Land.
(4) Nothing in this section shall be construed to mean denial of the
right of the landowner to otherwise develop in accordance with the
regulations applicable to the appropriate rural district, nor shall it
exempt any development from complying with other applicable
requirements of this chapter.
§ 12-2.5 HARRIS CODE § 12-2.6
AO:364
§ 12-2.6. Yard requirements. [Amended 4-12-1993 by Ord. No. 148]
No structure shall be placed in the front, side, or rear yard setback areas
specified for each use in Article II through Article VI of this chapter, except
where specifically permitted below or in other sections of this chapter:
A. Where two or more primary structures for nonresidential use are
proposed to be placed upon a lot in single ownership; the front, side,
and rear yard setback areas are required only at lot lines abutting other
property.
B. Where two or more detached or semidetached dwelling units are
proposed to be built upon a lot in single ownership, the front, side, and
rear yard setback areas are required as though each structure were on
an individual lot.
C. Where a side lot line runs coterminous with a party wall of a
semidetached and an attached dwelling, the side yard setback for such
lot line does not apply to the structure.
D. Where two or more attached dwelling units are proposed to be placed
upon a lot in single ownership, or upon two or more abutting lots under
single ownership, the front, side, and rear yard setback areas stipulated
in the district regulations are required only from the lot lines abutting
the property of another. Within the lot, however, the minimum
horizontal distance between facing walls of any two buildings shall be
40 feet.
E. Where a lot abuts upon a street (including private streets) with a rightof-
way of less than 50 feet in width, the front yard setback shall be
measured from a line parallel to, and 25 feet from, the center line of the
street cartway.
F. Fences, hedges, and freestanding walls are permitted in any yard
setback area unless otherwise restricted or prohibited by other
provisions of this chapter.
G. Balconies, bay windows, chimneys and flues, columns, cornices and
eaves, fire escapes, gutters and downspouts, sills, and unenclosed
porches may project into the specified yard setback areas of a lot, but
not more than three feet, except in the Village District, where they may
not extend into the side yard setback.
H. On corner lots, nothing, including structures, fences, walls, and
vegetation, shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such
a manner as to impede the vision between a height of 2 1/2 feet and 10
feet above the center-line grades of the intersecting streets and within
an area bounded by the street right-of-way lines of such corner lots and
a line joining points on these street right-of-way lines 25 feet from their
intersection.
§ 12-2.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.6
AO:365
§ 12-2.7. Maximum height requirements.
No structure shall exceed the height limitations specified for the use in
Article III through Article VI, except as allowed below:
I. On a corner lot, the side yard abutting the street shall have a setback
area equal to the depth of the front yard setback area required for the
use, and shall be governed by all front yard setback requirements of
this chapter. The owner shall choose what shall be the rear and side
yards.
J. On a through lot, the rear yard setback width shall be either the rear or
front yard setback width designated for the use, whichever is greater.
K. Buffer yards.
(1) Where a Commercial or Industrial District adjoins a Residential
District, a buffer yard of not less than 25 feet in width shall, at the
time of development, be provided on such commercial or industrial
land, except where the district boundary is coterminous with a
public street. The buffer shall be parallel to, and adjacent with, the
district boundary, and shall be completely covered with a
vegetative ground cover. In addition, a sight-obscuring evergreen
planting shall be placed the full length of the boundary in
accordance with the following requirements:
(a) All planting shall be at least four feet in height when planted,
and shall reach a height of at least six feet at maturity.
(b) All plantings and vegetative ground cover shall be maintained.
Any plant material which does not live shall be replaced within
one year.
(c) Buffer yards shall not be used for parking, loading, storage, or
structures. All except side buffer yards of interior lots may be
crossed by access driveways and utility easements, provided
such are not more than 25 feet in width at the point of
intersection.
(2) Where a tract of land contains a designated well site, a buffer yard
area, in accordance with the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection's (DEP) regulations, as applicable,
measured from the perimeter of the above facility, shall be
required. Any designated well site, where such well is to be used
for the provision of potable water supply, is to be protected by a
buffer yard consisting of existing woodland and vegetation and/or
combination of low-maintenance trees, shrubs, and ground cover
vegetation. For purposes of determining the status of a designated
well site, a written statement if such determination from the
applicable water provider shall be submitted with the required site
plan.
§ 12-2.6 HARRIS CODE § 12-2.7
AO:366
A. Exceptions. The maximum height for all nonresidential structures shall
be 45 feet. The maximum requirements shall not apply to the following:
barns and silos, belfries, bulkheads, chimneys, church spires, domes,
flagpoles, masts and aerials, monuments, observation towers, poles and
towers, ventilators, water tanks and windmills, provided they are
erected only to such height as is necessary to accomplish the purpose
they are to serve, and provided they are not intended for human
occupancy as dwellings. [Amended 1-5-2015 by Ord. No. 315]
B. Computation. The height of a structure shall be computed as the
vertical distance measured from the mean level of the ground
surrounding the structure to its highest point.
§ 12-2.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.7
AO:367

ARTICLE III
Rural Districts
§ 12-3.1. Agricultural District.
§ 12-3.2. Forest District.
A. Intent. It is the intent of the Agricultural District to promote the
following:
(1) To retain the pastoral nature of the district.
(2) To encourage the preservation of agriculture in rural areas.
(3) To limit development to those uses compatible with the rural
environment.
(4) To limit the extension across farmland of public utilities with costly
user fees.
(5) To preserve the quality of the soil for crop and pasture use.
(6) To protect prime cropland from its conversion to uses incompatible
with agriculture.
(7) To buffer housing from farm activities.
B. District regulations. Only the uses listed in Criteria and Standards for
the Agricultural (A) District119 shall be permitted in the Agricultural
District. All uses must conform to the lot, yard setback, and maximum
height regulations stipulated therein, as well as other appropriate
requirements of this chapter.
A. Intent. In addition to the intent of the Agricultural District, it is the
intent of the Forest District to promote the following:
(1) To encourage the preservation of woodlands in rural areas.
(2) To protect and retain natural resources.
(3) To alleviate erosion, sedimentation, and flooding.
(4) To protect and regenerate watersheds.
(5) To maintain micro-climates and air quality.
(6) To protect wildlife, habitat.
(7) To provide for aesthetic enjoyment, open space, and recreational
uses.
B. District regulations. Only the uses listed in Criteria and Standards for
the Forest (F) District120 shall be permitted in Forest District. All uses
119. Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 12-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-3.2
AO:369
§ 12-3.3. Rural Commercial District.
must conform to the lot, yard setback; and maximum height regulations
stipulated therein, as well as other appropriate requirements of this
chapter.
A. Intent. In addition to the intent of the Forest District, it is the intent of
the Rural Commercial District to promote the following:
(1) To permit limited commercial uses and community facilities which
are compatible with the rural environment or which would create
serious nuisances or hazards if located within populous areas.
B. District regulations. Only the uses listed in Criteria and Standards for
the Rural Commercial (RC) District121 shall be permitted in the Rural
Commercial District. All uses must conform to the lot, yard setback, and
maximum height regulations stipulated therein, as well as other
appropriate requirements of this chapter.
120. Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
121. Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 12-3.2 HARRIS CODE § 12-3.3
AO:370
ARTICLE IV
Residential Districts
§ 12-4.1. Single-Family Residential District.
§ 12-4.2. Two-Family Residential District. [Amended 9-14-1987 by
Ord. No. 109; 10-9-1995 by Ord. No. 170]
A. Intent. It is the intent of the Single-Family Residential District to
promote the following:
(1) To provide for low-density housing in appropriate locations, and to
permit limited public and quasi-public uses appropriate for
residential neighborhoods.
(2) To protect residential areas from changes and intrusions which
may cause deterioration.
(3) To meet minimum standards of health and safety by protecting
against hazards and nuisances.
(4) To provide for adequate daylight, ventilation, quiet, privacy, and
recreational opportunity.
(5) To prevent congestion and the overcrowding of land caused by
excessive densities.
B. District regulations. Only the uses listed in Criteria and Standards for
Single-Family Residential (R-1) District122 shall be permitted in the
Single-Family Residential District. All uses must conform to the lot, yard
setback, and maximum height regulations stipulated therein, as well as
other appropriate requirements of this chapter.
A. Intent. In addition to the intent of the Single-Family Residential District,
it is the intent of the Two-Family Residential District to promote the
following:
(1) To provide a buffer between low-density residential neighborhoods
and more intense land uses.
(2) To provide for low- and moderate-income housing.
(3) To promote diversity of housing types and character.
B. District regulations. Only the uses listed in the Criteria and Standards
for Single-Family Residential (R-1) District123 shall be permitted in the
Two-Family Residential District. All uses must conform to the lot, yard
setback and maximum height regulations stipulated therein, as well as
other appropriate requirements of this chapter.
122. Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
123. Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 12-4.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-4.3
AO:371
§ 12-4.3. Multifamily Residential District. [Amended 9-14-1987 by
Ord. No. 109]
§ 12-4.4. Village District. [Amended 9-14-1987 by Ord. No. 109]
A. Intent. It is the intent of the Multifamily Residential District to promote
the following:
(1) To provide for medium-density housing in appropriate locations,
and to permit limited uses appropriate to residential
neighborhoods.
(2) To protect residential areas from changes and intrusions that may
cause.
(3) To meet minimum standards of health and safety by protecting
against hazards.
(4) To provide for adequate daylight, ventilation, quiet, privacy, and
recreational.
(5) To prevent congestion and the overcrowding of land caused by
excessive densities.
(6) To provide for low- and moderate-income housing.
(7) To promote diversity of housing types and character.
B. District regulations. Only the uses listed in Criteria and Standards for
Multi-Family Residential (R-3) District124 shall be permitted in the
Multifamily Residential District. All uses must conform to the lot, yard
setback, and maximum height regulations stipulated therein, as well as
other appropriate requirements of this chapter.
A. Intent. In addition to the intent of the Single-Family Residential District,
it is the intent of the Village District to promote the following:
(1) To perpetuate the distinctive character and identity of the village
environment.
(2) To permit a harmonious mixture of housing, retail and service
establishments, and community facilities in the village center.
B. District regulations. Only the uses listed in Criteria and Standards for
the Village (V) District125 shall be permitted in the Village District. All
uses must conform to the lot, yard setback, and maximum height
regulations requirements of this chapter.
124. Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
125. Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 12-4.3 HARRIS CODE § 12-4.4
AO:372
ARTICLE V
Commercial Districts
§ 12-5.1. Residential - Office Districts. [Amended 9-14-1987 by Ord.
No. 109]
§ 12-5.2. General Commercial District. [Amended 9-14-1987 by Ord.
No. 109]
§ 12-5.3. Cultural District. [Amended 9-14-1987 by Ord. No. 109]
A. Intent. It is the intent of the Residential-Office District to promote the
following community facilities:
(1) To permit a harmonious mixture of housing, commercial offices,
and community facilities.
(2) To provide a transition from residential neighborhoods to
commercial areas.
(3) To meet minimum standards of health and safety by protecting
against hazards and nuisances.
B. District regulations. Only the uses listed in Criteria and Standards for
the Residential Office (RO) District126 shall be permitted in the
Residential Office District. All uses must conform to the lot, yard
setback, and maximum height, regulations stipulated therein, as well as
other appropriate requirements of this chapter.
A. Intent. It is the intent of the General Commercial District to promote
the following:
(1) To provide for a full range of retail, service, and office uses in
appropriate locations.
(2) To minimize the hazards of highway commercial activity.
(3) To encourage the clustering of commercial establishments.
(4) To meet minimum standards of health and safety by protecting
against hazards and nuisances.
(5) To promote stable commercial development.
B. District regulations. Only the uses listed in Criteria and Standards for
the General Commercial C-1 District127 shall be permitted in the
General Commercial District. All uses must conform to the lot, yard
setback, and maximum height regulations stipulated therein, as well as
other appropriate requirements of this chapter.
126. Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
127. Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 12-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-5.3
AO:373
§ 12-5.4. Corridor Overlay District. [Amended 9-14-1992 by Ord. No.
145]
A. Intent. It is the intent of the Cultural District to promote the following:
(1) To recognize and foster the museum function throughout the
Township.
(2) To preserve the historic character of the Township.
(3) To permit a harmonious mixture of uses and activities related to
and supporting cultural and recreational activities in the Township.
(4) To encourage the preservation and exhibition of artistic and
historic heritage.
(5) To enrich the community by encouraging appreciation of its
cultural heritage.
B. District regulations. Only the uses listed in Criteria and Standards for
the Cultural (CU) District128 shall be permitted in the Cultural District.
All uses must conform to the lot, yard setback, and maximum height
regulations stipulated therein, as well as other appropriate
requirements of this chapter.
A. Intent. The Corridor Overlay District is intended to provide land use
and land development controls along specified corridors in the
Township that are supplemental to the underlying zoning districts. The
more restrictive requirement shall apply. It is the intent of this district
to promote safe and efficient use of highways as well as to protect the
community character of the lands adjacent to them:
(1) To insure safe ingress and egress from existing and proposed
development along arterial corridors, to maintain adequate
highway capacity, and lessen or prevent traffic congestion.
(2) To encourage development consistent with the 1990 Centre
Regional Comprehensive Plan and subsequent amendments
thereto.
(3) To discourage unlimited commercial "strip development" and curb
cuts along highways, and encourage land development to occur in
nodes and clusters utilizing shared or controlled accesses.
(4) To establish an identity of the Township's communities and achieve
a pleasing effect for residents and visitors.
B. District regulations. The uses permitted and the lot dimensional, yard
setback, and maximum height regulations shall be those of the
underlying zoning district in which the lot or parcel is located, or as
stated in § 12-7.10, whichever is more strict.
128. Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 12-5.3 HARRIS CODE § 12-5.5
AO:374
§ 12-5.5. Village Commercial District. [Added 9-10-2018 by Ord. No.
331]
A. Intent. It is the intent of the Village Commercial District to promote the
following:
(1) To accommodate a mix of retail, service, commercial, and
professional office uses in the Boal Avenue commercial corridor;
(2) To permit redevelopment of existing parcels and encourage
positive improvements to existing uses;
(3) To minimize potential negative impacts of nonresidential
development to adjacent residential areas;
(4) To support multi-modal access and promote human scale elements.
B. District regulations. Only the uses listed in Criteria and Standards for
the Village Commercial (VC) District129 shall be permitted in the Village
Commercial District. All uses must conform to the lot, yard setback, and
maximum height regulations stipulated therein, as well as other
appropriate requirements of this chapter.
C. Exempt regulations. Properties located in the Village Commercial
District shall be exempt from Corridor Overlay Regulations found in
Chapter 12, Article VII, § 12-7.10 and from the building height
regulations for nonresidential structures found in Chapter 12, Article II,
§ 12-2.7.
D. Landscaping requirements. A detailed landscape plan shall be
submitted to the Township for all land development plans within the
Village Commercial (VC) District. The landscape plan shall identify all
existing trees that will be preserved on-site, as well as the type, number
and size of trees and shrubs that will be planted. The landscape plan
shall also address the following landscape requirements:
(1) Minimum landscaping requirements.
(a) No less than 75% of open areas, which includes areas not used
for buildings, parking, or sidewalks, shall be landscaped with
living groundcover. Shredded bark, wood chips, or other
organic mulch shall not be considered living groundcover.
(b) All landscaping materials provided for screening purposes
shall be maintained in good condition, shall present a healthy,
neat and orderly appearance.
(2) Front yard landscaping required.
(a) A minimum of one small crown tree shall be provided for every
20 linear feet within the required front yard setback, with no
129. Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 12-5.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-5.5
AO:375
less than three trees being provided in any front yard setback.
Required tree plantings may be grouped within the front yard
setback in order to avoid blocking the visibility of the front
facade of structures on the property.
(b) A minimum of one shrub must be provided every eight linear
feet within the required front yard. Shrubs must be a minimum
of two feet in height at the time of planting and must reach a
minimum of three feet height at maturity.
(3) Side and rear yard landscaping required.
(a) When the side or rear yard property line is adjacent to a
property within the Village Commercial District, the following
plantings are required within the applicable yard areas:
[1] A minimum of one medium crown tree for every 30 linear
feet, one small crown tree per 22 linear feet, or one large
shrub/dwarf tree tree per 15 linear feet shall be provided.
(b) When a side or rear yard property line is adjacent to a
residential zoning district, the following plantings/buffers are
required within the applicable yard areas:
[1] A minimum of one medium crown tree per 30 linear feet,
one small crown tree per 22 linear feet, or one large shrub/
dwarf tree per 15 linear feet shall be provided.
[2] Sight-proof fencing or landscaping must be provided along
the side or rear yard property line, subject to the following
standards:
[a] Sight-proof fencing shall meet the following
requirements:
[i] Sight-proof fencing must be a minimum of six feet
but no more than eight feet in height.
[ii] Sight-proof fencing must be kept in an attractive
state and in good repair at all times.
[iii] Sight-proof fencing must be made of wood,
polywood, masonry, or decorative metal.
[iv] Sight-proof fencing must be permanently
anchored to the ground by a base situated or
located entirely upon the property.
[v] Sight-proof fencing must be installed within 15
feet of the property line.
[b] Sight-proof landscaping shall meet the following
requirements:
§ 12-5.5 HARRIS CODE § 12-5.5
AO:376
[i] Sight-proof landscaping shall consist of evergreen
shrubs planted in a line to form a continuous
screen.
[ii] Shrubs shall be a minimum of four feet in height
at the time of planting and six feet in height at the
time of maturity.
[iii] Sight-proof landscaping must be installed within
15 feet of the property line.
(4) Landscaping requirements for parking areas.
(a) Perimeter landscaping shall be required for all parking areas
that are adjacent to an abutting parcel or a private or public
street. Landscaping shall consist of shrubs which will form a
solid vegetative screen. Shrubs must a minimum of two feet in
height at the time of planting and must reach a minimum of
three feet in height at maturity.
(b) Each parking island shall be planted with a minimum of three
shrubs. Shrubs must a minimum of two feet in height at the
time of planting and must reach a minimum of three feet in
height at maturity.
E. Parking regulations. In addition to the parking regulations contained in
Article X, § 12-10.10, the following regulations shall apply to properties
located within the Village Commercial District:
(1) Sidewalk connections between parking areas. In order to provide a
greater degree of pedestrian connectivity and accessibility, all
parking areas shall be provided with at least one sidewalk
connection to parking areas on adjacent parcels.
(a) Sidewalk connections shall be a minimum of four feet wide and
must be constructed of concrete, asphalt, or porous pavers.
(b) Sidewalk connections must run to the property line and
connect to existing paths or sidewalks on neighboring
properties or the likely location of future paths or sidewalks on
those properties.
(2) Setback for parking areas. Parking areas shall not be located closer
to the front property line than any structure on the property.
(3) Bicycle parking required. In order to support alternative modes of
transportation and encourage multi-modal access along the Boal
Avenue corridor, bicycle parking shall be required for all uses
within the Village Commercial Zoning District as follows:
(a) A minimum of two bicycle parking spaces shall be provided per
each 10 vehicle parking spaces required, with not less than two
spaces provided per property.
§ 12-5.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-5.5
AO:377
(b) Bicycle parking spaces shall consist of either lockers or racks
that:
[1] Provide for storage and locking of bicycles in which both
the bicycle frame and the wheels may be locked by the
user;
[2] Are designed so as not to cause damage to the bicycle;
[3] Facilitate easy locking without interference from or to
adjacent bicycles; and
[4] Are anchored so that they cannot be easily removed.
(c) Bicycle parking spaces shall be conveniently accessible by
pedestrians from the street, be well-lit, and located within 20
feet of building entrances accessible by tenants and occupants.
F. Access.
(1) Access to arterial streets. Access to each lot via an arterial street
shall be limited to not more than one driveway for each 200 feet of
street frontage. If multiple access points exist prior to the
submission of the plan, a design shall be implemented which
reduces the number of access points to the arterial street.
(2) Access to collector or local streets. Access onto collector or local
streets shall be limited to not more than one driveway per property
for each adjacent collector or local street. Driveways that provide
direct access to a collector or local street shall be no more than 20
feet in width.
G. Design standards. All portions and sides of buildings located within the
Village Commercial District that have walls visible from a street within
the Village Commercial District shall be surfaced with the same and/or
compatible materials as are used on the designated fronts of the
buildings. Site plan elevation drawings shall be required for all visible
surfaces and shall include a description of the exterior surface building
materials. All rooftop mechanical systems shall be screened by fencing
or other means.
H. Bicycle and pedestrian access. Bicycle and pedestrian facilities shall be
installed on each property in the Village Commercial District that is
adjacent to Boal Avenue. Such facilities shall be provided within the
front yard setback adjacent to Boal Avenue and shall connect to existing
facilities on adjacent parcels. These facilities shall not be required if
facilities exist within the Boal Avenue right-of-way at the time of
development.
I. Accessory dwelling units. Accessory dwelling units are permitted on
properties within the Village Commercial District so long as they are
located on the same parcel as a nonresidential use. Accessory dwelling
§ 12-5.5 HARRIS CODE § 12-5.5
AO:378
units within the Village Commercial District shall comply with the
following standards:
(1) A maximum of one accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted for
every 2,000 square feet of nonresidential floor area on the property.
Nonresidential floor area utilized for storage and warehousing
shall not apply towards this requirement. All properties, regardless
of nonresidential floor area, shall be entitled to one accessory
dwelling unit.
(2) Accessory dwelling units shall not be located on the ground floor of
any structure within the district.
(3) Each accessory dwelling unit shall be no more than 1,000 square
feet in size.
(4) Two additional parking spaces shall be provided for each accessory
dwelling unit.
§ 12-5.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-5.5
AO:379

ARTICLE VI
Industrial Districts
§ 12-6.1. General Industrial District. [Amended 10-9-2000 by Ord.
No. 208]
A. Intent. It is the intent of the General Industrial District to promote the
following:
(1) To cluster industrial development in selected locations.
(2) To provide sites for heavy industries, separated from light industry
and other less intense uses.
(3) To minimize the hazards and nuisances resulting from the
operation of industries.
(4) To provide adequate buffers between different classes of industrial
uses.
B. District regulations. Only the uses listed in Criteria and Standards for
the General Industrial (I-1) District130 shall be permitted in the General
Industrial District. All uses must conform to the lot, yard setback, and
maximum height regulations stipulated therein, as well as other
applicable requirements of this chapter.
130. Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 12-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-6.1
AO:381

ARTICLE VII
Supplemental Regulations
§ 12-7.1. Floodplain and wetland conservation. [Amended 1-13-1983
by Ord. No. 97; 5-31-1989 by Ord. No. 118; 12-9-1996 by Ord. No.
181; 4-13-2009 by Ord. No. 284]
A. Identified area; effect on other provisions; zoning permits.
(1) The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of Harris
Township, subject to the one-hundred-year flood, which is identified
as Zone A (Area of Special Flood Hazard) in the Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) dated May 4, 2009, and the accompanying maps or the
most recent revision thereof as issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, including all digital data developed as part of
the Flood Insurance Study.
(2) This section supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may
be in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other
ordinance provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the
extent that those provisions are more restrictive. If there is any
conflict between any of the provisions of this section, the more
restrictive shall apply.
(3) Zoning permits shall be required before any construction or
development is undertaken within floodplain area of the Township.
B. Description of floodplain areas.
(1) The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific
areas:
(a) FW (Floodway Area): the areas identified as "Floodway" in the
AE Zone in the Flood Insurance Study prepared by the FEMA.
The term shall also include floodway areas which have been
identified in other available studies or sources of information
for those floodplain areas where no floodway has been
identified in the Flood Insurance Study.
(b) FF (Flood-Fringe Area): the remaining portions of the onehundred-
year floodplain in those areas identified as an AE
Zone in the Flood Insurance study, where a floodway has been
delineated. The basis for the outermost boundary of this area
shall be the one-hundred-year flood elevations as shown in the
flood profiles contained in the Flood Insurance Study.
(c) FE (Special Floodplain Area): the areas identified as Zone AE
in the Flood Insurance Study, where one-hundred-year flood
elevations have been provided, but no floodway has been
delineated.
§ 12-7.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-7.1
AO:383
(d) FA (General Floodplain Area): the areas identified as Zone A in
the FIS for which no one-hundred-year flood elevations have
been provided. When available, information from other federal,
state, and other acceptable sources shall be used to determine
the one-hundred-year elevation, as well as a floodway area, if
possible. When no other information is available, the onehundred-
year elevation shall be determined by using a point on
the boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest
the construction site in question.
(2) In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken
only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated
qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used
correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies,
analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail
to allow a thorough technical review by the Township.
(3) Within any FW (Floodway Area), the following provisions apply:
(a) No new construction or development shall be allowed, unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
(b) Space below the lowest floor.
[1] Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (including
basement) is prohibited.
[2] Partially enclosed space below the lowest floor is
prohibited.
(c) No variances shall be granted by the Harris Township Zoning
Hearing Board for any development in the floodway that would
result in increased flood heights.
(4) Within any FE (Special Floodplain Area), no new construction or
development shall be allowed unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined
with all other existing and anticipated development, will not
increase the elevation of the one-hundred-year flood more than one
foot at any point.
(5) Within any identified floodplain area, any new construction or
substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the
one-hundred-year flood elevation, or be designed and constructed
so that the space enclosed by such structure shall remain either
completely or essentially dry during any flood up to that height.
§ 12-7.1 HARRIS CODE § 12-7.1
AO:384
(6) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, having a lowest floor
which is not elevated up to, or above, the one-hundred-year flood
elevation, shall be floodproofed in a completely or essentially dry
manner in accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification
standards contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing
Regulations" published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June
1972, as amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent
standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall
be accompanied by a statement certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect which states that the proposed
design and methods of construction are in conformance with the
above-referenced standards.
C. Permitted uses. Floodplains may only be used for the following,
provided such uses do not conflict with the limitations of Subsection D
below:
(1) The tilling of land, the raising of crops, fruits and vegetables, and
the raising and keeping of livestock and poultry;
(2) Horticultural uses related to the raising, propagating, and selling
of trees, shrubs, flowers and other plant materials;
(3) Forestry uses related to the harvesting of lumber products;
(4) Public and private conservation areas for the conservation of open
space, water, soil and wildlife resources;
(5) Park and recreational areas, including golf courses and driving
ranges in districts where permitted;
(6) Essential services, provided such facilities are designed and built to
minimize and eliminate flood damage and infiltration, and are
designed and built to applicable University Area Joint Authority and
State College Borough Water Authority specifications;
(7) Retaining walls, flood retention dams, culverts, and bridges as
permitted by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection; and
(8) Customary uses accessory to the above.
D. Use limitations. The uses permitted in Subsection C are limited as
follows:
(1) All buildings, even if customarily associated with the uses
permitted, are prohibited, except park shelters;
(2) All other uses are prohibited, including but not limited to the
following, which are not interpreted as being customary accessory
uses: filling in of the floodplain or wetland or relocation of any
watercourse; sanitary landfill or dumping of any kind; fences,
except two-wire fences which will not impede, retard or change the
§ 12-7.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-7.1
AO:385
direction of the flow of water or catch or collect debris carried
by such water; outdoor storage of materials which are buoyant,
flammable, explosive, or those hazardous materials listed in
Section 38.7 of the Pennsylvania Department of Community and
Economic Development's Floodplain Management Regulations, 16
Pa. Code, Section 38.7, as amended or supplemented; and on-site
sewage disposal systems.
(3) No activity or development shall be allowed within an identified
floodway or portion of the floodplain which would cause any
increase in flood levels during the one-hundred-year flood.
(4) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent communities which may
be affected by such action have been notified by the Township, and
all required permits or approvals first have been obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection. In addition, the Federal
Insurance Administrator and the Pennsylvania Department of
Community and Economic Development or its successor shall be
notified by the Township prior to any watercourse alteration.
E. Site plan review. All applications for zoning permits for lots, uses, and
structures located within a floodplain or wetland or 100 feet therefrom
shall submit, along with the application, a site plan as required in
Article IX of this chapter. The site plan shall include the elevation of the
lowest floor of the structure, the elevation of the one-hundred-year
flood and certification by an engineer of any required floodproofing
measures.
F. Development in floodplains and wetlands. It shall be the duty of any
landowner or developer applying for a permit for development in a
floodplain as designated in the Flood Insurance Study and
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), or in a wetland
designated by the Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands
Inventory Maps, the 1995 Natural Resource Map prepared by the
Centre Regional Planning Commission or on-site investigation to
present evidence that all other necessary governmental permits,
including those required by state and federal laws, have been obtained.
This may include permits required by the Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act, No. 537 of 1965;131 the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachment Act of 1979;132 the Pennsylvania Flood Plain
Management Act No. 166 of 1978;133 and the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act Amendments of 1972, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1334; as
amended.
(1) The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction
and development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
131. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
132. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
133. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 12-7.1 HARRIS CODE § 12-7.1
AO:386
(a) Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
[1] Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line
from all points;
[2] Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary
landfills shall not be permitted;
[3] Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
resistance to erosion, scouring, or settling;
[4] Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet
unless substantiated data, justifying steeper slopes are
submitted to, and approved by the Township; and
[5] Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
(b) Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed
to convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient
manner. The system shall insure proper drainage along streets,
and provide positive drainage away from buildings. The system
shall also be designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff
onto adjacent properties.
(c) Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
[1] All new or replacement water and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of
floodwaters.
[2] Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to
prevent the discharge of untreated sewage into
floodwaters.
[3] No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located
within any identified floodplain area except in strict
compliance with all state and local regulations for such
systems. If any such system is permitted, it shall be located
so as to avoid impairment to it, or contamination from it,
during a flood.
(d) Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical
and telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where
possible) and constructed to minimize the chance of
impairment during a flood.
(e) Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no
more than one-foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
(f) Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and
structures shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to
§ 12-7.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-7.1
AO:387
offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be
designed to have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of
flood water.
(g) Anchoring.
[1] All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in
accordance with accepted engineering practices to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
[2] All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar
objects or components located below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to prevent
flotation.
(h) Floors, walls and ceilings.
[1] Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be installed to accommodate a lateral
expansion of the flooring, perpendicular to the flooring
grain without causing structural damage to the building.
[2] Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be of a "marine" or "water-resistant" variety.
[3] Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be designed and constructed of materials
that are water-resistant and will withstand inundation.
[4] Windows, doors, and other components at or below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be made of metal or other
water-resistant material.
(i) Paints and adhesives.
[1] Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant
quality.
[2] Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be of a marine or water resistant variety.
[3] All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall
be finished with a marine or water-resistant paint or other
finishing material.
(j) Electrical components.
[1] Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet
above the one-hundred-year flood elevation.
[2] Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and
shall be dropped from above.
§ 12-7.1 HARRIS CODE § 12-7.1
AO:388
(k) Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and
ventilating units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility
equipment or apparatus shall not be located below the
regulatory flood elevation.
(l) Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be
designed to prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the
system and discharges from the system into floodwaters.
Additional provisions shall be made for the drainage of these
systems in the event that floodwater infiltration occurs.
(2) In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management
Act,134 and the regulations adopted by the Department of
Community and Economic Development as required by the Act, any
new or substantially improved structure which: will be used for the
production or storage of any of the following dangerous materials
or substances; or, will be used for any activity requiring the
maintenance of a supply of more than 550 gallons, or other
comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous materials or
substances on the premises; or, will involve the production,
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances, shall be
subject to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other
applicable provisions. The following list of materials and
substances are considered dangerous to human life:
(a) Acetone.
(b) Ammonia.
(c) Benzene.
(d) Calcium carbide.
(e) Carbon disulfide.
(f) Celluloid.
(g) Chlorine.
(h) Hydrochloric acid.
(i) Hydrocyanic acid.
(j) Magnesium.
(k) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(l) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(m) Phosphorus.
(n) Potassium.
134. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 12-7.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-7.1
AO:389
(o) Sodium.
(p) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(q) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and
rodenticides).
(r) Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
(3) Within any floodplain area, any new or substantially improved
structure of the kind described above shall be prohibited.
(4) The provisions of this section do not require any changes or
improvements to be made to lawfully existing structures. However,
when an improvement is made to any existing structure, the
following provisions shall apply:
(a) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
allowed within any floodway area that would cause any
increase in the elevation of the one-hundred-year flood.
(b) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
allowed within any FE area that would, together with all other
existing and anticipated development, increase the onehundred-
year flood elevation more than one foot at any point.
(c) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement,
of any kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of
50% or more of its market value, shall constitute a substantial
improvement and shall be undertaken only in full compliance
with the provisions of this section.
(d) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement
of any kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of
less than 50% of its market value, shall be elevated and/or
floodproofed to the greatest extent possible.
G. No modification or revision of any floodplain area shall be made without
approval of the Federal Insurance Administrator.
H. No modification or revision of any wetland area shall be made without
the approval of a qualified wetlands expert, after completion of an onsite
investigation, a copy of which shall be provided to Harris Township.
I. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOODPLAIN — The limits of the floodplain conservation regulations
are hereby determined to be areas subject to periodic inundation by
floodwaters or runoff as delineated in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
§ 12-7.1 HARRIS CODE § 12-7.1
AO:390
and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Harris
Township, as prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject
to partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream,
river or watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid
accumulation of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWATERS — Waters which escape from streams or other bodies
of water and over low adjacent lands, as distinct from runoff.
FLOODWAY — The designated area of a floodplain required to carry
and discharge flood waters of a given magnitude. For the purposes of
this section, the floodway shall be capable of accommodating a flood of
the one-hundred-year magnitude.
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — The floodplain area specifically
identified in this section as being inundated by the one-hundred-year
flood.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that, on the average, is likely
to occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one-percent chance of
occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year).
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year flood
elevation plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
Areas subject to periodic inundation by floodwaters shall include:
all flood hazard areas indicated as zones A, E, AE, AH, or AO on
the aforementioned Flood Hazard Rate Maps; and all wetlands as
defined herein and by both state and federal regulations.
(1)
All proposed development within areas classified as hydric or
hydric inclusive soils by the Soil Survey of Centre County,
Pennsylvania, prepared by the U.S. Department of Agriculture,
shall provide a wetlands delineation prepared by a qualified
wetlands expert and be subject to review and acceptance by Harris
Township.
(2)
Excluded from the definition of floodplain are: all lands within such
areas designated above to which the natural flow of floodwaters
or runoff within drainage swales has been prevented because of
lawful alterations to such areas by roads, dams, or other
obstructions; and all lands which, prior to the passage of this
section as part of the Code by Ordinance No. 97, January 13, 1986,
were filled with earth to an elevation greater than that of the
boundary of the natural floodplain drainage swale as shown on said
maps.
(3)
§ 12-7.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-7.1
AO:391
§ 12-7.2. Slope controls. [Amended 10-9-1995 by Ord. No. 168]
All land defined herein as having steep slopes shall be subject to the
following regulations:
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure
on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost
of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals of
exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damages
occurred.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails and new manufactured home parks and
subdivisions and substantial improvements to such existing parks,
when such development is located in all, or a designated portion of a
floodplain.
A. Intent. It is the intent of this section to control the development of land
in areas containing steep slopes for the following purposes:
(1) To limit erosion and sedimentation;
(2) To protect watersheds and limit increases in stormwater runoff;
(3) To prevent landslides and soil subsidence;
(4) To maintain adequate vegetative cover on areas subject to erosion;
and
(5) To protect streams from increases in sediment pollution.
B. Permitted uses. Steep slopes of 25% or greater shall be prohibited from
development, except when a tract completely contains slopes of no less
than 25%. Such slopes may be used as permitted by the district
regulations within which they are located, subject to the following
requirements:
(1) Wherever possible, structures and grading of land shall only be
located on portions of a lot where the slope is less than 25%. Where
it is necessary to use steep slopes as herein defined to permit
development of a lot, all such proposals shall, in addition to other
applicable regulations of this chapter, be in accordance with the
following principles of development:
(a) Development shall be oriented so that grading, cutting, filling
and similar site preparations are minimized.
(b) Where such grading is essential, it shall complement the
natural land form and be phased, if necessary, to prevent
excessive exposure of unprotected land.
(c) Paving shall be completed as soon as possible after grading.
§ 12-7.1 HARRIS CODE § 12-7.2
AO:392
§ 12-7.3. Nuisance standards.
All uses of land and structures shall be prohibited which:
§ 12-7.4. Outdoor storage.
The outdoor storage of materials shall be subject to the following
requirements:
§ 12-7.5. Waste and sewage disposal.135
All methods and plans for the disposal of sewage and wastes shall be
designed in accordance with regulations of the Pennsylvania Department
(d) Areas around structures shall be landscaped to blend them
with the natural landscape.
(e) Measures shall be taken to minimize erosion and
sedimentation and to limit increases in stormwater runoff in
accordance with related regulations of the Township and the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
C. Site plan review. All applications for zoning permits for lots, uses, and
structures located, in whole or in part, on land with steep slopes shall
submit, along with the application, a site plan as required by Article IX
of this chapter. Such applications shall also include a stormwater
management plan as required by Chapter 13, Stormwater
Management, of the Harris Township Code, and a copy of an erosion
and sedimentation control plan as required by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
A. Produce heat or vibration perceptible by human senses beyond the lot
line.
B. Produce glare from any process which emits harmful ultraviolet rays,
including arc welding and acetylene torch cutting, perceptible beyond
the lot line.
C. Produce electromagnetic radiation or radioactive emissions injurious to
human beings, animals, or vegetation, or which interfere with the use of
any other property.
A. All outdoor storage of fuel, raw materials, and products, except finished
products for retail sale to the public, in any Commercial or Industrial
District, or in the Village District, shall be completely screened from
view from any public right-of-way and Residential District by a sightobscuring
evergreen planting, fence or wall.
B. All discarded organic rubbish or garbage stored outdoors shall be
placed in watertight, verminproof containers.
135. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 12-7.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-7.5
AO:393
of Environmental Protection pertaining thereto. A required sewage permit
issued by the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer or University Area
Joint Authority shall be a prerequisite to the issuance of a zoning permit.
§ 12-7.6. Outdoor illumination. [Amended 10-13-1997 by Ord. No.
180]
§ 12-7.7. Soil erosion control.
Unless otherwise regulated by this chapter, any vacant portion of a lot not
in use shall be planted with grass or similar vegetation, and/or trees and
shrubs, except for farm uses and gardens left vacant outside the growing
season.
§ 12-7.8. Motor vehicle access. [Amended 6-20-1984 by Ord. No.
101]
Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a
public street or with motor vehicle access to a public street via a private
A. Residential lighting.
(1) All outdoor lighting fixtures shall be designed and directed so as to
prevent direct light from shining onto the property of any neighbor
or onto any public street or sidewalk. All luminaires designed for
entryway safety and decorative purposes on residential buildings
and structures with lamps of 60 watts or less do not require fixtures
that cut off direct light from view.
(2) The regulations of Subsection B shall apply to parking lot
illumination in any residential zoning district.
B. Nonresidential lighting.
(1) All nonresidential properties that provide outdoor lighting shall
design such lighting so as to prevent a direct view of the light
source (bulb) from any location off of the property by means of
shielding, decreased pole height, or any other means determined to
be acceptable to the Township. All luminaires designed for
entryway safety and decorative purposes on nonresidential
buildings and structures with lamps of 100 watts or less do not
require fixtures that cut off direct light from view.
(2) At the time of application for a zoning permit, a lighting plan
showing proposed wattage, light fixture design, pole height,
anticipated lighting pattern, and any other information deemed
necessary by the Township shall be submitted for review and
approval.
(3) At no time shall direct light from any nonresidential property be
permitted to shine onto another property or onto any public street
or sidewalk.
§ 12-7.5 HARRIS CODE § 12-7.8
AO:394
street. The intent of the following regulations is to provide safe and
convenient access for servicing, fire protection, traffic circulation, and
required off-street parking.
§ 12-7.9. Off-street parking and loading regulations. [Amended
10-2-1985 by Ord. No. 104; 9-14-1987 by Ord. No. 109; 10-13-1997
by Ord. No. 187; 5-14-2001 by Ord. No. 211; 4-12-2004 by Ord. No.
244]
Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided and maintained for
each use and structure hereafter established, erected, altered, or extended
in accordance with the provisions of this section:
A. On arterial streets, access for each lot shall be limited to not more than
two driveways for the 300 feet of frontage or fraction thereof, and one
driveway for each additional 300 feet of frontage. On all other streets,
access shall be provided by not more than one driveway for the first 50
feet of frontage or fraction thereof, and one driveway for each
additional 50 feet of frontage.
B. No driveway shall be closer to the side or rear property line than five
feet, unless the two adjoining property owners mutually agree to a
common driveway.
C. Driveways which provide access to all uses other than detached and
semidetached dwellings shall have a throat width of not less than 12
feet or greater than 24 feet, and the curb return radius shall not be less
than 13 feet or greater than 15 feet.
D. In the R-3, RO, C-1, I-1, and I-2 Districts, all driveways shall enter a
public street right-of-way at least 100 feet from the intersection with
another public street, except for intersections of two or more arterial
streets, in which case the minimum distance shall be at least 200 feet.
In all other districts, all driveways shall enter a public street right-ofway
at least 50 feet from its intersection with another public street of
any classification. If the lot width is insufficient to provide for the
required distance, access shall be as far from the intersection as the lot
and other provisions of this chapter will permit. For all cases cited
above, the distance in which access is prohibited shall be measured
from the tangent of the curb return of the intersection street cartway to
the tangent of the curb return of the driveway, but shall not include, in
measurement, any portion of either curb return.
E. If two or more driveways of the same lot enter a public street right-ofway,
the distance between the entrances of the driveways shall be at
least 50 feet.
F. Driveways are prohibited from intersecting with Main Street in the
Village District from any lot which has access on another public street
or alley.
A. General regulations.
§ 12-7.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-7.9
AO:395
(1) All required off-street parking spaces shall be used solely for the
parking of motor vehicles by residents, visitors, patrons, or
employees. Two or more motor vehicles without current and valid
inspection stickers as required by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania shall not be parked or stored on any lot unless within
completely enclosed buildings, except in the General Industrial
District as part of a permitted auto wrecking, junk, and scrap
establishment.
(2) Location.
(a) All required parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as
the use they serve, except that:
[1] The owner of two or more abutting lots may locate the use
on one lot and the parking space required for the use on
another of his abutting lots; or
[2] Two or more abutting property owners may locate the
parking space required for their uses on any of their lots
if:
[a] The lot(s) providing the parking space abuts the lot(s)
containing the use(s) it serves;
[b] All of the affected lots are in the same zoning district;
[c] The total number of spaces provided is not less than
the sum of spaces required for all the uses;
[d] Means of pedestrian access is provided from the
parking space to the uses so that pedestrians are not
required to traverse property owned by other than
said property owners, except where public sidewalks
may provide the access; and
[e] That a lease, easement, or other form of agreement be
executed among said property owners assuring use of
the required parking spaces until or unless the
required parking spaces are located on the same lot as
the use they serve; or
[3] In the Village District, the parking spaces required for a
use of a lot may be located on another lot, provided:
[a] The lot on which the parking is located is in the Village
Commercial District or in the Village District.
[Amended 8-15-2018 by Ord. No. 332]
[b] The lot on which the parking is provided is within 66
feet of the lot on which the use is located; and
§ 12-7.9 HARRIS CODE § 12-7.9
AO:396
[c] That a lease, easement, or other form of general
agreement be executed among the owners of the lot
on which the use and parking are located assuring the
use of the required parking spaces until or unless the
required parking spaces and the use which the
parking spaces serve are located on the same lot.
(b) In all cases above, both lots shall be included in the application
for a zoning permit.
(c) All parking spaces and lots open to the sky (i.e., not in garages
and carports) shall be located no closer than five feet from any
property line, except for abutting property lines of two or more
lots exercising the options for common parking stipulated in
Subsection A(2) above.
(d) All covered parking spaces and lots, including garages and
carports, shall not be located within any yard setback area,
except when permitted as an accessory building regulated in
§ 12-2.4A(1) of this chapter.
(3) Existing facilities. Parking spaces and lots serving structures and
uses in existence at the date of the adoption of this chapter shall
not be subject to the requirements of this section as long as the
kind or extent of use is not changed, provided that any parking
facility now serving such structures or uses shall not in the future
be reduced below such requirements, or if already below such
requirements, be reduced further.
(4) Change in requirements. Whenever there is an alteration or
extension of a use or structure which increases the parking
requirements according to Subsection B below, the total additional
parking required for the alteration or extension shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements of this subsection.
(5) Surfacing. All required off-street parking spaces and aisles shall be
covered with asphalt or concrete except those uses exempted from
this requirement in areas zoned Agricultural and Forest where
alternate pervious materials are permitted. Regardless of the
zoning designation for spaces and aisles which are not of the
parking lot as herein defined, this may include gravel or other
crushed stone. All impervious surface parking lots shall have
parking spaces designated with a four-inch yellow or white stripe
painted the entire length of each space in accordance with the
dimensional requirements stipulated in Subsection B below.
(a) Impervious sections. Asphalt parking lots shall consist of 1.5
inches minimum depth ID-2 wearing course (9.5 mm
Superpave PG 64-22), 2.5 inches minimum depth ID-2 Binder
Course (25.0 mm Superpave PG 64-22), or three inches
minimum depth bituminous concrete base course (25.0 mm
Superpave PG 64-22), and 2A subbase (minimum depth four
§ 12-7.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-7.9
AO:397
inches). A pavement section design must be submitted to the
Township for review and comment for parking facilities where
a high percentage of heavy vehicles is anticipated. Concrete
parking lots may be either plain cement concrete or reinforced
concrete (Class AA) on a 2A subbase (minimum depth six
inches). Depth of concrete shall be determined by the design
engineer and must be submitted to the Township for review
and comment.
(b) Pervious sections. Pervious sections for parking facilities may
be used in areas zoned agricultural and forest, provided that
the parking facility is to be used for infrequent, seasonal, or
event parking and is outside of Township right-of-way.
[1] Pervious bituminous pavement section shall consist of an
open-graded coarse aggregate base course, AASHTO #1
or AASHTO #2, for example, choked in with a smallersized
open-graded coarse aggregate, AASHTO #57 or
AASHTO #67, for example, overlaid with an open-graded
bituminous pavement. Subsurface drainage must consist
of an underdrain pipe system or other means of
eliminating the runoff that has infiltrated through the
pervious pavement. Infiltration capacity of the subgrade
must be certified by a qualified geotechnical professional if
the infiltration capacity of the subgrade is the only method
provided for the removal of water. The design of the
pervious pavement section along with all appropriate
calculations must be submitted to the Township for review
and comment.
[2] Turf pavers or "hardscaping" shall consist of a compacted
coarse aggregate base with sand bedding on which opengrid
concrete blocks are seated. The voids of the blocks
are to be filled with topsoil, appropriate high-traffic grass
seed and soil supplements. The construction method shall
be in conformance with the manufacturer's recommended
installation guidelines. The design, including evaluation of
the suitability of the existing soil and manufacturer's cut
sheets and recommended installation, shall be submitted
to the Township for review and comment.
[3] Stabilized turf shall consist of coarse aggregate such as
PennDOT 2A and topsoil along with appropriate soil
supplements. Minimum depth of the stabilized turf to be
eight inches. Design of stabilized turf shall be prepared by
a qualified professional and must include evaluation of
suitability of in situ soils and documentation of past
projects using the proposed design.
B. Required off-street parking spaces. All uses and structures shall provide
off-street parking spaces in an amount equal to, or greater than, the
§ 12-7.9 HARRIS CODE § 12-7.9
AO:398
number listed below. The total number of parking spaces necessary for
two or more uses, whether primary or accessory, on the same lot shall
be the sum of that required for each use. [Amended 4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 302; 12-10-2012 by Ord. No. 305; 8-15-2018 by Ord. No. 332]
(1) Dimensions. Each required off-street parking space shall be at least
nine feet wide and 18 feet long if set at an angle to the access aisle,
or eight feet wide and 24 feet long if parallel to the access aisle.
(2) Number and computations. In computing the required number of
spaces, all fractional numbers shall be increased to the next
highest integer. When computation is based on the number of
employees, the number employed during the largest work shift
shall be used.
Use
Number of
Required
Spaces
Residential Uses
Structures with less than 4
dwelling units
2 per dwelling
unit
Structures with more than 4
dwelling units
1.5 per
dwelling unit
Commercial Uses
All retail and service
establishments except those
specified below
1 per 250
square feet of
gross floor area
Furniture stores, contractor's
equipment, farm equipment and
feed sales, boat and marine,
mobile home, motor vehicle, and
monument burial vault and
casket sales
1 per 400
square feet of
gross floor
area, plus 1 per
3,000 square
feet of outside
sales area
Automobile service station 1 per 400
square of gross
floor area, 1
per fuel pump,
plus 1 per bay
if the station
provides for
repairs or
service
§ 12-7.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-7.9
AO:399
Use
Number of
Required
Spaces
Barbers and beauticians 1 space per 150
square feet of
gross floor area
or 2 spaces per
barber or
styling chair,
whichever is
less
Car wash 1 per wash bay
plus 1 per 250
square feet of
gross floor area
(not including
wash bays)
Mortuary 1 space for
every 50
square feet of
floor area in
the parlors of
the
establishments,
plus 1 space for
every 300
square feet of
remaining
gross floor area
Bowling alleys 3 per lane plus
1 per 350
square feet of
gross floor area
(not including
lanes)
Billiard parlors, table tennis,
pinball machines, or similar
amusement enterprises
1 per 350
square feet of
gross floor area
Arenas, stadiums, auditoriums,
theaters, roller rinks, ice rinks,
and dance halls
1 per 175
square feet of
gross floor area
Business, professional, and
financial offices
1 per 300
square feet of
gross floor area
§ 12-7.9 HARRIS CODE § 12-7.9
AO:400
Use
Number of
Required
Spaces
Medical and dental offices,
clinics
1 per 300
square feet of
gross floor area
Eating and drinking
establishments
1 per 100
square feet of
gross floor area
Hotels, motels, and bed-andbreakfast
facilities
1.25 per room,
1 per 300
square feet of
assembly/
conference
rooms and
banquet
facilities, plus
such spaces as
are required
for eating and
drinking
establishments
Nursing homes, personal care
homes, and other convalescent
homes
1 space per 3
beds plus 1 per
employee
Industrial Uses
All industrial uses except those
specified below
1 per 1,000
square feet of
gross floor area
and outside
operations
(excluding
storage)
Auto wrecking, junk, and scrap
establishments
1 per 5,000
square feet of
indoor/outdoor
storage area
plus 1 space
each 300
square feet of
office area
Freight and trucking terminals, moving and
storage, parcel delivery and express transfer
stations, and wholesale distributors and
warehouses
1 per 2,000
square feet of
gross floor area
§ 12-7.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-7.9
AO:401
Use
Number of
Required
Spaces
Industrial park 1 per 300
square feet of
gross floor area
Public and Quasi-Public Uses
Ambulance, taxi, and limousine
service
1 per vehicle
maintained on
the premises
plus 1 per 300
square feet of
gross floor area
Bus passenger station 1 per 250
square feet of
gross floor area
Child day-care center 1 per 350
square feet of
gross floor area
Churches and other places of
worship
1 per 125
square feet of
gross floor area
plus any spaces
required for
office, child
care, and other
accessory uses
Clubs, lodges, fraternal
organizations
1 per 100
square feet of
gross floor area
Commercial cemeteries 25 plus 1 per
employee
Golf courses and driving ranges 2 per tee
Hospitals 1 per 400
square feet of
gross floor area
Public libraries, museums, art
galleries, visitor centers
1 per 800
square feet of
gross floor area
Schools:
§ 12-7.9 HARRIS CODE § 12-7.9
AO:402
Use
Number of
Required
Spaces
Institutions of
higher
education and
postsecondary
schools
1 per 500 feet
of gross floor
area, plus any
additional
spaces
necessary for
administrative
offices and
dormitories
Nursery,
kindergarten,
elementary
1 per 600
square feet of
gross floor area
Secondary
schools
1 per 500
square feet of
gross floor area
Group home 5 spaces
Community center or halfway
house
1 space per 150
square feet of
gross floor area
Public and Private Recreation Uses in the Agricultural and Forest
Zones. The purpose of this entry is to recognize that the
requirement for impervious parking areas contained in
Subsection A(5)(a) of this section may not be appropriate for
certain recreation uses that may occur in the Township's
Agricultural and Forest Zoning Districts. The following uses are
permitted and encouraged to utilize mud-free, stabilized off-street
parking areas within the Agricultural and Forest Districts. These
parking areas can utilize alternate pervious material, in
accordance with standards outlined in Subsection A(2)(b).
Handicapped parking spaces within the exempted parking areas
are required to utilize impervious materials, in accordance with
standards outlined in Subsection A(5)(a).
Animal boarding kennels 1 space per 250
square feet of
office space
plus 1 space
per 1,000
square feet of
animal holding
areas
§ 12-7.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-7.9
AO:403
Use
Number of
Required
Spaces
Go-cart race track, miniature
golf
1 per go-cart, 2
per golf tee,
plus 1 space
per 250 square
feet of office
area
Batting cages, skate park, ice
rink
1 space per
machine, 1
space per 4
seats or 1
space per 4
persons, based
on maximum
design capacity
Public/private recreation area 25 spaces per
established
field/activity
area
Campground 1 space per
campsite plus 1
space per 250
square feet of
office area
Archery range (indoor or
outdoor)
1 space per
target plus 1
space per 250
square feet of
office area
Rifle, pistol, skeet or shotgun
range
1 space per
stand or
shooting
station plus 1
space per 250
square feet of
office area
§ 12-7.9 HARRIS CODE § 12-7.9
AO:404
Use
Number of
Required
Spaces
Horse riding stables and
academies
1 space per
horse stall plus
1 space per
employee; 1
space per 4
persons for
indoor arenas
based on
maximum
capacity
Nature education center 1 per 3 persons
based on
maximum
design capacity
Landscape contractor business 1 space per 250
square feet of
gross floor area
plus 1 space
per 3,000
square feet of
outside storage
and staging
areas
C. Parking lots. For the purposes of this chapter, parking lots are defined
as facilities providing off-street parking space for five or more motor
vehicles. All parking lots shall meet the design and maintenance
standards specified below. All applications for a zoning permit to use
land, in whole or in part, as a parking lot as herein defined shall be
accompanied by a site plan as stipulated in Article IX.
(1) Dimensions. All parking spaces shall comply with the dimensions
specified in Subsection B above. The minimum dimensions of all
aisles providing access to parking lot spaces shall be as follows:
Aisle Width
Angle of Parking Space to
Aisle
One-Way
(feet)
Two-Way
(feet)
Parallel 12 20
30° (150°) 12 20
45° (135°) 15 20
60° (120°) 18 20
90° 24 24
§ 12-7.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-7.9
AO:405
(a) No portion of any parking space shall intrude into the required
aisle width. For aisles providing access to parking spaces set at
angles other than those specified above, the required aisle
width shall be that of the nearest specified angle of parking. If
equidistant from specified angles, the greatest aisle width of
the two nearest angles shall apply.
(2) Obstructions. Parking lots shall be designed to permit each motor
vehicle to proceed to and from all unoccupied parking spaces
without requiring the moving of any other parked motor vehicle.
(3) Ingress and egress. Entrance and exit driveways and aisles linking
parking lots to public streets shall comply with the standards for
motor vehicle access stipulated in § 12-7.8 of this article. Parking
spaces shall be designed to prevent motor vehicles from backing
onto a public street in order to leave a lot.
(4) Location and yard; requirements. All parking lots shall meet the
location requirements stipulated in Subsection A(2) above. All
yards surrounding the parking lot, exclusive of driveways providing
ingress and egress to the lot, shall be bordered by a curb six inches
high along the sides of the yard area abutting the parking lot,
including spaces and aisles. Such curb may consist of bumpers at
the end of each parking space. Setback areas shall be planted with
grass or similar vegetative material and may include shrubs,
fences, or walls, provided they are not placed closer than three feet
from any parking space.
(5) Structures. Utility poles, light standards, and similar structures
shall not be permitted within any aisle or parking space. Any
structure located elsewhere within a parking lot shall be
surrounded on all sides abutting the spaces or aisles by a curb six
inches high, separated from the structure by at least three feet, the
distance to be measured from the broadest point on each side
exclusive of any portion greater than 10 feet from the ground.
(6) Raised islands. Raised islands shall be installed at the ends of all
parking bays abutting an aisle or driveway. The raised islands shall
be bordered by a curb six inches high wherever it abuts a space or
aisle, and shall be at least 10 feet wide and extend the length of the
parking space and/or bay. The islands shall be planted with grass,
shrubs, or similar vegetative materials, and may be combined with
crushed stone. Utility poles and light standards are permitted
within the raised islands, provided they are separated from the
spaces and aisles as required in Subsection C(5) above.
(7) Maintenance. All parking lots shall be kept free of litter and trash.
Any vegetative material required herein which dies shall be
replaced as soon as recommended seasonal conditions occur for
the replacement of the species.
§ 12-7.9 HARRIS CODE § 12-7.9
AO:406
D. Loading regulations. Space for the loading and unloading of vehicles
shall be provided when required below. Each required space shall be at
least 12 feet in width, 45 feet in length, and have a vertical clearance of
at least 14 feet. Spaces shall be located no closer than 10 feet from a
public right-of-way and five feet from any other lot line, and shall be
paved with an all-weather material.
(1) One off-street loading space is required for all nonresidential uses
with a floor area of at least 5,000 square feet but less than 20,000
square feet. For nonresidential uses which have a floor area of
20,000 square feet or more, one additional space shall be provided
for each additional 20,000 square feet or fraction thereof.
(2) Required off-street parking spaces shall not be used for loading and
unloading purposes, except during hours when business operations
are suspended.
(3) All required loading and unloading spaces shall be located on the
same property as the use they serve.
(4) The provisions of Subsections C and D above pertaining to offstreet
parking space shall also pertain to all required off-street
loading and unloading spaces.
Illustration of Selected Parking Lot Requirements
E. Public transit facilities. [Added 11-9-2015 by Ord. No. 322]
(1) Public transit facilities shall be a permitted use in all zoning
districts in Harris Township in accordance with the provisions of
this section.
§ 12-7.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-7.9
AO:407
(2) Public transit facilities may be incorporated into any new or
existing development subject to the review and approval of Harris
Township and the Centre Area Transportation Authority. The
appropriateness, design and location of these facilities shall be
based on ADA (Americans with Disabilities Act) standards and the
operational requirements of the Centre Area Transportation
Authority or its successor.
(3) Public transit facilities shall be maintained in good repair, and the
provider shall be responsible for the cleaning, repairing or
replacement of any part thereof, including walkways, curbs or
foundations encompassed by the public transit facility.
(4) A transit shelter may be located within the right-of-way of a public
street, provided:
(a) The transit shelter provider shall be responsible for the
construction, maintenance, permits, fees and removal of said
shelter.
(b) Transit shelters may be equipped with lighting that improves
the safety and security of waiting passengers. Transit shelter
lighting shall be designed such as to prevent the direct view of
the light source (bulb) from any location outside of the public
right-of-way by any means determined to be acceptable by the
Township.
F. Accessible parking spaces. Accessible parking spaces that comply with
the Americans with Disabilities Act shall be provided as follows:
[Added 8-15-2018 by Ord. No. 332]
(1) The number of accessible spaces required shall be calculated as
follows:
Total Parking in Lot Required Minimum Number
of Accessible Spaces
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of total
1,001 and over 20, plus 1 for each 100 over
1,000
§ 12-7.9 HARRIS CODE § 12-7.9
AO:408
§ 12-7.10. Corridor Overlay District regulations. [Amended
9-12-1992 by Ord. No. 145; 3-11-2002 by Ord. No. 220]
The following regulations shall apply to all properties located within 660
feet of the center line of the rights-of-way of SR 0045 within the boundaries
of Harris Township, as illustrated on the Harris Township Zoning Map. The
Corridor Overlay District (COD) regulations shall apply to all development
activities that occur within the designated area. All site plans, subdivision
plans and land development plans submitted to the Township for review and
approval, whether for residential of nonresidential development, shall be
required to address the regulations contained in this section.
(2) One of every six accessible parking spaces or fraction thereof, but
no less than one, must be "van-accessible." Van-accessible spaces
and access aisles shall comply with the Americans with Disabilities
Act.
(3) Each required accessible parking space shall be denoted by a
ground pole sign bearing the international handicapped symbol,
and the pavement of each required space shall also be marked with
the international symbol in accordance with state regulations.
(4) Parking lots shall be designed so that all buildings served by the
parking lot are accessible by persons with disabilities. Curbing
shall be depressed at strategic locations for ease of access, spaces
shall be located as close as possible to entrance(s) of a proposed
use and grades shall be such that they can be traversed by a person
confined to a wheelchair.
(5) Refer to the Americans with Disabilities Act as amended for
additional design criteria. If a conflict exists between these
requirements for handicapped accessible spaces and the
Americans with Disabilities Act regulations, the stricter shall apply.
A. Traffic impacts. A traffic impact study shall be submitted for all plans,
as described above, within the COD. Prior to the completion of the
traffic study, the applicant shall provide a copy of the plan to the Centre
Regional Planning Agency (CRPA), the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PennDOT), and Township staff to allow these entities to
identify an acceptable scope of the work for the study. All
recommendations shall be considered prior to plan approval.
B. Access. An important goal of the COD is to promote safety within the
Township's major transportation corridors by preventing unmanaged
ingress and egress points along these corridors. To accomplish this,
access to arterial streets within the COD shall be from the lowest
classification street possible. The following priority system shall be
used to provide access to properties within the COD:
(1) An existing street of lesser classification than the arterial street.
§ 12-7.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-7.10
AO:409
(2) A service/marginal access street, loop street or cul-de-sac street
approved by the Township that connects to the arterial street.
(3) Directly onto the arterial street, provided that access to each lot
shall be limited to not more than one driveway for each 200 feet of
frontage. If multiple access points exist prior to the submission of
the plan, a design shall be implemented which reduces the number
of access points to the arterial street.
C. Landscaping. A detailed landscape plan shall be submitted to the
Township for all plans within the COD. The landscape plan shall identify
all existing trees that will be preserved on-site, as well as the type,
number and size of trees and shrubs that will be planted. The landscape
plan shall also address the following landscape requirements.
(1) Buffer yards.
(a) To determine the amount of landscape plantings to be provided
within the front, side and rear yard areas, the buffer yard
provisions of Table 1 of Chapter 12, which establishes land use
classifications and associated required plantings, shall be
utilized. For the purposes of applying these buffer yard
requirements, arterial roadways shall be considered a Class IV
land use. Existing trees may be preserved and counted toward
the required buffer yard plantings.
(b) Any trees planted in required buffer yards must be warranted
for a three-year period, meaning those that die must be
replaced with trees meeting the standards contained herein.
(2) Landscape islands. Raised landscape islands shall be installed
within all off-street parking areas in the COD. One raised island
shall be required for every 10 parking spaces. Each landscape
island shall be equal to the length and width of a standard parking
space and shall contain two canopy shade trees in a minimum of
two-and-one-half-inch caliper measured 12 inches above ground
level.
(3) Tree preservation.
(a) An inventory of existing trees shall be provided with all plans
for development within the COD showing the location, size and
type of trees larger than six-inch caliper measured 12 inches
above the ground. All such trees shall be preserved unless site
characteristics such as utility location, access needs, etc.
prohibit the preservation of existing trees; any such trees
removed must be replaced with trees not less than 1/3 the size
of the removed trees with a maximum size of three-inch caliper.
(b) Any trees planted as replacements for trees removed over sixinch
caliper, as described above, shall be warranted for a
§ 12-7.10 HARRIS CODE § 12-7.10
AO:410
§ 12-7.11. Designated well sites, potable water well pump station
facilities, water treatment facilities, and water storage tanks.
[Added 4-12-1993 by Ord. No. 148]
Provided with every zoning permit application, the site plan shall include
the following studies and/or plan information if relevant to the site:
three-year period, meaning those that die must be replaced
with trees meeting the standards contained herein.
(4) Design requirements. All portions and sides of buildings located
within the COD that have walls visible from a street within the COD
shall be surfaced with the same and/or compatible materials as are
used on the designated fronts of the buildings. Site plan elevation
drawings shall be required for all visible surfaces and shall include
a description of the exterior surface building materials. All rooftop
mechanical systems shall be screened by fencing or other means.
(5) Lighting.
(a) Outdoor lighting within the COD shall comply with the
Township's lighting regulations contained in § 12-7.6.
(b) Illuminated signs within the COD shall comply with the
Township's lighting regulations, as described herein. Backlit
awnings and canopies within the COD shall be considered
signs and shall be subject to the requirements of Article XIV of
this chapter.
(6) Pedestrian and bicycle access. The Township shall require
pedestrian/bicycle sidewalks or paths along and through properties
within the COD. Prior to submission of a plan, the applicant shall
provide a written request to the CRPA for input on pedestrian/
bicycle facilities on-site. If access to an adjacent pedestrian way or
bikeway is required, the paved connection shall be not less than 10
feet in width. In addition, parking lots within the COD shall be
designed to promote safe separation of pedestrian and vehicular
traffic.
A. Ambient sound level.
B. Vegetative and/or wall screening of the facility from adjacent properties
and roads.
C. Odors emitted from the facility.
D. Emergency vehicle access.
E. Vibrations produced by the facility.
F. Off-site interference attributed to the facility.
G. Traffic generated by the facility and access.
§ 12-7.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-7.11
AO:411
§ 12-7.12. Zero lot line dwellings. [Added 10-9-1995 by Ord. No.
168]
§ 12-7.13. Ridge Overlay District requirements. [Added 3-26-2008
by Ord. No. 277]
H. If fencing and lighting are included with the site plan, they must be
shown on the plan.
A. Zero lot line dwellings, as defined in Article XI, are permitted in the
Single-Family Residential District and in the rural zoning districts when
utilizing the open space - rural clustering regulations.
B. Zero lot line dwellings shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) One side yard setback shall be zero, with the other side yard
conforming to the district regulations for side yards.
(2) Zero lot line dwellings shall be configured so as to adjoin common
zero side yard setbacks.
A. The Ridge Overlay District requirements are intended to provide land
use and land use development controls along specified ridge corridors
in the Township as an overlay that is supplemental to the underlying
Forest Zoning District regulations. If a conflict exists between the
regulations of this section and the underlying zoning district
regulations, the more restrictive section requirements shall apply.
B. Intent. [Amended 7-11-2011 by Ord. No. 295]
(1) The parcels located within the overlay zone are identified as having
slopes of 15% or greater and/or soils which are considered colluvial
in nature. These soils may include the following: Andover (AnB,
AnC, AoB, AoC), Buchanan (BuC, BxB, BxD) or Laidig (LaD, LcB,
LcD, LDF) or colluvial soils rated by the National Resources
Conservation Service's (NRCS) Web Soil Survey as being "Very
Limited" for uses such as septic tank absorption fields, habitable
structures with basements, and local roads and streets. A rating of
"Very Limited" by the Web Soil Survey indicates that the soil has
one or more features that are unfavorable for the specified use. The
limitations generally cannot be overcome without major soil
reclamation, special design, or expensive installation procedures.
Poor performance and high maintenance can be expected. The
limitations associated with the colluvial soils include a seasonal
high (perched) water tables, hydric soils, fragipan, soil instability,
steep slopes, slow permeability, large and/or excessive stones, and
frost action.
(2) It is the intent of the Ridge Overlay District requirements set forth
hereinafter to restrict the intensity of development on areas
containing slopes of 15% or greater and/or colluvial soils with
severe limitations, and:
§ 12-7.11 HARRIS CODE § 12-7.13
AO:412
(a) To identify the location of the most severe soil areas where
development is not appropriate;
(b) To minimize the potential for damage from erosion,
sedimentation, landslide and flooding;
(c) To protect the property of the Township and future
homeowners from adverse conditions; and
(d) To protect and retain natural resources, especially surface
water and groundwater resources within the Township.
C. Delineation of Ridge Overlay District. The Ridge Overlay District
requirements shall be applied in the areas depicted on the Official
Zoning Map for Harris Township. This includes all lands located within
the Forest Zoning District with slopes of 15% or greater and/or
underlying colluvial soils, as identified by the NRCS's Web Soil Survey.
D. Site plan review. A site plan, as described by Article IX, shall accompany
all applications for zoning permits for lots, uses, and structures located
in whole or in part on land located within the Ridge Overlay District.
Site plans must also include soils mapping information based on the
NRCS's Web Soil Survey.
E. Septic system approval. As part of the soils testing for the entire site,
the testing for septic systems must be accomplished. The septic
systems must be approved by the Township's Sewage Enforcement
Officer in conformity with the rules, policies, regulations and
specifications of the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP).
F. Federal and state permits. It is recommended that the need for any
federal and state permits be investigated, and that such permits be
obtained, prior to moving forward with any development plans within
the overlay district.
G. Criteria for erection of habitable structure on existing lots. For the
construction of a habitable structure on a lot existing at the time of
adoption of these regulations, and when no subdivision or land
development is proposed or required, the following criteria shall apply:
[Amended 7-11-2011 by Ord. No. 295]
(1) The site plan, as per Subsection D, must identify the location of all
colluvial soils and slopes of 15% or greater as well as delineate the
portion of the lot which encompasses the buildable area, which
shall be considered the same as the area of potential land
disturbance that includes the footprint of the structure and any
accessory structure or outbuilding, the access, and, if necessary,
the on-lot disposal system.
(2) In addition, a note must be placed on the plan which will alert
future homeowners to the potential for sinkholes, flooding and
drainage issues, as well as the possibility for development of the lot
§ 12-7.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-7.13
AO:413
to require special design or construction considerations to mitigate
the limitations imposed by the soils and/or slopes.
(3) Perennial and intermittent streams. No land disturbance which
would involve the construction of a habitable structure or the
installation of a driveway which is used for access to a habitable
structure may occur within 50 feet of a perennial or intermittent
stream. Since some perennial or intermittent streams may have the
capacity to carry substantially more runoff than others, the
required separation distance may be reduced as a result of a
hydrological analysis of the characteristics of each specific site
and/or the issuance of appropriate state or federal permits
associated with the proposed construction activity.
(4) Floodplain. No land disturbance which would involve the
construction of a habitable structure or the installation of a
driveway which is used for access to a habitable structure may
occur within 50 feet of the edge of a floodplain or the floodplain
conservation district as defined by the Flood Hazard Boundary Map
for Harris Township prepared by the Federal Insurance
Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency. This
distance may be reduced for areas where there is a minimum fivepercent
rise between the edge of the floodplain and the area of
earth disturbance. Where such reduction in distance is desired,
information shall be provided to assure that an adequate
separation has been provided. All land located within a floodplain
or wetland shall also be subject to the regulations of § 12-7.1.
(5) Sinkholes. No land disturbance which would involve the
construction of a habitable structure or the installation of a
driveway which is used for access to a habitable structure may
occur within 50 feet of the edge of the sinkhole. If there is a
drainage channel leading to the sinkhole, a minimum of 50 feet on
all sides of the drainage channel shall be protected.
(6) Slope and soils. Land disturbance which would involve the
construction of a habitable structure or the installation of a
driveway which is used for access to a habitable structure shall
minimize impacts on soils defined as colluvial in this chapter. All
land defined as having steep slopes of 25% or greater shall be
subject to the regulations found in § 12-7.2.
(7) Springs. No land disturbance which involves the construction of a
habitable structure or the installation of a driveway which is used
for access to a habitable structure may occur within 50 feet of a
defined spring. This required separation distance may be reduced
as the result of a hydrological analysis of the characteristics of each
specific site and/or the issuance of appropriate state or federal
permits associated with the proposed development activity.
§ 12-7.13 HARRIS CODE § 12-7.13
AO:414
(8) Wetlands. No land disturbance which would involve the
construction of a habitable structure or the installation of a
driveway which is used for access to a habitable structure may
occur within 50 feet of the edge of a defined wetland area as
established by this chapter, DEP, and/or the Army Corps of
Engineers. This distance may be reduced, if necessary; when the
appropriate permits from these state and federal agencies are
obtained. Where such reduction in separation distance is desired,
information shall be submitted that substantiates the need to
reduce the separation distance as well as the endorsement of the
permitting agencies.
(9) Wooded areas. The removal of healthy trees on the site shall be
minimized to the greatest extent practicable. Existing wooded
areas shall be protected to prevent unnecessary destruction or
removal of healthy trees with a minimum trunk caliper of five
inches at six inches above ground level.
(10) Excavation and fill. No excavation or fill that will cause any slope to
become unstable; impose loads that may affect the safety of
structures or slopes; interfere with adequate drainage for the site
area and the drainage area of land tributary to the site; obstruct,
damage, or adversely affect existing sewerage or drainage; cause a
stagnant pond of water to form; or cause erosion or sedimentation
shall be permitted.
(11) The site plan as detailed in Subsection D shall include soils
mapping as per NRCS's Web Soil Survey or the Centre County Soil
Survey for the entire site. The Township Engineer or his/her
designated agent shall review the soils report within the context of
the regulations and guidelines for construction specified in this
chapter to determine whether the proposed disturbance minimizes
impact to the greatest extent practicable to allow for the
construction of one habitable structure. The Township Engineer's
decision may be appealed by the applicant to the Zoning Hearing
Board.
H. Criteria for subdivision and land development in the Ridge Overlay
District. The following criteria will determine the ability to, and
establish the process for subdivision and land development in the Ridge
Overlay District: [Added 7-11-2011 by Ord. No. 295]
(1) No new building lots may be created after the date of enactment of
this subsection which do not encompass sufficient buildable area to
comply with the applicable provisions of Subsection H(3) through
(11). The buildable area shall be considered the same as the area of
potential land disturbance and includes the footprint of the
structure and any accessory structure or out building, the access,
and if necessary, the on-lot disposal system as well as suitable land
necessary to accommodate the required replacement area for the
on-lot disposal system.
§ 12-7.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-7.13
AO:415
(2) The subdivision plan for any lots which are created must identify
the location of all colluvial soils and slopes of 15% or greater within
the proposed lot, as well as delineate that portion of the lot which
encompasses the buildable area. In addition, a note must be placed
on the plan which will alert future homeowners to the potential for
sinkholes, flooding and drainage issues, as well as the possibility
for development of the lot to require special design or construction
considerations to mitigate the limitations imposed by the soils and/
or slopes. Where sinkholes are included on acreage designated as
part of a newly subdivided lot, it is recommended that such areas
be fenced for safety.
(3) Perennial/intermittent streams. No land disturbance which would
involve the construction of a habitable structure or the installation
of a paved driveway or construction of a road or roads which are
used for access to a habitable structure or structures, may occur
within 50 feet of a defined drainageway. Some drainageways may
have the capacity to carry substantially more runoff than others.
Therefore, the required separation distance may be reduced as the
result of a hydrological analysis of the characteristics of each
specific site and/or the issuance of appropriate state or federal
permits associated with the proposed development activity.
(4) Floodplain. No land disturbance which would involve the
construction of habitable structures or the installation of paved
driveways or construction of a road or roads which are used for
access to a habitable structure or structures may occur within 50
feet of the edge of a floodplain or the floodplain conservation
district as defined by the Flood Hazard Boundary Map for Harris
Township prepared by the Federal Insurance Administration,
Federal Emergency Management Agency. This distance may be
reduced for areas where there is a minimum five-percent rise
between the edge of the floodplain and the area of earth
disturbance. Where such reduction in distance is desired,
information shall be provided to assure that an adequate
separation has been provided. All land located within a floodplain
or wetlands shall also be subject to the regulations of § 12-7.1.
(5) Sinkholes. No land disturbance which would involve the
construction of habitable structures or the installation of paved
driveways or construction of a road or roads which are used for
access to a habitable structure or structures may occur within 50
feet of the edge of the sinkhole. If there is a drainage path leading
to the sinkhole, a minimum of 50 feet on all sides of the drainage
channel shall be protected.
(6) Slope and soils. No land disturbance which would involve the
construction of habitable structures or the installation of paved
driveways or construction of a road or roads which are used for
access to a habitable structure or structures shall occur within 50
feet downgrade of any area with a slope of 15% or more and/or that
§ 12-7.13 HARRIS CODE § 12-7.13
AO:416
is comprised of colluvial soils. All land defined as having steep
slopes of 25% or greater shall be subject to the regulations found
in § 12-7.2. Land disturbance which would involve the construction
of a habitable structure or the installation of a driveway which is
used for access to a habitable structure shall minimize impacts on
soils defined as colluvial in this chapter.
(7) Springs. No land disturbance which involves the construction of
habitable structures, the installation of paved driveways and/or
construction of a road or roads which are used for access to a
habitable structure or structures may occur within 50 feet of a
defined spring. This required separation distance may be reduced
as the result of a hydrological analysis of the characteristics of each
specific site and/or the issuance of appropriate state or federal
permits associated with the proposed development activity.
(8) Wetlands. No land disturbance which would involve the
construction of habitable structures, the installation of paved
driveways and/or construction of a road or roads which are used for
access to a habitable structure or structures may occur within 50
feet of the edge of a defined wetland area as established by this
chapter, DEP, and/or the Army Corps of Engineers. This distance
may be reduced, if necessary, when the appropriate permits from
these state and federal agencies are obtained. Where such
reduction in separation distance is desired, information shall be
submitted that substantiates the need to reduce the separation
distance as well as the endorsement of the permitting agencies.
(9) Wooded areas. At least 25% of healthy trees on the site shall be
maintained or replaced immediately following construction.
Replacement trees shall have a minimum trunk caliper of two
inches at a height of six inches above finished grade. Existing
wooded areas shall be protected to prevent unnecessary
destruction or removal of healthy trees with a minimum trunk
caliper of five inches at six inches above ground. Where significant
removal of trees within an existing wooded area is anticipated,
plans shall be required to be provided.
(10) Excavation and fill. No excavation or fill that will cause any slope to
become unstable; impose loads that may affect the safety of
structures or slopes; interfere with adequate drainage for the site
area and the drainage area of land tributary to the site; obstruct,
damage, or adversely affect existing sewerage or drainage; cause a
stagnant pond of water to form; or cause erosion or sedimentation
shall be permitted.
(11) Soils report and evaluation. Any property or site within the overlay
district mapped with or potentially containing colluvial soils rated
as Very Limited must be evaluated prior to being permitted for the
land disturbance activities noted above. While the NCRS's Web Soil
Survey may be used as a resource, on-site soils evaluation and soil
§ 12-7.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-7.13
AO:417
test pits will be required to determine the actual soil distribution
on each site.
(a) In order to accomplish the soils evaluation, the developer must
meet with the Township's Engineer or his/her designated agent
to determine, at a minimum, the location, number and type of
soil test pits that will provide a representative sample of the
soils present within the area intended to be disturbed.
Consensus on the number of test pits will be reached based on
the landowner's development intentions, soil mapping units
delineated in the NRCS's Web Soil Survey, the location of
natural features on the site, and any previous soil test results.
(b) The on-site soils assessment and report preparation must be
completed by a qualified soil scientist or registered
professional geologist with the appropriate experience in soil
science interpretation, subject to approval by the Township
Engineer or his/her designated agent. The results must then be
submitted for review and approval by the Township's Engineer
or his/her designated agent. This municipal review will
determine the adequacy of the soils evaluation to determine
the development potential/buildable area of the parcel.
(c) The soils assessment report will provide the data necessary to
prepare a detailed soils map of the site that will allow the
applicant to determine the potential to provide roads,
driveways and/or structures in accordance with these
regulations. The Township Engineer or his/her designated
agent shall review the soils report within the context of the
regulations and guidelines for development specified in this
subsection to determine whether there is sufficient buildable
area to develop and to identify additional conditions of
development, if necessary.
(d) For those properties or sites where the above required soils
assessment report definitively indicates that the proposed land
disturbance activities will not be impacted by the location of
colluvial soils, the remainder of the requirements of this
district shall not be applicable.
I. Criteria for land accessed across colluvial soils. In many cases, access
to an area that is developable may not be possible without crossing
colluvial soils. In such cases, the following requirements shall apply:
[Amended 7-11-2011 by Ord. No. 295]
(1) Low-impact driveway or roadway design, in accordance with the
recognized standards acceptable to the Township Engineer, shall
be used.
(2) The proposed location and design of the access shall provide the
least practicable disturbance to the colluvial soils in the area.
§ 12-7.13 HARRIS CODE § 12-7.13
AO:418
(3) The access is located in conformance with the setback restrictions
associated with wetlands, floodplains, sinkholes, springs,
drainageways, and watercourses as referenced above or, where
such setbacks cannot be met, evidence that the location and design
of the access is not adversely impacted by its proximity to such
features shall be provided.
J. Criteria where little or no buildable area is available on existing lots.
Where an existing lot contains little or no buildable area as a result of
this section, the design of any proposed structure must be engineered
by a licensed, professional engineer or architect to overcome the
limiting properties of the soils. The following land uses are permitted:
[Amended 7-11-2011 by Ord. No. 295]
(1) Habitable structure, provided that:
(a) There are no habitable structures currently existing on the
property;
(b) The land disturbance (which shall include the footprint of the
structure, the access, the primary and replacement areas for
on-lot sewage disposal) and the impervious coverage does not
exceed 50,000 square feet;
(c) The proposed location and design of the habitable structure
and access provide the least practicable disturbance to the
colluvial soils in the area;
(d) The proposal is consistent with the minimum lot size
requirement specified for the Forest Zoning District;
(e) Any increased maintenance required to ensure the longevity of
the structural integrity of the habitable structure and the onlot
septic system is identified and a written maintenance plan
is provided;
(f) The proposed construction will occur in conformance with the
setback restrictions associated with wetlands, floodplains,
sinkholes, springs, drainageways, and watercourses as
referenced above or, where such setbacks cannot be met,
evidence that the location of such construction is not adversely
impacted by its proximity to such features;
(g) The applicant shall provide a hold-harmless agreement and
indemnification in favor of the Township for any damage that
may occur to the structure or any other private property as a
result of the presence of colluvial soils.
(2) Forestry uses.
(3) Private passive park and recreational areas that do not include any
habitable structures.
§ 12-7.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-7.13
AO:419
(4) Horticultural and agricultural uses related to the tilling of the land,
the raising and propagation of crops, trees, shrubs, flowers, fruits
and vegetables, and other plant materials.
(5) Public or private conservation areas for the conservation of open
space, water soil, and wildlife resource.
K. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated: [Amended 7-11-2011 by Ord. No. 295]
CHANNEL — A perceptible natural or artificial waterway, which
periodically or continuously contains moving water having a definite
bed and banks which confine the water.
CLOSED OR UNDRAINED DEPRESSION — In a Karst geologic area, a
distinct bowl-shaped depression in the land surface; size and amplitude
are variable; drainage is internal. It differs from a sinkhole in that the
ground surface is unbroken and usually occurs in greater density per
unit area.
COLLUVIAL SOILS — Soils formed in colluvium that are rated as Very
Limited.
COLLUVIUM — Soil material, rock fragments, or both, moved by creep,
slide, or local wash, and deposited at the bases and uplands of steep
slopes.
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A stormwater management
facility designed to transmit stormwater runoff and shall include
streams, channels, swales, pipes, conduits, culverts, storm sewers and
similar structures.
RIDGE — For purposes of the this section, a ridge includes those
toeslope, sideslope, upland valleys, and ridgetop areas which contain,
in part, colluvial soils and/or slopes exceeding 15% grade.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
SINKHOLE — A localized, gradual or rapid sinking of the land surface
to a variable depth, occurring in areas of carbonate bedrock; generally
characterized by a roughly circular outline, a distinct breaking of the
ground surface and downward movement of soil into bedrock voids.
SPRING — Place where a concentrated discharge of groundwater flows
at the ground surface, including perched water flow from the soil.
STREAM — Perennial or intermittent watercourses identified through
site inspection, local and USGS mapping.
SWALE — A natural low-lying stretch of land or minor man-made
conveyance channel, which gathers or carries surface water runoff.
§ 12-7.13 HARRIS CODE § 12-7.13
AO:420
ARTICLE VIII
Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Lots of Record
§ 12-8.1. Intent.
It is the intent of this chapter to recognize the right of nonconformities to
continue, but to encourage that such lots, uses, and structures be brought
into conformity with this chapter as soon as constitutionally permissible. To
achieve this end, nonconformities are subject to the regulations set forth in
this article.
§ 12-8.2. Nonconforming lots of record.
§ 12-8.3. Nonconforming uses and structures.
Where a lawful use or structure exists which, on the effective date of
this chapter or subsequent amendment thereto, becomes nonconforming,
such use or structure may be continued as long as it remains otherwise
lawful, including subsequent sales of the property, subject to the following
provisions:
A. In any district in which dwellings are permitted as primary uses, a
single-family detached dwelling and customary accessory uses may be
erected on any single nonconforming lot of record at the effective date
of adoption or amendment of this chapter, notwithstanding limitations
imposed by other provisions of this chapter. Such nonconforming lot
must be in separate ownership and not abut other lots under the same
ownership. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet
the requirements for area and/or width that are applicable in the
district; provided that all other yard dimensions and requirements of
the lot shall conform to the regulations for single-family detached
dwellings in the Single-Family Residential District. Variance of yard
setback requirements may be obtained only through action of the
Zoning Hearing Board.
B. If two or more abutting lots or combinations of abutting lots and
portions of lots under the same ownership are of record at the time of
passage or amendment of this chapter, and if all or part of the lots do
not meet the requirements established for either lot width or area, the
lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the
purposes of this chapter, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or
sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with either lot width or
area requirements established by this chapter, nor shall any division of
any parcel be made which creates a lot with either width or area below
the requirements stated in this chapter.
C. Lots which fail to meet either minimum width or area requirements may
be expanded to include abutting lots under the same ownership.
A. The existing nonconforming use shall not be changed to a different
nonconforming use.
§ 12-8.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-8.3
AO:421
§ 12-8.4. Registration of nonconforming uses and structures.
In order to administer this article, the Zoning Officer shall identify and
register nonconforming uses and structures.
§ 12-8.5. New construction.
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require
a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any structure on
which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date
of adoption or amendment of this chapter and upon which actual building
construction has been carried on diligently. Actual construction is hereby
defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent
position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where excavation or
demolition or removal of an existing structure has been substantially begun
preparatory to rebuilding, such excavation or demolition or removal shall
be deemed to be actual constructions, provided that work shall be carried
on diligently.
B. No such nonconforming use or structure shall be altered or extended
except if such complies with the following criteria and standards:
(1) To provide for a natural expansion which is not detrimental to
public health, safety, and general welfare, provided such expansion
does not exceed 50% of the existing ground floor area of the
structure or other space occupied by the use.
(2) Provided such does not constitute the addition of a new
nonconforming use or structure.
(3) Provided such does not decrease yards when such already fail to
meet minimum yard setback areas.
(4) Provided that the alteration or extension meets the district
regulations for such use or structure as if same were being altered
or extended in the district where such use is permitted. In cases
where the use is permitted in two or more districts, the most
restrictive district regulations shall apply.
C. In the event that any nonconforming structure is destroyed or partially
destroyed by any means to an extent of 75% or more of the replacement
value less depreciation of such structure immediately preceding the
casualty, such nonconforming structure and use thereof shall terminate
and the lot shall thereafter be used only for conforming uses and
structures.
D. When a nonconforming use or structure is discontinued or abandoned
for a period of one year or more continuously, or replaced by a
conforming structure, the premises shall not thereafter be used except
in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located,
except if the use is a farm use as herein defined.
§ 12-8.3 HARRIS CODE § 12-8.5
AO:422
ARTICLE IX
Administration and Enforcement
§ 12-9.1. General provisions. [Amended 9-14-1987 by Ord. No. 109]
A. Enforcing official designated, duties. The Township Manager or his
designee shall be the Zoning Officer and shall not hold any elective
office in the Township. The Zoning Officer shall administer and enforce
this chapter in accordance with its literal terms, and shall not have the
power to permit any construction or any use or change of use which
does not conform to this chapter. The duties of the Zoning Officer shall
be as follows:
(1) To examine, record, and file all applications for zoning permits,
with any accompanying plans and documents, and to issue such
permits only for lots, uses, and structures which are in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) To receive applications for certificates of nonconforming uses,
investigate, and issue or deny certificates of nonconforming uses.
(3) To post a schedule of fees in his office.
(4) To receive, investigate, and process all complaints and to notify
persons of any violations of provisions of this chapter.
(5) To conduct inspections of property for which zoning permits have
been issued to ascertain if the construction or use is in conformity
with the provisions of the permit.
(6) Upon request of the Board of Supervisors, Planning Commission, or
Zoning Hearing Board, to present to such body facts, records, and
any similar information required to assist such body in its
deliberations.
(7) To be responsible for keeping current copies of this chapter and the
Official Zoning Map for distribution to the public.
(8) To perform other duties in the administration and enforcement of
this chapter as may be directed by the Board of Supervisors and/or
the Township Manager, as applicable.
B. Fees. The Board of Supervisors shall establish a schedule of fees and a
collection procedure for all zoning permits, certificates of
nonconformity, applications for variances, validity challenges, unified
appeals, and requests for curative amendments.
(1) The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the Zoning
Officer.
(2) All such fees shall be payable to the Township at the office of the
Zoning Officer.
§ 12-9.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-9.1
AO:423
§ 12-9.2. Zoning permits. [Amended 9-14-1987 by Ord. No. 109]
A zoning permit shall be required prior to the erection, extension, or
alteration of any structure or portion thereof (except those listed in
§§ 12-2.6F and 12-2.6G), and prior to the use or change in use of a structure
or land. No such zoning permit shall be required for normal maintenance
activities and minor repairs which do not constitute an erection, extension,
or alteration as herein defined. No permit shall be granted by the Zoning
Officer for any purpose except in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter or, upon appeal; in compliance with a decision of the Zoning
Hearing Board or the courts.
§ 12-9.3. Site plan review. [Amended 4-12-1993 by Ord. No. 148;
12-9-1996 by Ord. No. 181; 4-13-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
(3) No request for a zoning permit shall be considered complete until
all fees have been paid in full.
(4) No application or appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board and no
application for a certificate of nonconformity shall be considered
filed until the appropriate filing fee shall have been paid in full.
A. Application for zoning permit. To apply for a zoning permit, the
applicant shall submit an application for a zoning permit to the Zoning
Officer along with all required fees. When required by this chapter, site
plans and other information shall accompany the application.
B. Review of application. All applications for zoning permits shall be
granted or denied by the Zoning Officer within 30 days from the date of
receipt of the application and fees for such. The Zoning Officer shall
notify the applicant in writing of all action taken on the application for a
zoning permit within said thirty-day period. If the application is denied,
such notification shall specify the provisions of this chapter with which
such application does not comply. If, for any reason, the Zoning Officer
fails to notify the applicant of all action taken in the manner and time
limit set forth above, such application shall be considered approved as
submitted.
C. Permit expiration. A zoning permit shall be valid for a period of 36
months from the day of issuance, or until a certificate of conformance is
issued, whichever is first. A permit may be extended by the Zoning
Officer upon proper application and payment of fees for a period not to
exceed 18 months.
A. A site plan, as described below, shall accompany applications for zoning
permits whenever such applications propose the following:
(1) A proposed use required to have a parking lot as stipulated in
§ 12-7.8;
(2) Whenever development is proposed involving the location of two or
more primary uses or structures on a single lot, including, but not
§ 12-9.1 HARRIS CODE § 12-9.3
AO:424
limited to, apartment complexes, shopping centers, and industrial
parks; and
(3) Any proposed use or structure located in the Village District except
single-family and two-family detached dwellings or single-family
semidetached dwellings.
B. A site plan, as described below, shall be reviewed by the Planning
Commission and approved by the Board of Supervisors prior to
submission of zoning permit applications that propose the following: a
proposed use or structure located in or within 100 feet of a floodplain or
wetland as stipulated in § 12-7.1; a proposed use or structure on steep
slopes as stipulated in § 12-7.2; a proposed use involving designated
well sites, potable water well pump station facilities, water treatment
facilities; or water storage tanks; and a proposed use involving a
communications tower and its accessory facilities. A site plan is not
required for those circumstances cited above when a similar plan is
required for a mobile home park permit or approval of a planned
residential development as defined and regulated by their respective
ordinances of the Township.
(1) Submission and content of the site plan. Three copies of the site
plan shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer along with the
application for a zoning permit. The site plan shall be drawn to a
scale of one inch equals 50 feet or larger and contain the following
written and graphic information unless an item(s) is waived by the
Zoning Officer because such is unnecessary to determine
conformance with this chapter:
(a) The name of the proposed development and the name and
address of the owner of the property and the individual or firm
preparing the site plan.
(b) Date of the application for a zoning permit.
(c) Graphic scale.
(d) North point.
(e) Key map at a scale of one inch equals 400 feet showing streets
and roads, buildings, and motor vehicle access within 500 feet
from the exterior boundary of the lot.
(f) Total size of the property, and each lot and/or area to be leased.
(g) The proposed use of the property.
(h) Topographic contour lines drawn at vertical intervals of five
feet, including elevation of each ten-foot interval, both before
and after the proposed construction.
(i) The total tract boundary with distances marked to at least the
nearest foot.
§ 12-9.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-9.3
AO:425
§ 12-9.4. Certificate of conformance. [Amended 9-14-1987 by Ord.
No. 109]
Upon completion of the erection, extension, or alteration of a structure,
or upon fulfilling the requirements of a change in use for which a zoning
permit was issued, the applicant shall apply for a certificate of conformance.
The structure or the use for which the zoning permit was issued may not
be occupied or otherwise used until a certificate of conformance has been
issued by the Zoning Officer.
(j) Location of the front, side, and rear yard setback area as
required by the applicable zoning district.
(k) All existing and proposed structures, showing location and a
statement of the ground floor area, any retail and service floor
area, height and elevation of each.
(l) All streams, springs, sinkholes, floodplain boundaries, and
slopes of 25% or more.
(m) All existing and proposed street rights-of-way and cartways,
including those abutting the property.
(n) All existing and proposed points of motor vehicle access to the
property.
(o) All existing and proposed parking and loading spaces, parking
lots, and a statement of the surfacing material to be used.
(p) The location of all outdoor lighting fixtures.
(q) The location and common name of existing and proposed
vegetation to be used for landscaping.
(r) The location of all buffer yards required by this chapter.
(s) A space labeled "Approved by" for the signature of the Zoning
Officer; and a space for the date of such approval.
(2) Review procedure. All applications for a zoning permit which
include a site plan as herein required shall be reviewed in the same
manner as stipulated in § 12-9.2B above, except that:
(a) Upon receipt of the application, the Zoning Officer shall
forward one copy of the site plan to the staff of the Centre
Regional Planning Commission for review and comment; and
(b) Upon approval of the application, the Zoning Officer shall sign
two copies of the site plan, return one copy to the applicant
along with the requested zoning permit and retain the other
copy for his files.
A. Within 15 days of an application for a certificate of conformance, the
Zoning Officer or his designated agent shall inspect the premises to
§ 12-9.3 HARRIS CODE § 12-9.4
AO:426
§ 12-9.5. Certification of nonconformity. [Amended 9-14-1987 by
Ord. No. 109]
An application for a certificate of nonconformity may be made to the Zoning
Officer by the owner of a nonconforming use or structure requesting the
Zoning Officer to register the existence of the nonconforming use or
structure. The Zoning Officer shall investigate the claim of nonconforming
use or structure to determine if it came into existence prior to the
regulations which made it nonconforming, and to determine the extent
of the nonconformity. If the use or structure is determined to be a valid,
determine if the action taken complies with the regulations of this
chapter. If it does, a certificate of conformance shall be issued within
the fifteen-day time limitation.
B. If the action fails to comply with the regulations of this chapter, the
Zoning Officer shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the denial of a
certificate of conformance and shall state the provisions of this chapter
with which the action does not comply. The applicant may correct the
defects cited in the denial of the Zoning Officer for a certificate of
conformance. If, upon notification by the applicant and inspection of the
premises, the Zoning Officer finds that the defects have been corrected
and that no additional defects have been created, a certificate of
conformance shall be immediately issued.
C. Failure of the Zoning Officer to properly grant or deny an occupancy
permit in a manner and time period stipulated above shall constitute an
approval of the application for a certificate of conformance, and the
premises may be occupied or otherwise used as stipulated in the zoning
permit.
D. Temporary certificate of conformance. A temporary certificate of
conformance may be issued in the manner prescribed above, pending:
the completion of a structure or the fulfillment of requirements for a
change in use to allow for partial occupancy; and the posting of a bond
or certified check in an amount equal to the Zoning Officer's estimate of
work remaining to be completed for a permanent certificate. The
certificate shall be valid only until such time as the action for which the
zoning permit was issued is complete, or for a period of six months after
issuance, whichever is less.
(1) Upon expiration of the temporary certificate of conformance, the
applicant shall apply for a permanent certificate of conformance or,
if the action remains incomplete, may apply for one additional
temporary certificate of conformance. If the action remains
incomplete after all additional temporary certificates have expired,
the Zoning Officer shall use the proceeds of the bond or certified
check to complete the necessary work. Any costs incurred by the
Township over and above the amount of the bond or certified check
shall be paid by the zoning permit holder prior to occupying the
structure or otherwise using the land.
§ 12-9.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-9.5
AO:427
preexisting nonconforming use or structure, the Zoning Officer shall issue a
certificate of nonconformity describing the nonconforming use or structure
and defining its extent where applicable. Such certificate of nonconformity
shall be valid evidence of such nonconforming use or structure. If the
Zoning Officer denies a certificate of nonconformity, he shall state his
reasons for such denial in a written decision issued within 30 days from the
filing of the application for certificate of nonconformity. The Zoning Officer
shall maintain a record of all applications and certificates of nonconformity
issued or denied. Any person aggrieved by the action of the Zoning Officer
in issuing or denying an application for a certificate of nonconformity may
appeal the action within 30 days to the Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 12-9.6. Violations and penalties.
Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be a violation of
this chapter:
§ 12-9.7. Appeals.136
Any appeal from a decision or action of the Board of Supervisors or of any
officer or agency of the Township in matters pertaining to this chapter shall
be made in accordance with Article X-A of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended, 53 P.S. § 11001-A et seq.
§ 12-9.8. Amendments.
The regulations, restrictions, and district boundaries set forth in this
chapter may, from time to time, be amended through action of the Board
of Supervisors in the manner provided by §§ 609 through 611 of Article
VI of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, 53 P.S.
§§ 10609 through 10611.
A. Complaints regarding violations. Whenever a violation of this chapter
occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a complaint
to the Zoning Officer stating fully the causes and basis thereof. The
Zoning Officer shall record such complaint, immediately investigate,
and take action thereon as provided by this chapter.
B. Notice of violation. If the Zoning Officer shall find that any provision of
this chapter has been violated, he shall notify the person responsible for
such violation in writing, indicating the nature of the violation and
ordering the action necessary to correct it, whereupon such violation
shall be immediately corrected unless such person files an appeal of the
order of the Zoning Officer in the manner provided by this chapter.
C. Penalties. Penalties and remedies for violations of this chapter are
stipulated in §§ 616 and 617 of Article VI of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, 53 P.S. §§ 10616 and 10617,
respectively.
136. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 12-9.5 HARRIS CODE § 12-9.8
AO:428
ARTICLE X
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 12-10.1. Administration.
The Board of Supervisors shall appoint a Zoning Hearing Board whose
membership, organization, procedures, and functions shall be those as set
forth in Article IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended, 53 P.S. § 10901 et seq.
§ 12-10.2. Hearings.
The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with
the procedures stipulated in § 908 of Article IX of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, 53 P.S. § 10908. Notice shall
be given to the public, the applicant, the Zoning Officer, the Township
Manager, and to any person who has made timely request for the same.
Notices shall be given at such time and in such manner as shall be
prescribed by the rules of the Board.
§ 12-10.3. Functions.
The Board shall have the following functions as stipulated in §§ 909 through
913 of Article IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended, 53 P.S. §§ 10909 through 10913:
§ 12-10.4. Parties appellant before Board.
Persons who may file with the Board an appeal from decisions of the Zoning
Officer, a challenge to the validity of this chapter or Map, or a request
for a variance(s) are stipulated in § 914 of Article IX of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, 53 P.S. § 10914. Regulations
governing time limitations for persons aggrieved and all actions stayed
because of the filing of the proceedings listed above are stipulated in
§§ 915 and 916, respectively, of Article IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended, 53 P.S. §§ 10915 and 10916, respectively.
§ 12-10.5. Zoning appeals to court.137
Appeals to court from any decision of the Board may be taken by any
party aggrieved within 30 days after notice of the decision is issued, in the
A. To hear and decide appeals from decisions of the Zoning Officer.
B. To hear challenges to the validity of this chapter or map and issue
decisions and findings of fact.
C. To hear and grant or deny requests for variances from the provisions of
this chapter.
137. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 12-10.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-10.5
AO:429
manner provided by Article X-A of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended, 53 P.S. § 11001-A et seq.
§ 12-10.6. Violations and penalties.
Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be a violation of
this chapter.
§ 12-10.7. Appeals.138
Any appeal from a decision or action of the Board of Supervisors or of any
officer or agency of the Township in matters pertaining to this chapter shall
be made in accordance with Article X-A of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as emended, 53 P.S. § 11001-A et seq.
§ 12-10.8. Amendments.
The regulations, restrictions, and district boundaries set forth in this
chapter may, from time to time, be amended through action of the Board
of Supervisors in the manner provided by §§ 609 through 611 of Article
VI of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, 53 P.S.
§§ 10609 and 10611, respectively.
A. Complaints regarding violations. Whenever a violation of this chapter
occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a complaint
to the Zoning Officer stating fully the causes and basis thereof. The
Zoning Officer shall record such complaint, immediately investigate,
and take action thereon as provided by this chapter.
B. Notice of violation. If the Zoning Officer shall find that any provision of
this chapter has been violated, he shall notify the person responsible for
such violation in writing, indicating the nature of the violation and
ordering the action necessary to correct it, whereupon such violation
shall be immediately corrected unless such person files an appeal of the
order of the Zoning Officer in the manner provided by this chapter.
C. Penalties. Penalties and remedies for violations of this chapter are
stipulated in §§ 616 and 617 of Article VI of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, 53 P.S. §§ 10616 and 10617,
respectively.
138. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 12-10.5 HARRIS CODE § 12-10.8
AO:430
ARTICLE XI
Terminology
§ 12-11.1. Word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
§ 12-11.2. Definitions. [Amended 1-13-1983 by Ord. No. 97;
9-14-1987 by Ord. No. 109; 5-31-1989 by Ord. No. 118; 10-12-1992
by Ord. No. 144; 9-14-1992 by Ord. No. 145; 4-12-1993 by Ord. No.
147; 4-12-1993 by Ord. No. 148; 10-9-1995 by Ord. No. 168;
10-13-1997 by Ord. No. 180; 12-9-1996 by Ord. No. 181; 11-10-1997
by Ord. No. 187; 4-13-1998 by Ord. No. 196; 8-10-1998 by Ord. No.
199; 11-8-1999 by Ord. No. 207; 2-11-2002 by Ord. No. 219]
Unless a contrary intention clearly appears, the following words and
phrases shall have the meaning given in this section. All words and terms
not defined herein shall be used with a meaning of standard usage:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE, BUILDING — A separate structure or building
used to house or provide for an accessory use.
ADDITION — See "extension."
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment, having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade (for sale or rental), books, magazines
and other materials which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein.
ADULT BUSINESS USE — Any adult bookstore, adult cabaret or adult minimotion-
picture theater, as defined below, and which under Chapter 59, Title
18, of the Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes, must exclude minors or may
not knowingly disseminate to minors.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular; words of
masculine gender include feminine gender, and words of feminine
gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, or any other
similar entity.
D. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
E. The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended,"
"designed," "maintained," or "arranged to be used or occupied."
§ 12-11.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-11.2
AO:431
ADULT CABARET — A cabaret, tavern, theater or club which features
strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainers who exhibit,
display or engage in nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse, as
defined by Chapter 59, Title 18, of the Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes.
ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building offering
video presentations distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons within private
viewing booths and/or by use of token or coin-operated projectors or other
video machines.
ADULT THEATER — Any business, indoor or outdoor, which exhibits a
motion picture or other presentation which, in whole or in part, depicts
nudity, sexual conduct, or sadomasochistic abuse as defined by Chapter 59,
Title 18, of the Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes.
AIRPORTS AND LANDING STRIPS — All facilities for the storage,
maintenance, takeoff, and landing of motorized aircraft.
AISLE — A corridor used for access within a parking lot by motor vehicles
to the parking space.
ALLEY — See "street."
ALTERATION — As applied to a structure, a change or rearrangement in
the structural parts, including supporting members such as bearing walls,
columns, beams; or girders, or an enlargement, whether by extending on
a side or by increasing in height, or the relocation of a structure onto or
within a lot.
AMENDMENT — Any change or revision of the text of this chapter or the
Official Zoning Map.
AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARDS INSTITUTE (ANSI) — A national
organization which formulates guidelines and standards which are
recognized as authoritative by the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC).
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — A building used by a veterinarian for the treatment,
housing, or boarding of small domestic animals such as dogs, cats, rabbits,
birds, and fowl.
ANTENNA — A system of electrical conductors that transmits and receives
radio waves including, but not limited to, panels, microwave dishes, satellite
dishes, and whips.
APARTMENT COMPLEX — A group of two or more buildings occupying a
lot in single ownership, with each building used by three or more families.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer who has filed an application for a
zoning permit.
ARCHITECT — A professional licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania to practice architecture.
§ 12-11.2 HARRIS CODE § 12-11.2
AO:432
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION — The use of land and structures
engaged in the retail sale of gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires, and
other motor vehicle accessories, which may also provide minor mechanical
repairs and servicing of motorized vehicles.
AUTO WRECKING, JUNK, AND SCRAP ESTABLISHMENTS — The use of
land and structures for the storage, baling, packing, sorting, handling,
disassembling, purchase, or sale of any material which has been used,
salvaged, scrapped, or reclaimed, but is capable of being reused in some
form, including metals, fiber, paper, cloth and rags, rubber, rope, bottles,
machinery, tools, appliances, fixtures, utensils, lumber, boxes, crates, pipe
and pipe fittings, tires, motor vehicles which do not have a current and valid
inspection sticker as required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and
motor vehicle parts; but not including garbage or other organic wastes.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — An owner occupied single-family dwelling
providing to transient guests, for compensation, sleeping accommodations
and breakfast.
BLOCK FACE — The area which encompasses the houses on both sides of
the street, bordered at either or both sides by the nearest cross street.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Harris, County of Centre, Pennsylvania.
BOUNDARY — A line marking the limit or border of a lot or district.
BUILDING — A structure, including any part thereof, having a roof and used
for the shelter or enclosure or persons or property.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line within a lot defining the required
minimum setback distance between any structure and the adjacent street
line.
BUS PULL-OFF — A paved indentation at the side of a roadway designed
to allow buses to pick up and discharge passengers.[Added 11-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 322]
CAMPS and CAMPING GROUNDS — The use of land and structures by
campers for seasonal, recreational, and temporary living purposes in
cabins, tents, or outdoor recreational vehicles.
CARTWAY — The portion of a street right-of-way designed or intended for
vehicular use.
CENTER LINE — A line running parallel to and equidistant from both sides
of a street.
CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER — The use of land and structures for supervised
day care of six or more children.
CHURCHES AND OTHER PLACES OF WORSHIP — The use of land and
structures for religious, worship, education, and related activities; includes
chapels, cathedrals, temples, synagogues, and the like.
CLUBS, LODGES, AND FRATERNAL ORGANIZATIONS — The use of land
and structures by a nonprofit group which is not operated for the purpose of
§ 12-11.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-11.2
AO:433
trade or business, no part of the earnings of which benefit any individual but
which is operated for social and community service activities among group
members and their guests.
CLUSTER — A land development design that concentrates buildings on a
part of the tract to allow the remaining land to be used for productive
agriculture, preservation of environmentally sensitive areas, common open
space, recreation, and essential services.
COMMERCIAL DAIRY — The use of land and structures for the manufacture
and processing of dairy products.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water
or a combination of land and water within a development site designed and
intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of the planned residential
development, not including streets, off-street parking areas and areas set
aside for public facilities (e.g., schools, utilities, or municipal facilities).
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — A structure, partially or wholly exterior to
a building, used for mounting antennas which transmit or retransmit radio
signals.
COMMUNITY CENTER — A facility operated by a government agency,
nonprofit organization, or homeowners' association which is used for a
variety of civic, educational, recreational, and/or cultural services and
programs. Community centers shall not include living quarters.[Amended
6-11-2012 by Ord. No. 303]
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
extension, expansion, alteration, or relocation of a building or structure,
including the placement of manufactured homes.
CONSTRUCTION PERMIT — A document issued by the FCC to a broadcast
applicant giving permission to construct a radio or television broadcast
station; is not a station license.
CONVENIENCE FOOD STORE — Small stores permitted in selected rural
and residential districts which retail food and beverages primarily to the
immediately surrounding population.
CORRIDOR OVERLAY — Provides land use and land development controls
along specified corridors in the Township.
CURB RETURN — A curved curb connecting the tangents of two
intersecting curbs of streets or driveways.
DESIGNATED WELL SITE — Any existing or potential well site where such
well is to be used for the provision of potable water supply, and which
has been identified by an official water survey, Official Map, or other study
deemed acceptable by the Township Engineer. This site may include water
reservoirs, water storage tanks, and/or water treatment operations and
facilities either as primary or accessory uses and structures.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, the
§ 12-11.2 HARRIS CODE § 12-11.2
AO:434
placement of manufactured homes, streets and other paving, utilities,
filling, grading, excavation, mining, dredging, or drilling operations.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development of a planned
residential development, including a plat of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity
of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities,
common open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of the
development plan," when used in the Article XV, Planned Residential
Development, shall mean all the written and graphic materials referred to
in this definition.
DIRECT LIGHT — Light emitted directly from an outdoor lighting fixture or
reflected from any part of the fixture or its supports.
DISTRICT — All land and watercourses located within designated
boundaries on the Official Zoning Map; a zoning district.
DOG TRAINING FACILITY — A facility providing such services as obedience
classes, training or behavioral counseling, provided that overnight boarding
is not permitted.[Added 1-28-2015 by Ord. No. 318]
DRIVE-IN COMMERCIAL USE — The use of land and structures in which
goods or services are dispensed directly to the patron while in a motor
vehicle.
DRIVEWAY — A corridor which provides motor vehicle access from a street
into or across a lot.
DWELLING — A building designed for human living quarters.
ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION (EMR) — A technical term for the nature
of energy emitted by a transmitting antenna.
ERECTION — Construction or assembly.
EROSION — The removal, of soil, stone, and other surface materials by the
action of natural elements.
A. DWELLING UNIT — The portion of a dwelling occupied by one family.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A single dwelling unit occupying the
building from ground floor to roof.
B.
C. TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — Two dwelling units, one above the other.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Three or more dwelling units, with the
units stacked one above the other.
D.
E. DETACHED — Each dwelling unit has open space on all sides.
SEMIDETACHED — One side of each dwelling unit is a party wall in
common with an adjoining dwelling unit.
F.
ATTACHED — Both side walls of all except the dwelling units at the
ends of the building are party walls.
G.
§ 12-11.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-11.2
AO:435
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration, or
maintenance by public utilities, municipalities, or other governmental
agencies of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam; or water
transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply, or
disposal systems and their essential buildings, excluding communications
towers and antennas, as herein defined.
EXTENSION — An addition to the floor area of an existing structure, an
increase in the size of a structure, or an increase in that portion of a lot
occupied by an existing use; an enlargement of a use or structure.
FACING WALLS —
FAMILY — A person or two or more persons, all of whom are related by
blood, marriage, parentage, or adoption (including foster children) living
together as a single housekeeping unit. In addition to the family, two or
fewer unrelated persons may reside within the housekeeping unit in the
dwelling unit. Except that in the case where one or more of the unrelated
persons is a family care client, the number of unrelated persons permitted
to be with the housekeeping unit shall be three or fewer. Domestic servants
employed on the premises and temporary gratuitous guests may be housed
on the premises without being counted as part of the family.
FAMILY CARE — The provision of care in accord with regulations of the
appropriate state agency(ies) for up to three mentally ill, retarded or
disabled children or adults or elderly persons in a dwelling unit where a
professional caregiver administers care 24 hours a day.
FARM USE — The use of land and structures for one or more of the
following: the tilling of the land, the raising of crops, fruits, and vegetables,
and the raising and keeping of animals and plants; horticultural uses related
to the raising, propagating, and selling of trees, shrubs, flowers, and other
plant materials; forestry uses related to the harvesting of lumber products.
FARM WINERY — A winery operated by the owner of a Pennsylvania farm
and producing table, sparkling, or fortified wines from grapes, grape juice,
other fruit bases or honey.[Added 10-10-2011 by Ord. No. 296]
FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT — Any establishment whose principal business
is the sale of food or beverages with rapid turnover to customers in a readyto-
consume state for consumption either within the building or for carryout
off the premises, and whose design or principal method of operation
includes the following: foods and beverages are usually served in disposable
or edible containers; it is self-service, with customers expected to clean up
after themselves; and menus are posted.
FLOODPLAIN — The limits of the floodplain conservation regulations are
hereby determined, to be areas subject to periodic inundation by
floodwaters or runoff as delineated in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and
A. Walls of a structure opposite to and parallel with one another; or
Wall lines, or wall lines extended of opposite walls intersecting at
angles of less than 65°.
B.
§ 12-11.2 HARRIS CODE § 12-11.2
AO:436
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Harris Township, as
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river, or
watercourse, and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODWATERS — Waters which escape from streams or other bodies of
water and over low adjacent lands, as distinct from runoff.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross usable area of all floors of a building
measured from the face of the exterior walls; retail and service floor area is
that portion of the total floor area relegated to use by the customers and the
employees to consummate retail sales and services, including display areas
for goods, but not including office space or storage areas.
FRONTAGE — The portion of a lot boundary abutting a street.
GRADING — The act of excavating and/or filling land for the purpose of
changing natural slope.
GROUP HOME — A dwelling unit in which care and residence are provided
in accord with regulations of the appropriate state agency(ies) for more
than three, and not more than eight nonadjudicated clients who are
dependent children or elderly, mentally ill, retarded, or disabled adults.
HALFWAY HOUSE/REHABILITATION CENTER — A residence or
community center in which social and community service activities in
Areas subject to periodic inundation by floodwaters shall include:
All flood hazard areas indicated as zones A, AE, AH, or AO on the
aforementioned Flood Hazard Rate Maps; and
(1)
All wetlands as defined herein and by both state and federal
regulations.
(2)
A.
All proposed development located within areas classified as hydric or
hydric inclusive soils by the Soil Survey of Centre County, Pennsylvania,
prepared by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, shall provide a
wetlands delineation prepared by a qualified wetlands expert and be
subject to review and acceptance by Harris Township.
B.
Excluded from this definition of floodplain are:
All lands within such areas designated above to which the natural
flow of floodwaters or runoff within drainage swales has been
prevented because of lawful alterations to such areas by roads,
dams, or other obstructions; and
(1)
All lands which, prior to the passage of this chapter as part of
the Code by Ord. No. 97, 1-13-1983, were filled with earth to
an elevation greater than that of the boundary of the natural
floodplain drainage swale as shown on said maps.
(2)
C.
§ 12-11.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-11.2
AO:437
accord with regulations of the appropriate state agency(ies) are provided
for no more than eight residents and an unlimited number of nonresident
alcoholics, drug addicts, emotionally disturbed adults, former convicts, or
other adjudicated individuals.
HEIGHT — The vertical distance of a structure measured from the mean
level of the ground surrounding the structure to its highest point, regardless
of roof design.
HEIGHT ABOVE AVERAGE TERRAIN (HAAT) — A technical term used by
the FCC to determine the effective height of an antenna by considering the
effects of terrain variations in the coverage area provided by the antenna.
HEIGHT OF TOWER — The overall height of the tower from its base to its
highest point including, but not limited to, antennas, transmitters, satellite
dishes, or other structures affixed to or otherwise placed on the tower; if
the tower base is not on ground level, the height of the tower shall include
the base of the building or structure to which the tower is attached.
HISTORICAL MUSEUM — The use of land and structures which are open to
the general public and such land, structures, and preserved and exhibited
objects which are of educational and historical significance. Historical
museums shall be permitted, but are not limited to, the following functions:
the exhibiting, preserving, recording, or storing of objects of educational
and historical significance; educational events; arts and crafts
demonstrations; art performances; and fund-raising events to benefit the
museums.
HOME OCCUPATION — An accessory use of a dwelling for gainful
employment.
HOSPITAL — An establishment for the diagnosis, treatment or other care
of humans and having facilities for inpatient care; includes sanitarium,
sanatorium, and preventorium.
HUNTING AND FISHING CABIN — A building used for seasonal and
temporary living purposes by persons engaged in hunting, fishing, and
similar recreational purposes.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (AREA) — A surface that prevents the infiltration
of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces (or areas) shall include, but
not be limited to: roofs; additional indoor living spaces, patios, garages,
storage sheds and similar structures; and any new streets or sidewalks.
Decks, parking areas and driveway areas are not counted as impervious
areas if they do not prevent infiltration.[Amended 11-9-2015 by Ord. No.
321]
INDUSTRIAL PARK — An area planned for the integrated design of two
or more primary industrial uses and structures on a lot held in single
ownership or as units in a single condominium.[Amended 10-8-2018 by
Ord. No. 333]
INTERMODULATION — A technical term referring to the possible mixing of
two transmitted signals which creates unwanted and potentially interfering
signals.
§ 12-11.2 HARRIS CODE § 12-11.2
AO:438
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT — A professional licensed by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania to practice landscape architecture.
LANDSCAPE CONTRACTOR BUSINESS — A business that provides
services related to the decorative improvement of land including the
installation, mowing, and maintenance of lawns; landscape design; the
planting and maintenance of trees, shrubs, and flowers; tree and stump
removal; the raising, propagating, and selling of trees, shrubs, flowers, and
other plant materials; the spreading and grading of topsoil, mulch, or other
ground covers; the installation of stone, brick, and block walkways and
stone walls; and seasonal leaf cleanup and snow and ice removal.[Added
4-9-2012 by Ord. No. 302]
LARGE CROWN TREE — A species of tree with a mature height of over
45 feet. Examples include but are not limited to red maple, hybrid maple,
catalpa, hackberry, ginko, Kentucky coffee tree, oaks, tulip tree, London
plane tree, basswood, and silver linden.[Added 9-10-2018 by Ord. No.
331]
LARGE SHRUBS/DWARF TREES — A species of shrubbery or tree with
a mature height of eight feet to 20 feet. Examples include but are not
limited to Japanese maple, weeping cherry, flowering dogwood, saucer
magnolia, some cultivars of arborvitae, mountain stewartia, some cultivars
of cypress, some cultivars of spruce, serviceberry, dwarf Korean lilac, and
star magnolia.[Added 9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 331]
LOT — An area of land, including watercourses, held in single and separate
ownership; includes tract and parcel.
LOT LINE — A boundary line of a lot; includes property line.
LOT SIZE — The area contained within the boundary lines of a lot.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between side lot lines.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
CORNER LOT — A lot at the junction of and abutting on two or more
intersecting streets or at the point of abrupt change of a single street
where the interior angle is less than 135° and the radius of the street is
less than 100 feet.
A.
B. INTERIOR LOT — A lot with only one frontage on a street.
C. THROUGH LOT — A lot with front and rear street frontage.
FRONT LOT LINE — The line separating the lot from the street rightof-
way.
A.
B. SIDE LOT LINE — Any lines which are not front or rear lot lines.
REAR LOT LINE — Any line parallel to or within 45° of being parallel to
a street line which defines the rear of the lot.
C.
§ 12-11.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-11.2
AO:439
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
which has been planned and improved for the placement of two or more
manufactured homes.
MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE — The percentage of lot area which may be
occupied by the ground floor area of all primary and accessory buildings.
MEDIUM CROWN TREE — A species of tree with a mature height of 30
to 45 feet. Examples include but are not limited to ruby red horsechesnut,
American yellowwood, some cultivars of honeylocust, ironwood, sawtooth
oak, some cultivars of flowering cherry, and sassafras.[Added 9-10-2018
by Ord. No. 331]
MINING and QUARRYING — The use of land for the purpose of extracting
rocks and minerals for sale, exclusive of grading a lot preparatory to the
construction of a structure for which a zoning permit has been issued.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy as a residence, office, or place of assembly contained
in one unit or in two units designed to be joined into one integral unit
capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at
a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental
unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used
without a permanent foundation.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A form of development permitted in Article XIII of
this chapter.
MOTOR-VEHICLE-ORIENTED BUSINESS — Any commercial business or
any portion thereof which, by design, type of operation, or nature of
business, provides service to motor vehicles in a short period of time
including, but not limited to an automatic car wash, self-service car wash
or self-service gasoline station, or provides a service to occupants of the
motor vehicle while they remain in the vehicle, including but not limited to
a drive-in bank, drive-in restaurant, drive-in beverage sales, pickup window,
or gasoline service station.
NONCONFORMITIES — Any nonconforming lot, structure, or use of land or
structures.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot which does not comply with either the
lot size or width requirements for the uses and district in which it is
located, where such lot was legally recorder prior to the enactment of
Ord. No. 11, 8-2-1962, as amended, later incorporated into Ord. No. 80,
8-1-1978, readopted as part of the Code by Ord. No. 97, 1-13-1983, or
amendment thereto [this chapter].
A.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of structure,
which does not comply with the applicable use provisions of Ord. No.
11, 8-2-1962, as amended, and later incorporated into Ord. No. 80,
8-1-1978, readopted as part of the Code by Ord. No. 97, 1-13-1983,
B.
§ 12-11.2 HARRIS CODE § 12-11.2
AO:440
NURSING HOMES, PERSONAL CARE HOMES, and OTHER
CONVALESCENT HOMES — A building with sleeping rooms where persons
are housed or lodged and furnished with meals, nursing care for hire,
and which is approved for such by the Pennsylvania Department of Public
Welfare.
OFFICIAL ZONING MAP — The map setting forth the boundaries of the
districts of this chapter and adopted by the governing body of the Township.
OFF-SITE SEWER SERVICE — A sanitary sewage collection system in which
sewage is carried from individual lots by a system of pipes to a central
treatment and disposal plant.
OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE — A space not located within any street
right-of-way used by motor vehicles for the temporary storage of trucks
and other commercial vehicles while loading and unloading merchandise or
materials.
OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE — A space not located within any street
right-of-way used by motor vehicles for the temporary storage of one motor
vehicle.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that, on the average, is likely to
occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one-percent chance of occurring
each year, although the flood may occur in any year).
ON-SITE SEWER SERVICE — A sanitary sewage disposal system in which
sewage is treated and discharged on the same lot as the use which it serves.
OUTDOOR RECREATIONAL FACILITY — The primary use of open land
for active and passive recreational activities, including but not limited
to driving ranges, golf courses, ski and toboggan slopes, biking trails,
equestrian centers, swimming pools, ice-skating rinks, and amphitheaters.
This use excludes shooting ranges; campgrounds; RV parks; motorized
vehicle race tracks; and animal racing tracks.[Added 2-9-2015 by Ord.
No. 311]
PARENT TRACT — [Rural District Clustering Requirement] Developable
tract of land meeting minimum rural district clustering requirements.
Parent tract must be 20 acres or larger.
or amendment thereto [this chapter] where such use was lawfully in
existence prior to the enactment of such ordinance or amendment, or
prior to the application of such ordinance or amendment to its location
by reason of annexation.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use provisions
in Ord. No. 11, 8-2-1962, as amended, and later incorporated into
Ord. No. 80, adopted 8-1-1978, readopted as part of the Code by Ord.
No. 97, 1-13-1983, or amendment thereto [this chapter] where such
structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of such ordinance or
amendment or prior to the application of such ordinance or amendment
to its location by reason of annexation.
C.
§ 12-11.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-11.2
AO:441
PARKING BAY — A row of parking spaces abutting one another along the
length of each space.
PARKING LOT — A facility providing off-street parking space for five or
more motor vehicles.
PENNSYLVANIA MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE — Act of 1968, July
31, P.L 805, as amended, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
PERIMETER BOUNDARY — The line marking the outside limit of the
planned residential development.
PHASE — A component or definable part of a whole; a staged development.
A "phase" of a development plan is that part of the entire plan which, if
implemented, is capable of standing on its own. A "phase" of a PRD shall
be able to function independently of the undeveloped phases, while being
compatible with adjacent or neighboring land uses, even if the remainder of
the PRD were to be discontinued and its land reverted to its original zoning.
Also referred to as "stage."
PLANNED RECREATIONAL AREA — Area(s) laid out devoted to and
designed for the active and/or passive recreational pursuits of the residents
of the planned community. Such areas may include but shall not be limited
to ball fields, play apparatuses, nature trails, picnic areas, bike paths, and
like uses. However, all common open space within the planned residential
area shall not be deemed to be "planned recreational area."
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT (PRD) — An area of land,
controlled by a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a number
of dwelling units, the development plan for which may not correspond, in
lot size, bulk, or type of dwelling, density, lot coverage and required open
space, to the regulations established in any one residential district created,
from time to time, under the provisions of this chapter.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Harris Township Planning Commission,
Township of Harris, County of Centre, Pennsylvania.
PREMISES — Any lot and any structure constructed thereon.
PRIVATE — Not publicly owned, operated, or controlled.
PUBLIC — Owned, operated, or controlled by a government unit or a
governmental agency.
PUBLIC TRANSIT FACILITIES — Facilities or equipment used primarily by a
municipal or joint municipal transportation authority for loading, unloading
and transferring passengers. Facilities and equipment include but are not
limited to transit shelters, transit stops, and bus pulloff's.[Added
11-9-2015 by Ord. No. 322]
PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITY — Electric substations, automatic telephone
exchanges, and any other public utility corporation when exempted from
these provisions by state law; does not include public water and sewer
facilities, radio, television, and other private communications transmitters
and towers.
§ 12-11.2 HARRIS CODE § 12-11.2
AO:442
RACE TRACK — A commercial establishment for the racing of animals or
motor vehicles.
RADIO FREQUENCY (RF) INTERFERENCE — Disturbances in reception
caused by intruding signals or electrical current.
RECREATIONAL RESORT — A parcel that is developed as an outdoor
recreational facility but also contains a limited amount of visitor-oriented
facilities and accommodations. Visitor-oriented facilities and
accommodations may include overnight lodging, personal services,
restaurants, and meeting facilities.[Added 2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 311]
RIDING STABLE AND ACADEMY — An establishment where horses are
kept for riding or driving or are stabled for compensation as part of a club,
association, ranch, or similar establishment.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A corridor of land set aside for use, in whole or in part,
by a street.
RUNOFF — The surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a given
watershed after a fall of rain, snow, or other form of precipitation that does
not enter the soil but runs off the surface of the land.
SCHEDULE — A schedule of development is the projected time frame in
which the several phases of a development are to be implemented. Also
referred to as a "development schedule."
SCHOOL — Any place offering instruction in any branch of knowledge
under the supervision of lawfully constituted ecclesiastical governing body,
person, partnership, or corporation meeting the requirements of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
SEASONAL DWELLING — A single-family detached dwelling used for
seasonal and temporary living purposes during any season by persons
engaged in recreational pursuits.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by the movement of wind and water, or by gravity.
SELF-STORAGE FACILITY — One or more structures designed and used
for the internal storage of materials by individuals for a fee; no office,
sales, rental of goods or services, or industrial activities shall occur within
or outside of the storage buildings, nor shall any hazardous or otherwise
dangerous materials be permitted to be stored in such facilities.
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of two or more primary uses or structures
used for retail sales and service occupying a lot in single ownership.
SMALL CROWN TREE — A species of tree with a mature height of 20 feet
to 30 feet. Examples include but are not limited to paperbark maple, muscle
wood, eastern redbud, kousa dogwood, cultivars of hawthorn, cultivars of
crabapple, cultivars of cherry, and Japanese tree lilac.[Added 9-10-2018
by Ord. No. 331]
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — The depiction of male or female
genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if such person is female, breast.
§ 12-11.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-11.2
AO:443
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Activities to be regulated by this
chapter defined as follows:
STEEP SLOPE — Land whose slope (surfaces at an angle to the plane of the
horizon) is 25% or more (a vertical difference of 25 feet or more per 100
feet of horizontal distance).
STREET — A public or private corridor used as a means of vehicular and
pedestrian access to two or more lots; a highway, road, or alley.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between a street and the lot; includes
right-of-way line and front lot line.
STRUCTURAL CAPACITY — A term describing the physical ability of a
tower or other structure on which antennas are mounted to withstand
design loading without collapsing.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land. All
buildings are structures.
Act of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual intercourse or physical
contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area,
buttocks or, if such person is female, breast.
A.
The condition of human male or female genitals when in a state of
sexual stimulation or arousal.
B.
Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad in undergarments, a
mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or
otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed.
C.
ALLEY — A street, usually located to the rear or side of properties
otherwise abutting a street, used primarily for vehicular service access.
A.
ARTERIAL STREET — A major street with fast or heavy traffic of
considerable continuity used primarily as a traffic artery connecting
two or more neighborhoods or areas. For the purposes of this chapter,
existing arterial streets include the following: State College Bypass,
including entrance and exit ramps, and the Route 45 spur from the
College Township line to the intersection with U.S. 322; PA. 45; U.S.
322.
B.
COLLECTOR STREET — A major street which carries traffic from local
streets to arterial streets. For the purposes of this chapter, existing
collector streets include the following: Branch Road, Woodside Drive,
Main Street, Church Street, Boalsburg Pike, LR 14061 to LR 14020
(Linden Hall Road), to T 345 to LR 14021 (Brush Valley Road) to the
Potter Township line.
C.
LOCAL STREET — Any street which is not defined herein as either an
arterial or collector street.
D.
§ 12-11.2 HARRIS CODE § 12-11.2
AO:444
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any modification, alteration,
reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to an existing structure to an
extent or amount of 50% or more of its market value either:
THEATER FOR THE PERFORMING ARTS — The use of land and structures
which may contain an assembly hall and studios with or without stage,
which may be equipped with curtains and permanent stage scenery, or with
mechanical equipment adaptable, but not limited to, the showing of plays,
operas, performances, spectacles, and similar forms of live or audiovisual
entertainment, and for instruction in the performing arts.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Harris, County of Centre, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
TRANSIT SHELTER — A small, roofed structure, usually having three walls,
located near a street and designed primarily for the protection and
convenience of public transit passengers.[Added 11-9-2015 by Ord. No.
322]
TRANSIT STOP — A curbside place where passengers board or alight
transit.[Added 11-9-2015 by Ord. No. 322]
USE — Any purpose for which a lot or structure may be designed, arranged,
intended, maintained, or occupied, or any activity, occupation, business, or
operation carried on in a structure on a lot.
VARIANCE — A permissive waiver of terms and conditions of this chapter
granted by the Zoning Hearing Board.
VISITORS CENTER — The use of the land and structure or part thereof,
which is open to the general public and designed for the dissemination
of information. Such information may include, but shall not be limited to,
exhibits, maps, brochures, pamphlets, and similar items.
WETLANDS — Areas within Harris Township that are inundated or
saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient
to support vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions;
includes swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
WINTER SPORTS AREA — An establishment providing outdoor recreation
during the winter, such as skiing, sledding, and skating.
YARD — An unoccupied space, open to the sky, extending from the lot line
to a structure. The size of a required yard shall be measured as the shortest
distance between the structure and lot line.
A. Before the improvement, modification, or repair is started; or
If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the
damage occurred.
B.
A. PRIMARY USE — The main use of a lot or structure.
ACCESSORY USE — The use of land which is incidental and
subordinate to the primary use, and located on the same lot with such
unless specifically permitted elsewhere herein.
B.
§ 12-11.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-11.2
AO:445
YARD SETBACK AREA — An area bounded by a lot line and a line drawn
parallel to the lot line at a distance specified in this chapter for front, side,
or rear yard setbacks.
ZERO LOT LINE DWELLING — A building which is designed as a singlefamily
dwelling with setbacks on three sides with one side built on a side
property line.
ZONING OFFICER — The officially designated Zoning Officer of the
Township of Harris, County of Centre, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. FRONT YARD — The yard extending the full length of the front lot line.
SIDE YARD — A yard extending along the side lot line from the required
front yard to the required rear yard setback area.
B.
C. REAR YARD — The yard extending the full length of the rear lot line.
BUFFER YARD — A yard covered with vegetation and designed to
provide an area of separation between different districts or uses.
D.
§ 12-11.2 HARRIS CODE § 12-11.2
AO:446
ARTICLE XII
Enactment
§ 12-12.1. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 15, the existing zoning ordinance of the Township of Harris,
and all other existing ordinances or parts of ordinances which are contrary
to the provisions of this chapter, are hereby repealed to the extent
necessary to give this chapter full force and effect.
§ 12-12.2. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective on August 1, 1978.
§ 12-12.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-12.2
AO:447

ARTICLE XIII
Mobile Home Parks
§ 12-13.1. Title. [Amended 11-10-2008 by Ord. No. 279]
This Article XIII shall be known as "The Harris Township Mobile/
Manufactured Home Park Ordinance."
§ 12-13.2. Effective date.
This article shall be and become effective the 26th day of June 1974.
§ 12-13.3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The Harris Township Board of Supervisors.
CARTWAY — The portion of the roadway, paved or unpaved, intended for
vehicular use.
CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION — The written approval as issued by
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection authorizing an
owner to operate and maintain a mobile home park.
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION — The Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.[Amended 11-10-2008 by Ord.
No. 279]
EXISTING MOBILE HOME PARK — A mobile home park in existence and
operating in Harris Township at the time of adoption of this Article XIII.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME — A single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, office, or place of assembly contained in one unit, or
in two or more units, designed to be joined into one integral unit that can be
transported on its own chassis and is capable of again being separated for
repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy
except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations and
constructed so that it may be used without permanent
foundation.[Amended 11-10-2008 by Ord. No. 279]
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single
ownership or which has been declared to be of condominium ownership,
which has been planned and improved for placement of mobile/
manufactured homes for nontransient use, consisting of two or more
mobile/manufactured home lots.[Amended 11-10-2008 by Ord. No. 279]
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME LOT — A parcel of land or a
condominium unit in a mobile/manufactured home park, improved with the
necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary for the
erection thereon of a single mobile/manufactured home, which is either
leased or conveyed by the park owner to the owner of the mobile/
§ 12-13.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-13.3
AO:449
manufactured home erected on the lot.[Amended 11-10-2008 by Ord.
No. 279]
OWNER — Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, corporation, company,
association, or other entity owning or operating a proposed or existing
mobile home park.
PERMIT — The written mobile home park permit or renewal permit
authorizing a (person) owner to operate and maintain a mobile home or
mobile home park under the provisions of this Article XIII.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Harris Township Planning Commission.
REGIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION — The Centre Regional Planning
Commission.
SERVICE BUILDING — A permanent structure which contains operational,
office, recreational, sanitary, maintenance, or other facilities built for the
use of the mobile home park residents or owner.
SEWER CONNECTION — Consists of all pipes, fittings, and appurtenances
from the drain outlet of the mobile home to the inlet of the corresponding
sewer riser pipe.
SEWER RISER PIPE — That portion of the sewer lateral which extends
vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a designated point at
each mobile home lot.
WATER CONNECTION — Consists of all pipes, fittings, and appurtenances
from the water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the distribution system
within the mobile home.
WATER RISER PIPE — That portion of the water service pipe which extends
vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a designated point at
each mobile home lot.
WATER SERVICE PIPE — Consists of all pipes, fittings, valves, and
appurtenances from the water main of the park distribution system to the
water outlet of the distribution system within the mobile home.
§ 12-13.4. Certification and permit required.
A. Permits required. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain,
construct, alter, or extend any mobile home park within the limits of the
Township of Harris, unless he holds:
(1) Any certificate of registration or permit required by the
Department of Environmental Protection.
(2) A valid permit issued by Harris Township in the name of the owner.
B. Application for certificate of registration. All applications for a
certificate of registration shall be made by the owner of the mobile
home park or his authorized representative in accordance with the
rules and regulations, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of
Environmental Protection.
§ 12-13.3 HARRIS CODE § 12-13.4
AO:450
C. Application for mobile home park permit. All applications for a mobile
home park permit shall be filed in quadruplicate with the Township
Manager at the Harris Township offices. The application shall be in
writing, signed by the owner, and shall include the following:
(1) The name and address of the owner.
(2) The location and legal description of the mobile home park.
(3) A complete plan of the park in conformity with the requirements of
§ 12-13.7 of this chapter.
(4) Plans and specifications of all buildings, improvements, and
facilities constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home
park, which shall consist of site locations, heights, dimensions, and
profiles of the same.
(5) A current certificate of registration, if required, from the
Department of Environmental Protection.
(6) Such further information as may be requested by the Board of
Supervisors or the Planning Commission to enable it to determine if
the proposed park will comply with legal requirements.
(7) The initial permit fee for each mobile home park shall be paid upon
filing application for permit. Amount of such fee will be set by
resolution by the Board of Supervisors.
D. Title procedures for handling applications. Four copies of the
application and plans shall be submitted to the Township Manager for
inclusion on the Planning Commission agenda for review at their next
regular meeting following filing of the application for permit; provided,
however, that if said application shall be filed later than 20 days before
such meeting, the review shall occur at the next regularly scheduled
meeting. The Secretary of the Planning Commission shall transmit one
copy of the plans and application to each the Township Manager and
Centre Regional Planning Commission for review and recommendation
to the Township Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall
review said application and plans and forward recommendation thereon
to the Board of Supervisors for final determination. Upon the approval
of said application and plans, with or without conditions, by the Board
of Supervisors, a permit shall be issued to the owner, said permit to be
valid until the date stated on the permit. If the grant of permit is denied
because of noncompliance with this article or any other Township
ordinance, state laws, rules or regulations, the Board shall so inform
the applicant in writing within 10 days after the public meeting at
which time the permit is denied setting forth the reasons for the denial.
E. Each mobile home park owner shall apply for renewal of his permit on
or before the termination date stated in his permit. The fee for renewal
permit will be set by resolution, by the Board of Supervisors, to be paid
upon application of renewal permit. The owner shall submit, with
§ 12-13.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-13.4
AO:451
application for renewal permit, a statement by the owner as to the
status of compliance to this article and evidence of a valid certificate of
registration. Upon inspection of the park by the Board of Supervisors,
or their representative, if such inspection is deemed appropriate, a
renewal permit shall be granted if compliance is found. If the mobile
home park is found not to be in compliance with this article and other
applicable ordinances, laws, and regulations, a renewal permit may be
granted upon condition that the park will be brought into compliance
with stated conditions upon a certain date. Renewal permits shall be
valid for one year.
F. Inspection. The Board of Supervisors or their appointed officer may
inspect a mobile home park at reasonable intervals and at reasonable
times to determine compliance with this article.
G. Permit to be posted. The permit shall be conspicuously posted in the
office or on the premises of the mobile home park at all times.
H. Transfer of permit. All persons shall, upon transfer of ownership of any
mobile home park, immediately make application for transfer permit by
filing with the Township Manager an application setting forth the
names and addresses of the transferor and transferee; the nature of the
transfer, be it gift, sale, or inheritance; and such other data and
information as the Board of Supervisors may require by rule or
regulation. The fee for transfer of permit shall be as set by resolution by
the Board of Supervisors payable upon application. The Township
Manager shall issue a written transfer of permit if the application and
facts set forth therein are found to be in order.
I. Nonconforming uses. Existing mobile home parks shall be allowed to be
nonconforming to parts of this article for time periods specified herein;
except that if the number of occupied lots in the existing mobile home
park shall exceed twice the number occupied at the time this article
goes into effect, it shall be ineligible for renewal permit unless the
existing mobile home park is fully complying; excepting further that any
existing mobile home park shall not be eligible for a renewal permit 20
years after the expiration date of its original permit issued under this
article unless it is fully complying.
(1) Sections 12-13.1, 12-13.2, 12-13.3, 12-13.4, 12-13.7, 12-13.15 and
12-13.16 shall be of immediate effect in existing mobile home
parks, except that the owner shall be given 120 days after the
effective date of this article to submit a correct application and the
Township shall have an additional 60 days to grant or deny a
permit.
(2) With respect to new mobile home lots occupied in existing mobile
home parks after two permits have been granted, those spaces
shall comply with §§ 12-13.6 (12-13.6.D, 12-13.6F, and 12-13.6G),
and §§ 12-13.8B, 12-13.8E, and §§ 12-13.9, 12-13.10, 12-13.12, and
12-13.14.
§ 12-13.4 HARRIS CODE § 12-13.4
AO:452
§ 12-13.5. Site requirements.
(3) No renewal permit may be granted until the existing mobile home
park also complies with §§ 12-13.5C, 12-13.5D, 12-13.5E, 12-13H
[except §§ 12-13.8B, 12-13.8C and 12-13.8E(4)], 12-13.9, 12-13.10
(except § 12-13.10B), and 12-13.12.
(4) No renewal permit shall be granted to an existing mobile home
park one year after the expiration date of its original permit unless
the existing mobile home park also complies with § 12-13.14.
(5) No renewal permit shall be granted to an existing mobile home
park two years after the expiration date of its original permit unless
the existing mobile home park also complies with § 12-13.11.
(6) No renewal permit shall be granted to an existing mobile home
park three years after the expiration of its original permit unless
the existing mobile home park shall also have complied with
§§ 12-13.6A(2), 12-13.6C(3), and 12-13.6F and shall have submitted
a plan to the Board of Supervisors for the ultimate compliance of
existing mobile home parks to all portions of § 12-13.16. Said plan,
if approved by the Board of Supervisors, shall be held to govern
further compliance with § 12-13.6.
(7) No renewal permit shall be granted to an existing mobile home
park five years after the expiration date of its original permit unless
the existing mobile home park shall also comply with §§ 12-13.13.
J. Individual mobile homes. Individual mobile homes are allowed only in
an improved mobile home park except as allowed in this chapter, and
shall comply with all other applicable Harris Township ordinances and
regulations.
A. Zoning. Mobile home parks shall be located only in these zoning
districts as set forth in this chapter.
B. Size and contiguity. The minimum size requirement for mobile home
parks shall be 10 contiguous acres.
(1) Land utilized for mobile home parks shall be contiguous and shall
not be intersected by any public highway, street, alley, or way.
C. Site location. The location or contemplated location as indicated in the
application of all mobile home parks shall conform to the following
standards:
(1) Be free from adverse influence by swamps, marshes, garbage or
rubbish disposal areas or other potential breeding places for
insects, rodents, pests, or other conditions which may be
determined to constitute a health hazard.
(2) Not be subject to flooding.
§ 12-13.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-13.5
AO:453
§ 12-13.6. Design standards. [Amended 10-9-1995 by Ord. No. 170]
(3) Not be subject to hazard or nuisance, including excessive noise,
vibration, smoke, toxic matter, radiation, heat, odor, or glare.
D. Site drainage requirements.
(1) The ground surface in all parts of every park shall be graded and
equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner.
(2) Surface water collectors and other bodies of standing water
capable of breeding mosquitoes and other insects shall be
eliminated or controlled in a manner approved by the Department
of Environmental Protection.
(3) Wastewater from any plumbing fixture or sanitary sewer line shall
not be deposited upon the ground surface in any part of a mobile
home park, nor shall it be discharged or deposited in any manner
that may contribute to or cause pollution or contamination of
underground or surface waters.
E. Soil and ground cover requirements.
(1) Exposed ground surface in the mobile home park shall be paved or
covered with stone screenings or other solid material or protected
with a vegetative growth capable of preventing soil erosion and the
emanation of dust during dry weather, which cover or growth shall
be maintained and kept in good repair or control, as the case may
be.
(2) Park areas and other open spaces shall be properly seeded and
landscaped with adequate and reasonable grasses, trees, and
shrubbery which shall provide a dust deterrent environment. All
such areas shall be properly maintained and shall comply with the
provisions of Chapter 5, Article I.
(3) The design and development of the proposed mobile home park
shall preserve, where reasonable, natural features such as large
trees, outcroppings, streams, vegetation, etc.
(4) The interior of the mobile home park shall have adequate grass,
trees, and shrubs to provide a shaded environment.
F. Areas for nonresidential use. No part of any park shall be used for
nonresidential purposes except such uses that are required for direct
servicing, recreation, and well-being of the residents of the park and for
the management and maintenance of the park. These uses shall serve
primarily the residents of the mobile home park and may include a
community building, service building with laundry, convenience store
or stores not exceeding 2,400 square feet in gross floor area,
maintenance and recreational facilities and office facilities for park
management.
§ 12-13.5 HARRIS CODE § 12-13.6
AO:454
A. Mobile home lots.
(1) Mobile home lots within the park shall have a minimum gross area
of 5,000 square feet.
(2) The area of the mobile home lot shall be improved with an adequate
and stable pad or foundation for the placement of the mobile home.
The mobile home foundation or pad shall be designed so as not to
heave, shift or settle unevenly under the weight of the mobile home
because of frost action, inadequate drainage, vibration, or other
forces acting on the superstructure.
B. Required setbacks, buffer strips and screening.
(1) All mobile homes shall be located at least 50 feet from a major road,
40 feet from a collector road and 30 feet from a minor road right-ofway
exterior to the park boundary line and at least 25 feet from all
other park boundary lines.
(2) There shall be a minimum distance of 20 feet between individual
mobile homes (including accessory structures attached thereto).
(3) All mobile homes and structures shall be at least 20 feet from any
street, clustered off-street parking lot, or pavement located within
the mobile home park.
(4) All mobile home parks shall be required to provide an attractive
visual screen along the boundary of the mobile home park where it
abuts other zones, public streets or highways. Said screens shall be
designed and maintained with trees, shrubbery and ground cover
where possible to provide a buffer between zones and use areas
and to minimize noise, dust, dirt and other deleterious effects that
may result from adjacent uses, streets and highways upon the
residents of said mobile home park.
C. Erection and placement of mobile homes.
(1) Mobile/manufactured homes shall be constructed in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Manufactured Housing Improvement Act
(Act 158 of 2004, as amended).139 [Amended 11-10-2008 by Ord.
No. 279]
(2) An accessory structure which has a horizontal area exceeding 25
square feet that is attached to a mobile home or is located within 10
feet of its window and has an opaque or translucent top or roof that
is higher than such window shall, for the purposes of this
separation requirement, be considered to be part of the mobile
home.
(3) An enclosure of design and materials compatible with the mobile
home shall be erected around the entire base of each mobile home.
139. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 1658.1 et seq.
§ 12-13.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-13.6
AO:455
Such enclosure shall be constructed to provide sufficient
ventilation to inhibit decay and deterioration of the structure, and
shall be maintained in good condition.
(4) Each mobile home shall be tied down to a ground anchor system
that meets the following requirements:
(a) Each ground anchor shall be capable of resisting an allowable
working load equal to or exceeding 3,150 pounds applied in the
direction of the tie-down. In addition, each ground anchor shall
be capable of withstanding a 50% overload without failure.
(b) Ground anchors shall be resistant to weathering deterioration
at least equivalent to that provided by a coating of zinc on steel
strapping of not less than 0.30 ounces per square foot of
surface coated.
(c) Unless the entire tie-down system, including ground anchors,
is designed by a registered professional engineer or architect,
ground anchors shall be placed not more than 24 feet on
centers beginning from a line congruent with the front wall of
the mobile home.
(d) Ground anchors for diagonal ties shall be provided in
conjunction with each vertical tie-down.
D. Street system. All park streets shall conform to the following minimum
standards:
(1) General requirements. A safe and convenient vehicular access shall
be provided from abutting public streets or roads.
(2) Access. The entrance road connecting the park streets with a
public street or road shall have a minimum cartway width of 32
feet. Whenever a street intersects a public street, a stop sign in
conformity with Township regulations shall be installed and
maintained. Vehicle access to mobile home parks shall be from
either a collector or an arterial public street.
(3) Internal streets. Roadways shall be of adequate width to
accommodate intensified traffic and, in any case, shall meet the
following minimum requirements:
(a) Internal roadways shall be provided and all mobile home
spaces shall face or abut upon a roadway having at least 22
feet of unencumbered cartway. No mobile home space shall be
allowed direct access to a public highway, street, alley, or way.
(b) A minimum radius to property line of 60 feet and a minimum
fifty-foot radius of cartway turnaround shall be provided.
(c) Where one-way streets are used, the cartway may be reduced
by 10 feet.
§ 12-13.6 HARRIS CODE § 12-13.6
AO:456
(d) Required illumination of park and street systems. Both
roadways and sidewalks shall be adequately lighted. Roadways
shall be lighted with a minimum of one streetlight at each
roadway intersection and one streetlight at the end of each culde-
sac which is 300 feet or more from a roadway intersection.
(e) Street construction.
[1] All streets shall be provided with a smooth, hard and dustfree
surface which shall be durable and well-drained under
normal use and weather conditions.
[2] Grades. Grades of all streets shall be sufficient to insure
adequate surface drainage, but shall be not more than
10%. Short runs, not exceeding 500 feet, with a maximum
grade of 14%, may be permitted, provided traffic safety is
assured by appropriate surfacing, adequate leveling areas,
and avoidance of lateral curves.
[3] Intersections. Intersecting streets and common ways shall
be at angles approximating 90° (right angles) and shall be
straight lines for a distance of 100 feet from the corner of
such intersections; offset intersecting streets shall not be
located nearer than 150 feet as measured from the center
lines of such offset intersecting streets; and no more than
two streets or ways shall intersect at one point.
(f) A transportation impact report complying with Chapter 11,
Subdivision and Land Development, Article VII, Land
Development Transportation Impact Report, shall accompany
each application for a mobile home park permit.
E. Parking areas.
(1) A minimum of at least two off-street parking spaces shall be
provided for and be located on each mobile home lot or be located
no farther than 200 feet distant from the mobile home that such offstreet
parking is intended to serve in order that convenient and
safe access is provided for all mobile home park lots to their offstreet
parking spaces.
(2) There shall be provided visitor off-street parking spaces clustered
at various locations within the mobile home park. It shall be
required that 0.5 off-street parking spaces for visitors be provided
for each mobile home lot within the mobile home park.
(3) Each mobile home park shall provide screened areas for the
storage of boats and trailers (travel, horse, or utility) with an
aggregate size of at least 100 square feet per mobile home lot.
F. Walks.
§ 12-13.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-13.6
AO:457
§ 12-13.7. Plan requirements.
(1) General requirements. Between individual mobile homes, park
streets and community facilities, all walks shall provide safe,
convenient all-season pedestrian access and be of adequate width
for intended use. Sudden changes in alignment and gradient shall
be avoided.
(2) Common walk system. Where a common walk system is provided
and maintained between locations, and where pedestrian traffic is
concentrated, such walks shall have a minimum width of four feet.
(3) Individual walks. All mobile home lots shall be connected to
common walks, streets, driveways or parking spaces connecting to
a street with individual walks having a minimum width of three
feet.
G. Open space requirements. Suitable spaces for recreation and open
space use shall comply with § 12-2.5C(2)(h).
(1) The open space shall be landscaped with a water-absorbent surface
except for recreational facilities, garden space, and walkways
utilizing hard surfaces, and be equipped with suitable play
equipment and other recreational facilities to serve the residents of
the mobile home park.
(2) The open space and recreation area must be maintained by the
mobile home park operator.
(3) All open spaces including public right-of-way up to a curb or a
public street shall be planted with a mixture of grass, trees, and
shrubs and/or remain in a natural condition to provide a "park-like"
appearance.
A. Scale. The plan of a mobile home park shall be clearly and legibly drawn
to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, except that larger scales may be
used for mobile home parks in excess of 20 acres.
B. Contents of plan. The plan should show:
(1) Name of current or proposed mobile home park.
(2) North point, graphic scale, written scale and data including the
month, day, and year that the original drawing was completed, and
the month, day, and year that the original plan was revised, for
each revision, if any.
(3) Name of record owner and developer.
(4) Name and address of registered surveyor or engineer, landscape
architect, land planner, or other similarly qualified person
responsible for the plan.
§ 12-13.6 HARRIS CODE § 12-13.7
AO:458
(5) Names of all abutting property owners, if any, with the County
Recorder of Deeds book and page numbers where recorded.
(6) A key map for the purpose of locating the property being
subdivided, showing the relationship to adjoining property and to
all streets, roads, municipal boundaries, and recorded subdivision
plans existing within 1,000 feet of any part of the property.
(7) Total tract boundaries of the property being subdivided, showing
bearings and distances, and a statement of total acreage of the
property.
(8) Zoning data, including any changes in the existing zoning to be
requested by the owner. If a zoning amendment is being considered
or is pending which might affect the proposed park, the Township
shall notify the owner of such a request.
(9) Contour lines at vertical intervals of two feet for land with average
natural slope of 4% or less, and at intervals of five feet for land with
natural slopes exceeding 4%.
(10) Location and elevation of the datum to which contour elevations
refer; where reasonably practicable, datum used shall be a known
established benchmark.
(11) All existing sewer lines, water lines, fire hydrants, utility
transmission lines, culverts, bridges, railroads, watercourses, and
other significant man-made or natural features within the proposed
mobile home park and within 50 feet from the boundaries of the
proposed mobile home park.
(12) All existing buildings or other structures and the approximate
location of all existing tree masses within the proposed mobile
home park.
(13) All existing streets, including streets of record (recorded) but not
constructed on or abutting the tract, including names, right-of-way
widths, cartway (pavement) widths, and approximate grades.
(14) The full plan of proposed development, including:
(a) Location and width of all streets and rights-or-way, with a
statement of any conditions governing their use.
(b) Suggested street names and utility easement locations.
(c) Proposed building setback lines along each street.
(d) Lot lines with dimensions and proposed placement of the
mobile homes.
(e) A statement of the intended use of all nonresidential lots and
parcels.
§ 12-13.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-13.7
AO:459
§ 12-13.8. Water supply.
(f) Lot numbers and a statement of the total number of lots and
parcels.
(g) Sanitary and/or storm sewers (and not drainage facilities), with
the size and material of each indicated, and any proposed
connection with existing facilities.
(h) Parks, playgrounds, streets and other areas dedicated or
reserved for public use, with any conditions governing such
use.
C. Supplementary data. Before final approval is given, the following
supplementary data applicable should be submitted:
(1) Typical street cross-section drawings for all proposed streets.
Cross-section drawings may be shown on either the plan or on the
profile sheets.
(2) Streets shall have profiles prepared along the top of the cartway
edges or along the top of curb for both sides of each proposed
street shown on the plan. Such profiles shall show natural and
finished grades at the following scale, or a ratio thereof:
(a) One inch equals 10 feet horizontal and one inch equals one foot
vertical.
(3) Designs of any bridges or culverts which may be required. Such
designs shall meet all applicable requirements of the Department
of Environmental Protection and/or the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation.140
A. General requirements. An adequate supply of water shall be provided
for mobile homes, service buildings and other accessory facilities as
required by this article. Where a public water supply system of
satisfactory quantity, quality, and pressure is available, connection shall
be made thereto and its supply shall be used exclusively. Where a
satisfactory public water supply system is not available, the
development of a private water supply system shall be approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection or other authorities having
jurisdiction.
(1) The water supply shall be capable of supplying a minimum of 150
gallons of potable water per day per mobile home, and shall have a
minimum sustained rate of flow of 50 gallons of potable water per
hour per mobile home.
B. Source of supply.
140. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 12-13.7 HARRIS CODE § 12-13.8
AO:460
(1) The source of the water supply shall be capable of supplying a
minimum of 150 gallons of potable water per day per mobile home,
and supplying a sustained flow of 250 gallons per minute for a
minimum of an hour.
(2) The well or suction line of the water supply system shall be located
and constructed in such a manner that neither underground nor
surface contamination will reach the water supply from any source.
(3) No well casings, pumps, pumping machinery or suction pipes shall
be placed in any pit, room or space extending below ground level
nor in any room or space above ground which is walled in or
otherwise enclosed, unless such rooms, whether above or below
ground, have free drainage by gravity into the ground.
(4) Water supply treatment shall be in accordance with the
requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection.
C. Water storage facilities. All potable water storage reservoirs shall be
covered watertight and constructed of impervious material. Overflows
and vents of such reservoirs shall be effectively screened. Manholes
shall be constructed with overlapping covers so as to prevent the
entrance of contaminated materials. Reservoir overflow pipes shall
discharge through an acceptable air gap.
D. Potable water distribution system.
(1) All water piping, fixtures and other equipment shall be constructed
and maintained in accordance with state and local regulations.
(2) The water piping system shall not be connected with nonpotable or
questionable water supplies and shall be protected against the
hazards of backflow or back siphonage.
(3) The system shall be so designed and maintained as to provide a
pressure of not less than 20 pounds per square inch, under normal
operating conditions, at service buildings and other locations
requiring potable water.
E. Individual water riser pipes and connections.
(1) Individual water riser pipes shall be located within the base
enclosure of the mobile home at a point where the water
connection will approximate a vertical position, thereby insuring
the shortest water connection possible and decreasing
susceptibility to water pipe freezing.
(2) The water riser pipe shall have a minimum inside diameter of 1/2
inch and terminate at least four inches above the ground surface.
The water outlet shall be provided with a cap when a mobile home
does not occupy the lot.
§ 12-13.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-13.8
AO:461
§ 12-13.9. Sewage disposal.
(3) Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service
lines, valves and riser pipes and to protect risers from heaving and
thawing actions of ground during freezing weather. Surface
drainage shall be diverted from the location of the riser pipe.
(4) A shutoff valve below the frost line shall be provided near the water
riser pipe on each mobile home lot. Underground stop-and-waste
valves are prohibited unless their types of manufacture and their
method of installation are approved by the Board of Supervisors.
A. General requirements. An adequate and safe sewage system shall be
provided in all parks for conveying and disposing of sewage from
mobile homes, service buildings and other accessory facilities. Such
system shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance
with the ordinances of the Township of Harris, Department of
Environmental Protection or local health regulations, and shall be
acceptable in design and quality to the College-Harris Joint Authority
for present or future connections to the Authority's systems.
B. Individual sewer connections.
(1) Each mobile home lot shall be provided with at least a four-inch
diameter sewer riser pipe. The sewer riser pipe will be so located
within each base enclosure that the sewer connection to the mobile
home drain outlet will approximate a vertical position.
(2) The sewer connection (see definition) shall have a nominal inside
diameter of not less than three inches, and the slope of any portion
thereof shall be at least 1/4 inch per foot. All joints shall be
watertight.
(3) All materials used for sewer connections shall be semirigid,
corrosive-resistant, nonabsorbent and durable. The inner surface
shall be smooth.
(4) Provision shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe when a
mobile home does not occupy the lot. Surface drainage shall be
diverted away from the riser. The rim of the riser pipe shall extend
at least 1/2 inch above ground elevation.
C. Sewer lines. Sewer and water lines shall be laid in separate trenches,
with a horizontal distance of at least 10 feet from each other, except
that these lines may be laid in the same trench by placing the water
pipe on a shelf of undisturbed earth above and to one side of the
caulked tight sewer line. All sewer lines shall be constructed of
materials approved by the Township of Harris and the College-Harris
Joint Authority and shall have watertight joints.
D. Sewage treatment and/or discharge. Where the sewer lines of the
mobile home park are not connected to a public sewer, all proposed
§ 12-13.8 HARRIS CODE § 12-13.9
AO:462
§ 12-13.10. Electrical distribution system.
§ 12-13.11. Service buildings and other community service
facilities.
sewage disposal facilities shall be approved by the Department of
Environmental Protection and the Board of Supervisors prior to
construction.
A. General requirements. Every park shall contain an electrical wiring
system consisting of wiring, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances
which shall be installed and maintained in accordance with local
electrical power company specifications regulating such systems.
B. Power distribution lines. Main power lines shall be located
underground.
C. Individual electrical connections.
(1) Each mobile home lot shall be provided with an approved
disconnecting device and over-current protective equipment. The
minimum service per outlet shall be 120/240 volts AC, 200
amperes.
(2) The mobile home shall be connected to the outlet receptacle by an
approved type of flexible cable with connectors and a male
attachment plug.
D. Required grounding. All exposed not-current-carrying metal parts of
mobile homes and all other equipment shall be grounded by means of
an approved grounding conductor run with branch circuit conductors
or other approved method of grounded metallic wiring. The neutral
conductor shall not be used as an equipment ground for mobile homes
or other equipment.
A. The requirements of this section shall apply to service buildings,
recreation buildings and other community service facilities when
constructed, such as: management offices, repair shops, storage areas,
laundry facilities, and indoor recreation areas.
B. Structural requirements for buildings.
(1) All portions of the structure shall be properly protected from
damage by ordinary uses and by decay, corrosion, termites and
other destructive elements. Exterior portions shall be of such
materials and be so constructed and protected as to prevent
entrance or penetration of moisture and weather.
(2) All structures containing laundry and/or toilet facilities shall:
(a) Have sound-resistant walls extending to the ceiling between
male and female sanitary facilities. Walls and partitions in
lavatories and other plumbing fixtures shall be constructed of
§ 12-13.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-13.11
AO:463
§ 12-13.12. Refuse disposal.
§ 12-13.13. Fire protection.
§ 12-13.14. Fuel.
dense, nonabsorbent, waterproof material or covered with
moisture-resistant material.
(b) Have at least one window or skylight facing directly to the
outdoors. The minimum aggregate gross area of windows for
each required shall be not less than 10% of the floor area
served by them.
(c) Have at least one window which can be easily opened or a
mechanical device which will adequately ventilate the room.
(3) Toilets shall be located each in a separate compartment equipped
with a self-closing door.
A. Refuse handling. The storage, collection, and disposal of refuse in the
mobile home park shall be so managed as to create no health hazards or
air pollution.
B. Refuse storing. All refuse shall be stored in flytight, watertight,
rodentproof containers, which shall be located not more than 150 feet
away from any mobile home space. Containers shall be provided in
sufficient number and capacity to properly store all refuse. Rubbish
shall be collected and disposed of as frequently as may be necessary to
insure that the containers shall not overflow.
A. Fire extinguishers. Portable fire extinguishers of a type approved by the
fire prevention authorities shall be maintained in all public service
buildings under park control. The mobile home park owner shall adopt
park regulations, which shall include, among other regulations to be set
by the park owner, a recommendation that each mobile home owner
provide and maintain within his mobile home a portable fire
extinguisher suitable for class A, B, and C fires.
B. Fire hydrants public water supply. Where a public supply of water is
available, fire hydrants shall be installed as agreed upon by the Board
of Supervisors and the agency or person responsible for supplying
water.
C. Burning. No open fires shall be permitted at any place which may
endanger life or property. No fires shall be left unattended at any time.
A. Heating oil tanks. All heating oil storage tanks shall be permanently
installed and must meet the following specific requirements:
(1) Heating oil tanks shall be located no closer than two feet to any
building or mobile home. Such tanks shall be suitably protected
§ 12-13.11 HARRIS CODE § 12-13.14
AO:464
§ 12-13.15. Supervision responsibilities of park management.
The park management shall operate the park in compliance with this article
and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities
and equipment in good repair and in a clean, safe, and sanitary condition;
supervise the placement and anchoring of each mobile home on its mobile
home pad, which includes securing its stability against winds up to 60 mph
and installing all utility connections; shall give the Board of Supervisors
or their representative free access to inspect all mobile home lots, service
buildings, and other community service facilities; shall maintain a register
from the weather and from physical damage incident to outside
use. The tanks shall not block normal means of egress.
(2) A tank not larger than sixty-gallon capacity may be a DOT-5
shipping container (drum) and be so marked, a listed safety can, or
a tank meeting the provisions of Standard UL 80 (Underwriters
Laboratory tested - 80).
(3) A tank other than a DOT-5 (federally approved Department of
Transportation - 5) shipping container having a capacity of not
more than 660 gallons shall meet the provisions of Standard UL.
(4) Not more than one six-hundred-sixty-gallon tank or two tanks of
aggregate capacity of 660 gallons or less shall be connected to oilburning
appliances.
(5) Two supply tanks connected to the same burner as permitted by
Subsection A(3) above may be cross-connected and provided with a
single fill and a single vent, but when so connected, they shall be on
a common slab and be rigidly secured, one to the other.
(6) Tanks having a capacity of 660 gallons or less shall be securely
supported by rigid noncombustible supports to prevent settling,
sliding, or lifting.
(7) The filling of a portable container from a storage tank larger than
60 gallons shall be by means of a hand pump only.
B. Gas containers. All gas storage tanks or cylinders shall be securely
fastened in place and shall not be located inside or beneath the mobile
home or less than five feet from any mobile home exit.
C. Storage of gas containers. No disconnected gas storage tanks or
cylinders shall be stored or kept in or upon the mobile home park
except in properly constructed, safe structures, access to which shall be
limited and under the control of the owner or manager of a mobile home
park.
D. Piping. All piping from fuel storage tanks or cylinders to mobile homes
shall be copper or other acceptable metallic tubing and shall be
permanently installed and securely fastened in place.
§ 12-13.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-13.15
AO:465
containing the names and addresses of all park occupants and make such
register available to any authorized person inspecting the park.
§ 12-13.16. Enforcement.
A. Revocation of permit. Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home
park, it is determined that conditions or practices exist which are in
violation of any provision of this article, or any regulations adopted
pursuant thereto, the Board of Supervisors or their representative shall
give notice in writing to the person to whom the permit was issued,
such notice to consist of a listing of the violated sections of this article,
and shall advise them that unless such conditions or practices are
corrected within a period of time specified in the notice, the permit to
operate will be suspended. At the end of such period, such mobile home
park shall be reinspected and, if such conditions or practices have not
been corrected, the Board of Supervisors shall suspend the permit and
give notice in writing of such suspension to the person to whom the
permit is issued.
B. Penalties. The owner of any mobile home park who violates any of the
provisions of this article including any person operating a mobile home
park without a permit, excepting mobile home parks which shall comply
to this article within 180 days after its effective date, shall, upon
conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District
Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment
of said fines and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days.
Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section of this
article which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a
separate offense.141
(1) Each day's failure of compliance with any such provision shall
constitute a separate violation.
141. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 12-13.15 HARRIS CODE § 12-13.16
AO:466
ARTICLE XIV
Signs
[Added 4-8-1996 by Ord. No. 174]
§ 12-14.1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Harris Township Sign Ordinance."
§ 12-14.2. Effective date.
This article shall become effective this 8th day of April 1996.
§ 12-14.3. Definitions. [Amended 2-14-2005 by Ord. No. 250]
The definitions in Article XI, Definitions, of this chapter apply in the
interpretation of this article. The following words and phrases shall have
the meanings given in this section:
PROPERTY — The land area of a single tax parcel owned, rented, or leased;
a lot of record.
REFLECTOR — A device fitted over a lamp for reflecting or partially cutting
off its light.
SIGN — Any structure, device, light, or natural object, including the ground
itself, or any part thereof or any device attached thereto, or painted or
represented thereon, which shall be used to identify, advertise, or attract
attention to any object, product, place, activity, person, institution,
organization, firm, group, commodity, profession, enterprise, industry, or
business, or which shall display or include any letter, work, model; number,
banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device, or representation used as an
announcement, direction, or advertisement, and which is intended to be
seen from off of the premises or from a parking lot.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — A sign denoting a business name, direction; and
distance information containing no commercial advertisement.
A.
GROUND POLE SIGN — A sign supported by one or more uprights;
poles, or braces placed in or upon the ground.
B.
HANGING SIGN — A sign suspended from a portion of an existing
structure.
C.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign that provides artificial light directly, or
through any transparent or translucent material, from a source of light
connected with such sign, or a sign illuminated by a light focused upon
or chiefly directed at the surface of the sign.
D.
MONUMENT SIGN — A sign placed on or in the ground, not supported
by any building or other structure, with the bottom edge of the sign
entirely at grade.
E.
§ 12-14.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-14.3
AO:467
SIGN AREA — The area of the smallest triangle, rectangle, or circle which
can wholly enclose the surface area of the sign. All visible faces of a multifaced
sign shall be counted separately and then totaled in calculating sign
area. Three-dimensional signs shall be counted as dual-faced, such that the
total area shall be twice the area of the smallest triangle, rectangle, or
circle which can wholly circumscribe the sign in the plane of its largest
dimension.
§ 12-14.4. Signs permitted and prohibited in all zoning districts.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign which contains a message unrelated
to a business or profession conducted upon the premises where such
sign is located, or which is unrelated to a commodity, service, or
entertainment sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is
located.
F.
ON-PREMISES SIGN — A sign located on the property or attached to
the exterior of the building which houses the business or occupation.
G.
ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The officially designated
Ordinance Enforcement Officer of the Township of Harris, County of
Centre, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
H.
PERMANENT SIGN — Any sign intended for display for an unlimited
period of time, or in excess of that associated with a temporary sign, as
specifically described in this article.
I.
POLITICAL SIGN — A sign announcing or advocating a candidate or an
issue to be considered during an election.
J.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign which projects from and is supported by a
wall of a building.
K.
REAL ESTATE DEVELOPMENT SIGN — A sign providing the name of a
development, the developer, and/or the developer's telephone number.
L.
TEMPORARY SIGN — Any sign intended for display for a limited period
of time, or for less than that established for a permanent sign, as
specifically described in this article.
M.
WALL SIGN — A sign which is attached directly to or painted upon a
building wall or window, which does not extend more than 12 inches
therefrom nor above the roofline.
N.
A. Signs permitted in all zoning districts. Signs listed in this section are
permitted in all districts and shall not require licenses and shall not be
counted when calculating the number of signs on a premises. However,
such signs shall conform with the general regulations for signs
enumerated in the remainder of this article:
(1) Name and address of resident, not to include any commercial
advertisement, of not more than two square feet in sign area.
§ 12-14.3 HARRIS CODE § 12-14.4
AO:468
(2) Signs regulating the use of property, such as "no trespassing," "no
hunting," "no fishing," etc., of no more than two square feet of sign
area in residential zones and five square feet of sign area in
commercial and industrial zones.
(3) Real estate signs not exceeding five square feet in sign area in
residential zones and 25 square feet of sign area in commercial,
industrial; agricultural, and forest zones, which advertise the sale,
rental, or lease of the property upon which said signs are located.
Such real estate signs shall be removed within 10 days after the
premises advertised has been sold, rented, or leased.
(4) Bulletin boards for public, charitable, or religious institutions,
when located on the premises thereof, with a sign area of no more
than 25 square feet if single-faced, nor more than 50 square feet if
double-faced, and if used exclusively for noncommercial
announcement.
(5) Signs regulating on-premises traffic, parking, or other functional
subdivision, such as lavatory facilities, telephone, and signs
denoting sections of a building such as an office, etc., when such
signs are less than five square feet in area and bear no commercial
advertisement.
(6) Signs erected by a governmental body, or under the direction of
such a body, and bearing no commercial advertisement, such as
traffic signs, railroad crossing signs, signs identifying public
schools and playgrounds, etc.
(7) Memorial signs or tablets and signs denoting the date of erection of
buildings, not exceeding two square feet of sign area on a single
face.
(8) The flag, pennant, or insignia of any government, or of any
religious, charitable, or fraternal organization.
(9) Signs no larger than five square feet of sign area advertising the
sale of edible farm products produced on the premises, or
advertising garage sales, auctions, or special events of charitable
or public service groups, which shall be removed at the conclusion
of the event or activity.
(10) Political signs not exceeding five square feet in sign area if singlefaced
or 10 square feet if double-faced, placed on private property
with the owner's permission. Signs shall be valid for a thirty-day
period prior to the voting date and must be removed within seven
days after the voting date.
(11) Permanent residential development signs at major entrances
designed to identify a residential subdivision and containing no
commercial advertising, which do not exceed 25 square feet of sign
§ 12-14.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-14.4
AO:469
area on a single face or 50 square feet of sign area on a double
face.
(12) Signs identifying places of worship when located on the premises
thereof not exceeding five square feet of sign area on a single face.
(13) On-premises occupation signs containing only name and
occupation and of no more than two square feet of sign area.
(14) Decals affixed to the windows or door glass panes which indicate
membership in a business group or which denote credit cards
accepted by an establishment.
(15) Signs identifying a golf course or a country club or other
recreational facility when located on the premises thereof and
containing no commercial advertising. These signs shall be limited
to 25 square feet of sign area on a single face and 50 square feet of
sign area on a double face.
(16) Signs not exceeding 25 square feet in area erected on the inside of
the perimeter fencing or on the scoreboard of an organizational
athletic field for the sole purpose of sponsoring or contributing to
the organized sport or organization. [Added 4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 301]
B. Signs prohibited in all zoning districts.
(1) Signs which by reason of size, location, content, coloring, or
manner of illumination obstruct or detract from the vision of
drivers, either when driving on a roadway or when entering a
roadway from another roadway or driveway, or obstruct or detract
from the visibility or effectiveness of any sign or control device on
public streets and roads.
(2) Any sign which obstructs free ingress to or egress from a fire
escape, door, window, or other required exitway.
(3) Signs which make use of words such as "stop," "look," "one-way,"
"danger," "yield," or any similar words or phrases, symbols, lights,
or characters in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or
confuse traffic.
(4) Any signs which approximate in shape, design, color, or wording
any traffic control sign or device installed by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation or Harris Township.
(5) Any obsolete sign which no longer advertises a bona fide business
conducted or a product sold. In any case, 90 days shall be allowed
for removal of an obsolete sign.
(6) Signs on public property or public rights-of-way, unless erected by
a government body or required to be so located by order of a
government body. No sign located on public property or a public
§ 12-14.4 HARRIS CODE § 12-14.4
AO:470
§ 12-14.5. Sign licensing regulations.
right-of-way shall bear any commercial advertisement or
announcement.
(7) Signs painted on, attached to, or supported by a tree, stone, cliff, or
other natural object.
(8) String lights, other than seasonal holiday decorations, which are
unshielded.
(9) Search lights, pennants, banners, balloons, and streamers, except
for occasions such as grand openings and then only with special
permission of the Ordinance Enforcement Officer. Use shall be
limited to a fifteen-day period.
(10) Flashing or oscillating sign lights.
A. Permanent signs.
(1) All permanent signs, except those enumerated in § 12-14.4A, Signs
permitted in all zoning districts, must be licensed. A license shall
be required prior to constructing or installing a new sign and prior
to altering or moving an existing sign.
(2) Application for a license for a permanent sign shall be made on a
form provided by the Ordinance Enforcement Officer. The
Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall issue a sign license only if the
applicant has provided sufficient information to assure that such
sign will comply with all applicable provisions of this article.
(a) Any person desiring a sign license shall file application upon a
form which shall contain or have attached thereto the following
information:
[1] Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant.
[2] A map showing the location of any building, structure, or
lot to which the sign is to be attached or erected, and
showing the position of the sign in relation to nearby
buildings and thoroughfares; such a map shall be drawn to
scale.
[3] A plan showing the design of the sign, materials to be
used, lighting plans, method of construction, and means of
attachment to a building, structure, or the ground; such
plans must be to scale and be drawn on eight-and-one-halfinch-
by-eleven-inch paper.
[4] Name of person, firm, corporation, or association erecting,
altering, or installing said sign.
§ 12-14.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-14.5
AO:471
[5] Written consent of the owner of the land on which the sign
is to be erected, altered, or relocated.
[6] Other information as the Ordinance Enforcement Officer
shall deem necessary in order to show full compliance with
all applicable provisions of this and other applicable
ordinances of the Township.
(3) Licenses for permanent signs are valid for three years and shall be
renewable at three-year intervals.
(4) Licenses for permanent signs must be kept on the premises where
the sign is displayed and must be shown to the Ordinance
Enforcement Officer upon request.
(5) A sign may be erected, installed, altered, or relocated after a sign
license has been issued by the Ordinance Enforcement Officer. The
owner of the sign shall notify the Ordinance Enforcement Officer;
who shall inspect the sign.
(a) If the Ordinance Enforcement Officer finds that the sign has
been placed as specified in the license application and in
compliance with all applicable provisions of this and other
ordinances of the Township, he shall issue a certificate of
conformance.
(b) If the Ordinance Enforcement Officer finds that the sign has
not been placed as specified in the license application and/or is
not in compliance with all applicable provisions of this and
other ordinances of the Township, the owner of the sign shall
be notified in writing by the Ordinance Enforcement Officer to
remove said sign or correct any violations of this article noted
by the Ordinance Enforcement Officer within 30 days of the
date of notification. Any sign owner who shall fail to correct
noted violations within 30 days of notification shall be subject
to fines and penalties as set forth in § 12-14.9, Enforcement
and penalties, of this article.
B. Temporary signs.
(1) All temporary signs as they are defined in this article shall be
licensed and shall conform to the regulations established in this
article. Possession of a valid license for a temporary sign shall
entitle the licensee to display one temporary sign at any time for
the period stated.
(2) Application for a license for a temporary sign shall be made on a
form provided by the Ordinance Enforcement Officer. Licenses for
temporary signs must be kept on the premises where signs are
displayed and must be shown to the Ordinance Enforcement Officer
upon request.
§ 12-14.5 HARRIS CODE § 12-14.5
AO:472
§ 12-14.6. General regulations in all zoning districts. [Amended
2-14-2005 by Ord. No. 250]
(3) Licenses for temporary signs are valid for 90 days and may be
renewed upon the filing of a new application and payment of the
license fee.
(4) Not more than two temporary signs may be licensed for any
property at any one time.
C. License fees.
(1) The Board of Supervisors shall establish a schedule and a collection
procedure for all sign fees, which shall be posted in the office of the
Ordinance Enforcement Officer.
(2) All such fees shall be payable to Harris Township at the office of the
Ordinance Enforcement Officer.
A. Limit on signs per property. No more than five signs may be erected or
maintained on any property at any one time, except on a multi-tenant
property, as described in § 12-14.8.B(4).
(1) In calculating the total number of signs on a property, only
permanent signs shall be used. A double-faced sign shall count as a
single sign.
(2) Shopping centers in commercial zoning districts may have one
additional shopping center identification sign if such shopping
center has an entrance from more than one existing roadway. Such
sign shall be subject to the requirements of § 12-14.8A and B.
B. Limit on sign area. The total permanent sign area per property shall not
exceed two square feet per lineal front foot of the main building on the
property; however, no property shall be limited to less than 20 square
feet of total sign area nor allowed to exceed 200 square feet of total sign
area.
C. Limit on height of signs. No sign, nor any part thereof, including braces,
supports, or lights shall exceed a height of 25 feet. Height shall be
measured from the median grade level directly below the face of the
sign to the highest part of the sign.
D. Limit on content of largest sign on property. The largest sign on a
property shall not advertise any particular article of merchandise
unless it is the principal product sold or manufactured on the property.
E. Nonconforming signs. The owner of any licensed nonconforming sign
shall submit an application for a sign license at the time of renewal.
Additionally, an application for a certificate of nonconformity shall be
filed for signs not officially recognized as nonconforming at the time of
license renewal.
§ 12-14.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-14.6
AO:473
§ 12-14.7. Sign regulations in residential districts.
Signs in Single-Family, Two-Family, and Multifamily Residential Districts
(R-1, R-2, and R-3) are allowed only as follows:
(1) No nonconforming sign shall be enlarged or dimensionally altered
or moved from one location to another.
(2) Nonconforming signs may be repaired and maintained, which shall
include, but not be limited to, the replacement of certain portions
of the sign, or the entire sign if necessary, to repair damage from
collision, natural causes such as windstorm or fire, or from
intentional damage such as vandalism.
(3) If there is an abandonment or nonuse, of a nonconforming sign or
sign location for a period of at least one year, such nonconforming
sign shall be deemed to be abandoned and the right to maintain
such nonconforming sign shall terminate.
F. Illumination of signs.
(1) Light sources which cast light on signs shall be shielded by opaque
materials so that the bulbs, floodlights, or tubes are not visible off
the property on which the sign is located.
(2) Any source of sign illumination shall be so located and arranged
that the direct rays of the light sources do not shine into a dwelling
unit, the eyes of a pedestrian, or a vehicle operator.
(3) All reflectors shall be equipped with wire mesh guards and shall be
10 feet or more above the surface of the ground.
(4) Ground-anchored light sources may be used to illuminate wall and
ground pole signs only.
G. Safety and maintenance.
(1) Every sign and all parts thereof, including framework, supports,
background, anchors, and wiring systems shall be constructed and
maintained in compliance with the building, electrical, and fire
prevention codes as they now exist, or as they may hereafter exist
in Harris Township.
(2) All signs and parts thereof shall be kept in a good state of repair
and maintenance.
(3) Any sign which has received damage or deterioration to 50% or
more of the sign area as estimated by the Ordinance Enforcement
Officer shall be considered a nuisance and must be repaired or
removed within 30 days of notification by the Ordinance
Enforcement Officer.
§ 12-14.6 HARRIS CODE § 12-14.7
AO:474
§ 12-14.8. Types of signs. [Amended 2-14-2005 by Ord. No. 250]
A. All signs are prohibited in R-1, R-2, and R-3 Residential Districts except
those identified in §§ 12-14.4A and 12-14.8B(2)(a).
B. Illuminated signs are prohibited in R-1, R-2, and R-3 Residential
Districts, except for street address signs, signs identifying doctors of
medicine, signs identifying churches and other places of worship, and
signs necessary for public safety.
C. No sign may be erected or maintained in R-1, R-2 or R-3 Residential
Districts which exceeds 25 square feet in sign area on a single face, or
50 square feet of sign area on a double-faced sign.
D. Wall signs denoting the name of an apartment building, fraternity or
sorority house, boarding or rooming house, bed-and-breakfast,
nonprofit club, community or municipal center, funeral home, or any
similar enterprise as are now allowed or may hereafter be allowed in
these districts shall comply with all applicable provisions of this
article.142
A. Basic sign types.
(1) Ground pole signs. In addition to the general provisions of this
article, the following regulations shall apply to all ground pole
signs:
(a) Every ground pole sign and all parts, braces, and supports
thereof, shall be located entirely behind the property line and
shall not project over public right-of-way or other adjoining
lands. Ground pole signs are permitted between the property
line and the building setback lines.
(b) No ground pole sign shall exceed 25 square feet of sign area on
a single sign face, nor 50 square feet of sign area if doublefaced,
except in the Village Zoning District, where no ground
pole sign shall exceed 15 square feet of sign area on a single
face or 30 square feet of sign area if double-faced.
(c) If external lighting is used, reflectors must be 10 feet or more
above the surface of the ground or sidewalk. Ground-anchored
light sources are permitted.
(d) No more than one sign shall be mounted to the supporting
structure of any ground pole sign, except for directional signs
permitted in this article.
(e) One ground pole sign may be installed for and toward each
public way on any public way on any property located on a
142. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. AO, Adopting Ordinance).
§ 12-14.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-14.8
AO:475
corner lot of having public entrance to two or more public
ways.
(2) Hanging signs. In addition to the general provisions of this article,
the following regulations shall apply to all hanging signs:
(a) No portion of any hanging sign-shall be less than 10 feet above
grade level, except in the Village Zoning District, where
clearance over walkways shall not be less than eight feet.
(b) No single face of a hanging sign shall exceed 15 square feet of
sign area, except in the Village Zoning District, where hanging
signs shall not exceed 10 square feet of sign area.
(c) Hanging signs may be illuminated.
(3) Projecting signs. In addition to the general provisions of this
article, the following regulations shall apply to all projecting signs:
(a) No projecting sign shall project more than five feet beyond the
building line in the direction of the street, nor shall any portion
of any projecting sign be closer than two feet to the face of the
street curb or curbline.
(b) No portion of any projecting sign shall be less than 10 feet
above grade level; except in the Village Zoning District, where
projecting signs shall maintain at least eight feet of clearance
over walkways.
(c) No single face of a projecting sign shall exceed 15 square feet
of sign area, except in the Village Zoning District, where
projecting signs may not exceed 10 square feet of sign area per
face.
(d) There shall be no more than one projecting sign for any
premises unless the premises is located on a corner lot or has
public entrances on two or more public ways, in which case
one projecting sign may be erected for and toward each public
way.
(4) Wall signs. In addition to the general provisions of this article, the
following regulations shall apply to all wall signs:
(a) No wall sign shall extend above the top of the wall upon which
it is placed, nor extend beyond the left and right extremities of
the wall to which it is attached.
(b) No wall sign, nor any part thereof, shall project more than 12
inches from the wall upon which it is mounted. If external
lighting is used, reflectors must be 10 feet above the surface of
the sidewalk, be equipped with wire mesh guards, and may
extend no more than two feet from the wall of the building.
§ 12-14.8 HARRIS CODE § 12-14.8
AO:476
(c) No wall sign shall exceed 25 square feet of sign area, except in
the Village Zoning District, where no wall sign shall exceed 15
square feet of sign area.
(5) Monument signs. In addition to the general provisions of this
article, the following regulations shall apply to all monument signs:
(a) No monument sign shall extend more than six feet above
grade.
(b) No monument sign shall exceed 25 square feet of sign area per
face, except in the Village Zoning District, where no monument
sign shall exceed 15 square feet of sign area per face.
B. Special sign types.
(1) Directional signs. In addition to the general provisions of this
article, the following regulations shall apply to all directional signs:
(a) Directional signs may be erected along arterial roadways, with
the property owner's permission, to direct vehicles or
pedestrians to locations not visible or easily accessed from
major roadways.
(b) Directional signs shall be ground pole signs with a maximum
sign area of 10 square feet if single-faced and 20 square feet if
double-faced.
(c) The content of directional signs shall be limited to the name of
the establishment, direction, and distance information.
(d) Directional signs shall not be located more than 500 feet from
an entrance or other roadway leading to the advertiser, shall
be located in advance of such roadway or entrance, and shall
be located on that side of the highway which is occupied by
traffic to which direction is being conveyed.
(e) No more than two individual signs shall be erected within the
permitted area, and these shall be attached to a single ground
support structure. When more than two such signs are
requested at a single location, all information shall be
combined in one sign which shall not exceed either an area of
25 square feet for a single-faced sign or 50 square feet for a
double-faced sign.
(f) Directional signs on collector or local streets may be erected
with the property owner's permission. Such signs may not
exceed five square feet of sign area and may contain only the
name of the establishment, direction, and distance
information. Such signs are considered permanent.
§ 12-14.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-14.8
AO:477
(2) On-premises occupation signs. In addition to the general provisions
of this article, the following regulations shall apply to all onpremises
occupation signs:
(a) A professional occupation sign shall denote only the name,
office hours, symbol, and/or profession of an occupant. There
shall be not more than one sign per occupant, and total sign
area shall not exceed five square feet per occupant. The total
area for all such signs shall not exceed 25 square feet per
building.
(3) Real estate development signs. In addition to the general
provisions of this article, the following regulations shall apply to all
real estate development signs:
(a) The use of real estate development signs shall be limited to
those developers or owners having for sale a minimum of six
lots in one subdivision.
(b) Such signs must be located on the subdivision in which lots are
for sale.
(c) Such signs may advertise only the subdivision in which the sign
is located and not the sale of lots elsewhere, or the realtor's,
developer's, or landowner's business in general. The content of
such signs shall be limited to the name of the development, the
developer's name, and the telephone number of the developer
or his sales agent(s).
(d) Such signs shall conform to relevant setback line
requirements. If any person shall use more than one sign for
the same development or area, no two signs shall be closer to
each other than 1,000 feet measured in a straight line.
(e) The maximum sign area of any such single-faced sign shall be
25 square feet, and for any double-faced sign, 50 square feet.
No part of such sign shall be more than 10 feet above grade or
in excess of 10 feet in any dimension.
(f) Such signs shall be removed when 75% of the lots in the
subdivision have been sold or leased.
(g) Artificial illumination of such signs is prohibited.
(4) Multi-tenant property signs. For those properties containing more
than one tenant, including but not limited to shopping centers,
office parks, and industrial parks, the following regulations shall
apply:
(a) For every multi-tenant property, one ground pole or monument
sign not exceeding 25 square feet in area per face identifying
the property/development shall be permitted at the entrance.
In the case that a property has entrances from more than one
§ 12-14.8 HARRIS CODE § 12-14.8
AO:478
§ 12-14.9. Enforcement and penalties.
public street, one additional ground pole or monument sign
shall be permitted at an additional entrance.
(b) For each tenant on the property, one wall sign of not more than
25 square feet in area shall be permitted.
(c) Directional signs of not more than 10 square feet in area per
face and bearing no commercial advertisement other than the
names of tenants may be erected at street/driveway
intersections within the property. Such signs shall not be
licensed and shall not be counted toward the number of signs
permitted on the property.
A. Enforcement.
(1) The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Ordinance
Enforcement Officer of the Township of Harris.
(2) The Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall examine all applications
for permits for erection of signs, issue licenses for new signs and
for continued use of signs which conform to the requirements of
this article, record and file all applications for permits with any
accompanying plans or documents, make an annual inspections of
all signs in the Township, and make such reports as the Township
may require.
(3) If the Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall find that any sign has
been constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation of
the provisions of this article, (s)he shall promptly notify the owner
or lessor thereof in writing. Failure to remove said sign within the
time given in the notice by the Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall
constitute a violation of this article. The Ordinance Enforcement
Officer is authorized to take all necessary steps as authorized by
the Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., to
enforce the provisions of this article and to abate violations of this
article.
(4) Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate violation of
this article.
(5) The cost of removal or abatement of any violation shall be borne by
the owner or lessor of such sign, and shall be a lien upon the
property of the owner or lessor.
(6) The Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall cause any sign which is in
immediate peril to persons or property to be removed immediately.
The cost of such removal shall be borne by the owner or lessor of
such sign, and shall be a lien upon the property of the owner or
lessor.
§ 12-14.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-14.9
AO:479
§ 12-14.10. Zoning Hearing Board.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear all cases involving variances, special
exceptions, appeals involving interpretations of this article, unified appeals,
and challenges to the validity of this article as provided by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
B. Penalties. Penalties for violation of this article are set forth in §§ 712.1
and 712.2 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of
1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as reenacted and amended, 53 P.S. §§ 10712.1
and 10712.2, respectively.
§ 12-14.9 HARRIS CODE § 12-14.10
AO:480
ARTICLE XV
Planned Residential Development
[Added 10-12-1992 by Ord. No. 144]
§ 12-15.1. Intent.
It is the intent of the Planned Residential Development District to promote
the following:
§ 12-15.2. General requirements.
A. To increase the availability of a variety and mixture of housing types,
services, and locations for employment.
B. To encourage innovative design in residential and corresponding
nonresidential land development.
C. To encourage a more efficient use of land and public services.
D. To preserve existing topography, trees, and sensitive natural features.
E. To preserve and protect landmarks, amenities, cultural, and historic
lands and buildings.
F. To relate the type, design, and layout of development to the particular
site.
G. To provide sufficient, usable, and convenient common open space and
recreation facilities.
H. To combine and coordinate site landscaping and building styles within
the development using a coordinated theme.
I. To provide an environment of stable character in harmony with
surrounding development and in accordance with the Comprehensive
Plan.
A. Design and improvements. The design and physical improvements to
the property being developed shall be provided by the developer as
shown on an approved plan in accordance with all applicable Township
regulations, state and federal law, unless specifically waived.
B. Location. A planned residential development may be established in the
following districts as designated by this chapter, on the Official Zoning
Map:
(1) Single-Family Residential (R-1).
(2) Two-Family Residential (R-2).
(3) Multifamily Residential (R-3).
(4) Residential Office (RO).
§ 12-15.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-15.2
AO:481
§ 12-15.3. Permitted uses.
C. Size. A proposed planned residential development must be more than
10 acres of total contiguous land area. Contiguous land is area that is
within a coterminous boundary.
D. Ownership. All land contained in a proposed planned residential
development must be land under single ownership and be developed as
a single entity as provided with the master plan.
A. All residential uses identified as follows:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Single-family semidetached dwellings.
(3) Single-family attached dwellings.
(4) Two-family detached dwellings.
(5) Two-family attached dwellings.
(6) Multifamily detached dwellings.
(7) Multifamily semidetached dwellings.
(8) Multifamily attached dwellings.
(9) Group homes.
B. Nonresidential uses as follows are permitted within the PRD and are
not to exceed 10% of the total gross tract area. Motor vehicle access to
the nonresidential uses shall not cause through traffic from outside of
development on local residential streets of the PRD. Arterial and/or
collector-type streets are acceptable forms of access to nonresidential
uses. The following are permitted to be integrated within the PRD:
(1) Business, professional, and financial offices, banks, and automatic
teller machines.
(2) Medical and dental offices and clinics.
(3) All retail establishments for the sale, service, and rental of goods,
convenience stores. Prohibited uses include sales of aircraft and
accessories, beer distributors, boat and marine supplies, sales of
contractors and farm equipment, lumber yards, sales of mobile
homes and accessories (including automobile service stations and
garages), pawnshops, swimming pools, express and package
delivery, structural glass, and used clothing.
(4) Restaurants, bars, and lounges, excluding motor vehicle drive-up
window establishments and food delivery operations.
(5) Research, engineering, or testing offices and laboratories.
§ 12-15.2 HARRIS CODE § 12-15.3
AO:482
§ 12-15.4. Density and intensity. [Amended 11-11-2002 by Ord. No.
225; 9-12-2005 by Ord. No. 255]
(6) Health clubs and private athletic and recreational facilities.
(7) Libraries, museums, art galleries, reading rooms.
(8) Community centers, day-care centers for any age group, churches
and other places of worship.
A. In a planned residential development, there shall be no minimum area
requirements for individual lots or building sites, except as provided
herein.
B. The maximum number of dwelling units is as follows:
Underlying Zoning
District
Number of Dwelling Units Per Gross
Acre of Tract
R-1 3.5 per acre
R-2 6 per acre
R-3 10 per acre
RO 10 per acre
C. The Township may refuse to allow the maximum density permitted
within each zoning district or may refuse to allow certain permitted
nonresidential uses if the development would:
(1) Create inconvenient or unsafe vehicle access to the planned
residential development.
(2) Create traffic which exceeds the acceptable level of service of
public streets which adjoin the planned residential development.
(3) Place an excessive burden on utilities, parks, schools, or other
public facilities which serve or are proposed to serve the planned
residential development.
(4) Adversely affect existing uses on adjacent lands which are different
from the nearby uses in the planned residential development.
(5) Permit commercial uses to spread along arterial streets in strip
commercial configuration which is not in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan.
D. Spacing. The Township may allow a reduction in lot size, lot width,
spacing and rear setback requirements previously required in the
zoning district to promote innovative design, provided that: [Amended
1-28-2015 by Ord. No. 314]
(1) Building areas shall be designed so as to require a certain minimum
separation, as defined more specifically below, between building
lots or areas. Such separation may be accomplished by creating
§ 12-15.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-15.4
AO:483
setbacks in individual lots, sufficiently separating building lot or
unit boundaries from one another, or any other acceptable method
that guarantees these minimum separation distances between
building lots or areas.
(a) Road and street separation. The development shall be laid out
so that no building lots or areas could be constructed within
the following distances from the following types of streets and
rights-of-way:
Type of Building
Local and
Collector
(feet)
Arterial
(feet)
Single-family
dwellings
20 100
Two-multi-dwellings 30 100
Nonresidential 50 100
(b) Side separation. The development shall be laid out so that,
where the side of a structure faces other structures, no portion
of such side building lot or area could be constructed within
the following distances from the following types of building lots
or areas on other structures:
Front
(feet)
Side
(feet)
30 15
(2) Minimum building lot or area size. Building lots or areas shall
conform to the following minimum sizes:
(a) Single-family detached dwelling units shall have an average
minimum building lot or area size of 4,500 square feet.
(b) All other housing types shall have an average minimum
building lot or area size of 3,000 square feet per unit.
E. If a planned residential development is to be developed in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Uniform Planned Community Act143 as a planned
community, then individual fee simple lots do not have to meet the
requirement of 30% building coverage and 50% impervious coverage
for individual lots. Within the perimeter boundary of the entire tract,
the total building coverage cannot exceed 30% of the total interior tract
area of the development, and the total impervious coverage cannot
exceed 50% of the total interior tract area of the development.
[Amended 1-28-2015 by Ord. No. 314]
143. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 5101 et seq.
§ 12-15.4 HARRIS CODE § 12-15.4
AO:484
§ 12-15.5. Parkland, recreation and common open space
requirements. [Amended 11-11-2002 by Ord. No. 225; 3-14-2005 by
Ord. No. 252]
F. Height. The height of all buildings within 200 feet of the boundary of
the planned residential development shall not exceed the maximum
height permitted in the adjoining residential district. When the building
is located within 200 feet of more than one adjoining zoning district, the
height shall not exceed the lowest maximum height allowed in either
district. The Township may allow higher buildings beyond 200 feet from
the perimeter if the property owner/developer can demonstrate that
such will not create any adverse impact on adjoining lands. The lowest
maximum height of the Village District shall be followed when any PRD
is located adjacent to the Village District either along the zone
boundary and/or a street.
G. Perimeter requirements. The planned residential development shall be
designed to avoid adverse influences and impacts on surrounding
properties.
(1) Residential structures located adjacent to the perimeter boundary
within the planned residential development may be required to
conform to the setback and yard regulations of the adjoining
district when necessary to ensure compatibility of land uses.
(2) Nonresidential structures adjacent to the perimeter boundary
within planned residential developments shall conform to the
buffer setback and buffer yard requirements of § 12-2.6K, Buffer
yards.
(3) Additional buffer yards may be required where the planned
residential development is adjacent to existing dwellings or
neighborhoods. If the buffer yard ordinances governing the
adjacent uses and area are more stringent, those are to be applied
to the PRD perimeter.
A. Thirty percent of the total tract size is to serve as common open space.
Fifty percent of the common open space is to consist of parkland.
(1) Acceptable parkland is to consist of active and passive sites that
meet the general design characteristics described in § 11-4.12,
Parkland dedication requirements; fee-in-lieu option.
(2) Parkland may be limited to use by the residents of the PRD or may
serve residents from outside the PRD.
(3) A fee in lieu of parkland may be offered by the developer if the
conditions outlined in § 11-4.12, Parkland dedication requirements;
fee-in-lieu option.
(4) The buildings, structures, and improvements which are permitted
in the common open space shall conserve and enhance the
§ 12-15.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-15.5
AO:485
amenities of the common open space having regard to its
topography and natural unimproved condition.
(5) The use and improvement of the common open space shall be
planned in relation to any existing or proposed public or semipublic
open space which adjoins or which is within 1,500 feet of the
perimeter of the PRD.
(6) Common open space may include stormwater management areas,
wetlands, steep slopes, water well protection sites, areas of
sinkholes, rock outcroppings, streams, and other sensitive natural
features. As a component of the PRD for the duration of the PRD,
access easements, scenic easements, and other easements over
private property of the PRD may serve as common open space. The
buildable areas of lots, public rights-of-way, and normal setback
areas are not included as common open space. Private golf courses
are a separate use under § 12-15.3B(6), and are not counted toward
parkland, or common open space, unless such is accessible to PRD
residents and is open to the public.
B. All land shown on the final development plan as parkland or open space
shall be conveyed in any of the following ways, at the discretion of the
Board of Supervisors:
(1) To the Township of Harris; or
(2) To an organization or organizations for the ownership and
maintenance of the parkland or common open space, which
organization shall not be dissolved, that will:
(a) Include a statement of the present ownership of all of the land
within the PRD and the applicant's interest in the land
proposed for development; and
(b) Describe the form of organization proposed to own and
maintain the parkland or common open space, and whether
public or private ownership is proposed. The common open
space, as noted in Subsection A(4) above, shall be on land
owned by a property owners association or on privately owned
land when an open space easement and/or acceptable access
easement to common open space has been granted to the
property owner's association.
C. A development schedule is to be submitted with the PRD and the
preliminary plan indicating:
(1) The approximate date when construction of the project can be
expected to begin, with the area and location of parkland and
common open space components that will be provided at each
stage.
§ 12-15.5 HARRIS CODE § 12-15.5
AO:486
§ 12-15.6. Environmental design.
The environmental design scheme of the planned residential development
shall be laid out in such a fashion so that all of the elements listed below
are incorporated into a harmonious and aesthetically pleasing design.
Consideration shall be given to the overall character of the community and
its visual effect on the residents of the planned development; as well as the
residents of the Township and Centre Region at large.
§ 12-15.7. Traffic and pedestrian access. [Amended 11-11-2002 by
Ord. No. 225]
(2) The stages in which the parkland and common open space
components will be built and the approximate date when
construction of each stage is expected to begin. This schedule will
be updated annually on the anniversary of its approval.
(3) The approximate dates when the total of development stages will
be completed.
A. Existing trees shall be preserved. Existing stands of mature, healthy
trees, waterways, historic sites, scenic points, views and vistas, and
other community assets and landmarks are to be preserved.
B. The planned residential development shall be designed to minimize
grading, cut and fill, and other changes to the natural terrain. All
graded slopes shall blend with the surrounding terrain and
development.
C. All landscaping shall be in conformance with an overall landscaping
plan and unifying concept for the development.
D. All planned residential developments shall conform to all applicable
regulations contained in this chapter, as amended.
E. All planned residential developments shall conform to all applicable
regulations contained in Chapter 11, Subdivision and Land
Development, as amended.
F. All planned residential developments shall conform to all applicable
requirements of Chapter 13, Stormwater Management, as amended.
G. Development within the PRD shall be "clustered" to preserve and
minimize disturbance to woodlands, steep slopes, streams, wetlands,
floodplains, sinkholes, water well sites, water recharge areas, and
sensitive natural features.
A. A proposed planned residential development shall have an internal
system of public streets with direct access to a public collector or
arterial street; the Board of Supervisors may approve direct access to a
public local street when a planned residential development proposes no
nonresidential buildings or uses, provided the Township Engineer
§ 12-15.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-15.7
AO:487
§ 12-15.8. Utilities, easements and markers.
reviews and verifies the conclusions of a traffic study that indicates the
existing local street system is designed to accommodate the increased
traffic to be generated by the proposed PRD.
B. A traffic impact study shall be required.
C. All streets in the development shall be dedicated to the Township and
shall conform to all related standards contained in Chapter 11,
Subdivision and Land Development, as amended, and shall comply with
state and federal laws applicable to streets of this type. Within a
planned residential development, the Board of Supervisors may
approve public streets with a forty-foot right-of-way bordered on both
sides by a ten-foot private utility easement when the developer provides
proper justification. In such instances, the requirements of § 12-2.6E of
this chapter shall not apply.
D. A system of pedestrian access, in the form of paved sidewalks or
interior walkways, shall be provided to allow walking between every
use, structure, or recreational facility and shall be connected with
existing sidewalks and walkways adjacent to the planned residential
development. Sidewalks shall be designed in conformance with the
construction standards of Chapter 11, Subdivision and Land
Development.
E. Motor vehicles access and parking shall be provided as required in this
chapter. Within a planned residential development, the Board of
Supervisors may allow driveway entrances serving attached and
detached homes to be located not less than 30 feet from the
intersection of local streets within the development, superseding the
requirements of § 12-7.8D. Further, within a planned residential
development, the Board of Supervisors may approve driveway
entrances serving attached and detached dwellings to be located not
less than 10 feet from the tangents of other driveways, superseding the
requirements of § 12-7.8E, or the Board of Supervisors may require the
use of common driveways.
A. Sanitary sewage disposal. Sewage disposal for all buildings in the
planned residential development shall comply with the provisions of the
Centre Region Act 537 Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted by the Harris
Township Board of Supervisors, with subsequent amendments thereto
and applicable regulations of the servicing sewer authority.
B. Water supply.
(1) All planned residential developments shall connect to public water
authority or company mains. All water mains and laterals shall
meet the design and installation specifications of said water
authority or company.
§ 12-15.7 HARRIS CODE § 12-15.8
AO:488
§ 12-15.9. Procedure for establishing planned residential
development.
An applicant wishing to receive approval of a planned residential
development with the Township of Harris shall submit plans in accordance
with procedures provided for under this section.
(2) When public water service is provided, fire hydrants shall be
installed in locations approved by the Board of Supervisors and the
servicing water authority. Fire hydrants shall be placed in
accordance with Chapter 11, Subdivision and Land Development,
as amended, and in compliance with the regulations of the
servicing water provider.
C. Easements. Utility and drainage easements shall be provided in
conformance with the requirements of Chapter 11, Subdivision and
Land Development.
D. Monuments and markers. Monuments and markers shall be installed
for all land subdivisions in the planned residential development and for
the perimeter boundary in conformance with Chapter 11, Subdivision
and Land Development.
A. Preapplication conference. Before submitting an application for a
planned residential development, an applicant, at his option, may
confer with the Planning Commission.
B. Application for preliminary approval of a planned residential
development.
(1) An applicant desiring to establish a planned residential
development shall provide the Planning Commission with 10 copies
of a "master plan" indicating the following:
(a) A key map showing the location of the site.
(b) The size of the site.
(c) A plan showing the proposed general layout; the location of the
various types of land uses; dimensions of lots; the approximate
location, use, height, and bulk of buildings; the proposed
density of population in each distinct residential area; the
location and size of recreational spaces, parks, schools, and
other facilities which are intended for public use; the
provisions for automobile parking and the size and floor space
of commercial or industrial uses.
(d) A public utility plan for sanitary sewer, water, and stormwater
management controls.
(e) A plan showing the width and location of proposed streets and
public ways.
§ 12-15.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-15.9
AO:489
(f) Topography of the site.
(2) The applicant shall also submit 10 copies of a written statement
containing the following information:
(a) A statement of the ownership of all land included within the
planned residential development.
(b) An explanation of the character and intent of the planned
residential development and the reasons why the development
would be in the public interest and consistent with the
objectives in the Township Comprehensive Plan.
(c) A statement describing any proposed innovative design
concepts included in the plan.
(d) The substance of covenants, grants of easements, or other
restrictions proposed to be imposed on the use of land,
buildings, and structures, including proposed easements or
grants for public use or utilities.
(e) A description of the form of organization proposed to own and
maintain the common open space, recreational facilities, or
other common facilities.
(f) A statement of the proposed use and improvement of common
open space and recreational facilities.
(g) A description of proposals to preserve natural features and
existing amenities and a statement of conceptual landscaping
designs.
(h) A statement describing the stormwater management methods
to be employed.
(3) A development schedule indicating:
(a) The approximate date when construction of the project will
begin.
(b) The stages in which the project will be built and the
approximate date when construction of each stage can be
expected to begin. This schedule will be updated annually on
the anniversary of its approval.
(c) The approximate dates when the development will be
completed.
(d) The area and location of common open space that will be
provided at each stage.
(4) Public hearings.
§ 12-15.9 HARRIS CODE § 12-15.9
AO:490
§ 12-15.10. Plan requirements.
Contents of plans submitted for preliminary review. All plans submitted for
preliminary review shall be drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet
or larger (e.g., one inch equals 30 feet) and shall contain the following
information:
(a) Public hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the
regulations set forth in the Municipalities Planning Code, Act
of 1968, P.L 805, No. 247, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., as reenacted
and amended.
(b) Prior to the public hearing by the Board of Supervisors, the
Planning Commission shall consider the application at either a
private or a public meeting, without the requirement of public
notice, and shall make its recommendation to the Board of
Supervisors. Refer to MPC, § 708, 53 P.S. § 10708.
(5) The findings. The Board of Supervisors shall make findings in
accordance with § 709 of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10709.
(6) Status of plan after tentative approval shall be in accordance with
MPC, § 710, 53 P.S. § 10710.
(7) Application for final approval shall be in accordance with MPC,
§ 711, 53 P.S. § 10711.
(8) Post final plan conditions shall be in accordance with MPC,
§ 711(e), 53 P.S. § 10711(e).
A. General data.
(1) Name of proposed planned residential development.
(2) North point.
(3) Graphic scale and legend describing all symbols shown on the plan.
(4) Day, month, and year the plan was prepared and/or revised.
(5) Name and address of the owner and deed book and page numbers
of the deeds conveying the property to the owner.
(6) Name and address of the individual or firm preparing the plan.
(7) Names of abutting property owners, including their deed book and
page numbers, tax parcel numbers, and abutting zoning districts.
(8) Key map at a readable scale showing the location of proposed
planned residential development and all roads within 1,000 feet
therefrom.
(9) Centre County tax parcel numbers of all parcels included in the
planned residential development.
§ 12-15.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-15.10
AO:491
B. Existing features.
(1) Perimeter boundaries of the total property showings bearings to
the nearest minute and distances to the nearest hundredth of a
foot.
(2) Total acreage of the property and total square feet within each lot
of the development.
(3) Current zoning district, as stipulated in this chapter.
(4) Natural features.
(a) Sinkholes, watercourses, wetlands, tree masses, wildlife
habitat, unique vegetation, soils, and/or natural features.
(b) Floodplain and steep slopes, as defined by this chapter.
(c) Topographic contour lines at vertical intervals of two feet for
land with average undisturbed slope of 4% or less and at
intervals of five feet for land with average natural slopes
exceeding 4%, including source of topographic data.
(5) Approximate location of man-made features in or within 50 feet of
the property, including:
(a) Sewer lines.
(b) Water mains and fire hydrants.
(c) Electrical lines and poles.
(d) Culverts and bridges.
(e) Railroads.
(f) Buildings.
(g) Streets, including right-of-way and cartway widths and
approximate grades.
C. Proposed development.
(1) The approximate location, total ground floor area, total floor area,
height, and use of buildings and other structures (all area
dimensions shall be indicated in square feet).
(2) The approximate location and area of driveways and parking and
loading areas.
(3) The property lines of lots to be subdivided, measured to the nearest
foot. Setbacks and lot dimensions shall be shown.
(4) The approximate locations of sidewalks and walkways, including
widths, surfacing materials, and ramps for the handicapped.
§ 12-15.10 HARRIS CODE § 12-15.10
AO:492
(5) The approximate location of utility and drainage easements.
(6) The approximate location and pipe diameter of sewer and water
mains and laterals.
(7) The approximate location of fire hydrants.
(8) Perimeter setbacks and required buffer yards.
(9) Street information, including:
(a) Location and width of rights-of-way and cartways.
(b) Proposed street names.
(c) Approximate road profiles along the center line of each
proposed street, showing finished grade at a scale of one inch
equals 50 feet horizontal and one inch equals five feet vertical.
Include typical cross-section to be utilized.
(d) Vegetation to be planted between the curb or shoulder and the
right-of-way line.
(10) A conceptual landscaping plan indicating the treatment of
materials and landscaping concepts used for private and common
open space.
(11) A general grading plan showing alterations to the topography of
the site.
(12) A plan showing the general location and type of all stormwater
conveyance and detention and/or retention facilities designed to
serve more than one lot or to collect stormwater from streets and
common areas.
D. Common open space.
(1) The location and area of the proposed common open space.
(2) The proposed use and improvements of common open space.
(3) The location and use of common recreational facilities.
(4) The location and area of land to be dedicated for public purposes,
where easements are located, and lands of the property owner
association(s).
E. Density calculation. A table shall be included on the plan describing
each phase or section with quantitative data, including the following:
(1) The total area of the development and of each phase, section, or
stage.
(2) The total area devoted to residential uses, the total number of
dwelling units, the number of each type of unit, and the total
§ 12-15.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-15.10
AO:493
residential floor area in the development and in each phase or
section. Residential uses include all dwelling units and types,
parking areas for said units and those lands surrounding the
dwelling units not designated as common open space.
(3) The number of dwelling units per acre in the development and each
phase, section, or stage.
(4) The area of streets, parking, sidewalks, and walkways and total
area paved and percentage of area paved or covered by structures
in the development and each phase or section, and nonresidential
lot.
(5) The total acreage and percentage of acreage in common open
space in the development and each phase.
(6) The total area devoted to planned recreational use throughout the
entire development and in each phase.
(7) The total area devoted to nonresidential uses and total floor area of
nonresidential buildings in the development and in each phase.
F. Narrative statement. A written statement including the following:
(1) A statement of the ownership of all of the land included within the
planned residential development.
(2) An explanation of the character and intent of the planned
residential development and the reasons why the development
would be in the public interest and consistent with the objectives in
the Township Comprehensive Plan.
(3) A statement describing any proposed innovate design concepts
included in the plan.
(4) The substance of covenants, grants of easement, or other
restrictions proposed to be imposed on the use of land, buildings,
and structures, including proposed easements or grants for public
use or utilities.
(5) A description of the form of organization proposed to own and
maintain the common open space, recreational facilities, or other
common facilities.
(6) A statement of the proposed use and improvement of common open
space and recreational facilities.
(7) A description of proposals to preserve natural features and existing
amenities and a statement of conceptual landscaping designs.
(8) A statement describing the stormwater management methods to be
employed.
G. Signatures.
§ 12-15.10 HARRIS CODE § 12-15.10
AO:494
§ 12-15.11. Contents of plans submitted for final review.
Plans submitted for final review shall include all information required
above. Where applicable, the final plan for the development shall meet
the plan requirements contained in the following Township regulations, as
amended:
§ 12-15.12. Property owners' association.
The form of the property owners' association shall be as follows:
(1) Signature(s) and seal(s) of a licensed engineer and/or architect or
landscape architect who prepared or supervised the preparation of
the plan.
(2) Signed, notarized statement by the owner certifying ownership of
the property.
(3) Stormwater management block with space for the signature by the
Township Engineer and certification by applicant's engineer.
(4) Space for approval signatures by the Chairman and Secretary of
the Board of Supervisors, including date of such approval.
A. Chapter 11, Subdivision and Land Development.
B. Chapter 12, Zoning.
C. Chapter 13, Stormwater Management.
D. Chapter 12, Zoning, Article XIV, Signs.
A. A property owners association shall be established for the ownership
and maintenance of common open space, recreation facilities, and other
common facilities not dedicated to the Township.
B. The requirements and functions of the property owners' association
shall be set forth in covenants, restriction, and grants of easements,
recorded where applicable, and shall comply with the following:
(1) The property owners' association shall be legally established before
any properties are sold.
(2) Membership shall be mandatory for each property owner and any
successive buyer.
(3) The common open space shall be guaranteed by restrictive
covenants or easements describing the open space and its
maintenance by the residents of the development.
(4) The association shall be responsible for all costs of the common
elements, including liability insurance, local taxes, and the
maintenance of facilities.
§ 12-15.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-15.12
AO:495
§ 12-15.13. Violations and penalties.
Failure to comply with any provisions of this article shall be a violation of
this article:
(5) Property owners shall pay their pro rata share of the costs in the
form levied by the association, which can become liens on
properties.
(6) The association shall have authority to adjust the financial
responsibility of its membership to meet changing needs.
C. In the event that the organization established to own and maintain
common open space, or any successor organization, shall, at any time
after establishment of the PRD, fail to maintain the common open space
in reasonable order and condition in accordance with the development
plan, the Township shall commence enforcement action in accordance
with the powers granted by the Municipalities Planning Code, Act of
1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., as reenacted and
amended. The cost of such maintenance by the Township shall be
assessed equitably against the properties within the planned residential
development that have a right of enjoyment of the common open space
and shall become a lien on said properties. The Township, at the time of
entering upon said common space for the purpose of maintenance, shall
file a notice of lien in the office of the Prothonotary of Centre County
upon the properties affected by the lien within the planned residential
development.
A. Complaints regarding violations. Whenever a violation of this article
occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a complaint
to the Zoning Officer stating fully the causes and bases thereof. The
Zoning Officer shall record such complaint, investigate, and take action
thereon as appropriate.
B. Notice of violation. If the Zoning Officer shall find that any provision of
this article has been violated, he shall notify the person responsible for
such violation or the owner or developer, in writing, indicating the
nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it,
whereupon such violation shall be corrected within the time specified.
C. Penalties. Penalties for violation of this article are set forth in §§ 712.1
and 712.2 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of
1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, 53 P.S. §§ 10712.1 and 10712.2, respectively, as
reenacted and amended.
D. Enforcement. The municipality may enforce the provisions of the article
as set forth in § 706 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, 53 P.S. § 10706, as reenacted and
amended.
§ 12-15.12 HARRIS CODE § 12-15.13
AO:496
ARTICLE XVI
Adult Business Use
[Added 11-8-1999 by Ord. No. 207]
§ 12-16.1. Conditional use provisions.
Adult business uses, as defined herein, will be permitted in the Township's
General Commercial (C-1) and Rural Commercial (RC) Districts, and only as
a conditional use subject to the specific criteria expressed in this and other
applicable ordinances.
§ 12-16.2. Procedures.
A. A conditional use permit for adult businesses will be issued by the
Harris Township Board of Supervisors, providing the following specific
conditions are met:
(1) Applications for a conditional use permit for an adult business will
be submitted to the Township office at least 15 days prior to the
next regular meeting of the Township Board of Supervisors. At that
meeting, the Board of Supervisors will receive the application and
all information to the Township Planning Commission for review
before taking action on the conditional use permit application.
(2) Upon receipt of an application for an adult business conditional use
permit, the Board of Supervisors will establish the date, time, and
place for a public hearing on the application.
(a) The applicant will provide public notice, as defined by the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Code,144 concerning the public
hearing for the proposed adult business use. This public notice
will be published at least once in a newspaper with general
circulation in the municipality not less than 10 days nor more
than 20 days from the date of the hearing. The notice will
establish the time, date, and place of the hearing and will
describe the proposal in general terms. This public notice will
be in the following form:
144. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 12-16.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-16.2
AO:497
Notice of Conditional Use Application for an Adult Business in
Harris Township
Public notice is hereby given that the Harris Township Board
of Supervisors has received a conditional use application for
a proposed adult business use to be located at (provide
address), tax parcel #25________ - _____. The Board of
Supervisors will hold a public hearing on ___________________
at the Harris Township Municipal Building, 224 East Main
Street, Boalsburg, to receive public input on this application.
A copy of the conditional use application and supporting
materials is available for review prior to the hearing at the
Harris Township Municipal Office and at this newspaper. For
more information, please contact the Zoning Officer at
466-6228, or the applicant at (provide telephone number and
contact person).
(b) In addition to the public hearing notice, the applicant will
provide, via certified mail, a written notice to the owners of all
property within 200 feet of the site proposed for the adult
business use. A copy of the mailing list will be provided to the
applicant by the Township. Copies of the certified mail return
receipts will be provided to the Township by the applicant. The
public hearing will be held no later than 60 days following the
meeting at which the Township Board of Supervisors receives
an application for the adult business use.
(c) The Planning Commission will review the application at its next
legally advertised regular meeting following the receipt of the
application from the Board of Supervisors. Within 10 days of
the Planning Commission meeting, the Planning Commission
will submit a written report to the Board presenting its findings
on the conformity of the adult business conditional use permit
application with the requirements of this and other applicable
ordinances.
(d) At the first regular or special meeting of the Board of
Supervisors subsequent to the Board's conducting the public
hearing, the Board will take action on the application. The
Board may approve the conditional use permit subject to
specific conditions or changes, or may disapprove the
conditional use permit with a specific list of reasons for the
disapproval. Written notification of the Board's action, with
reasons, will be mailed to the applicant by the Township within
five days of the action by the Township Board of Supervisors.
B. All applications for an adult business conditional use permit will be
accompanied by a site plan as per § 12-9.3. In addition to all established
site plan requirements, site plans for adult business proposals will
include the following:
§ 12-16.2 HARRIS CODE § 12-16.2
AO:498
§ 12-16.3. Other requirements.
§ 12-16.4. Signs and other visible messages.
In addition to the regulations Article XIV, Signs, and applicable state laws,
the following will apply to all adult business uses:
§ 12-16.5. Location requirements.
(1) Adult business use intended.
(2) The location and elevations of all buildings, structures, walls,
fences and landscaping on the site.
(3) Off-street parking areas and traffic circulation patterns.
(4) All signs, displays, and advertising, including locations.
A. All storage and displays will be located within the building.
B. All business transactions on the premises will be conducted within the
building.
C. No exterior changes, excluding maintenance, to a building proposed to
be used for an adult business can be made without addressing the
zoning permit requirements of § 12-9.2 of this chapter.
D. All new construction should be consistent with the scale and
architectural styles of the buildings surrounding the site proposed for
an adult business use.
E. Advertisements, displays or other promotional materials of specific
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas will not be shown or
exhibited as to be visible to the public from the exterior of the building.
F. In adult mini-motion-picture theaters, no openings are permitted
through walls separating private viewing booths.
G. All adult business uses will comply with the Township's outdoor
illumination requirements contained in § 12-7.6 of this chapter.
A. Sign messages will be limited to written description of material or
services available on the premises.
B. Sign messages may not include any graphic or pictorial depiction of
material related to specific sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
A. No adult business use will be located within 1,000 feet of any other
existing adult business use, measured from the property lines of the lot
where the adult business is located.
§ 12-16.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-16.5
AO:499
§ 12-16.6. Termination or modification of conditional use permit.
B. To provide protection for the youth of the community and public health,
safety and welfare, no adult business will be located within 250 feet of
the lots where the following uses are located:
(1) Churches, monasteries, chapels, synagogues, convents or
rectories.
(2) Schools up to and including the 12th grade and their adjunct play
areas.
(3) Public playgrounds, public parks, public swimming pools and
public libraries.
(4) Day-care facilities.
C. All adult business uses will incorporate landscape plantings along all
perimeter property boundaries. The number of plantings required will
be determined based on the type of adjoining land use as defined in
Table 1, Land Use Classifications. The following plantings will be
required along the property boundaries of the adult business use:
Adjacent Land Use
Plantings Required Per 100 Linear
Feet
Class I and II 4 canopy trees
6 understory trees
12 evergreen trees
Fence
Class III and IV 3 canopy trees
4 understory trees
8 evergreen trees
Class V 2 canopy trees
4 understory trees
4 evergreen trees
(1) When adult businesses are located adjacent to a residential use or
zoning district, the required fence will be opaque and at least six
feet in height. Seventy percent of the required plantings will be
placed between the property line shared with the residential use or
zoning district and the required fence.
A. When a conditional use permit for an adult business use is authorized
by the Township Board of Supervisors, the continuation of the use will
be dependent on the conditions established under the permit and this
chapter. In the event of a change of conditions or noncompliance of
§ 12-16.5 HARRIS CODE § 12-16.6
AO:500
conditions, the Board will have the responsibility and right to terminate
or revoke the conditional use permit.
B. Any modification to a conditional use permit must be approved by the
Board of Supervisors using the same procedures outlined for approval
of a conditional use permit.
§ 12-16.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-16.6
AO:501
Chapter 13
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 9.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
11.
Zoning — See Ch. 12.
§ 12-16.6 HARRIS CODE § 12-16.6
AO:502
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 13-1.1. Findings.
The governing body of Harris Township finds that:
§ 13-1.2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare within
Harris Township through provisions designed to:
§ 13-1.3. Statutory authority.
The Township is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect runoff
by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32
A. Inadequate maintenance of stormwater best management practices
(BMPs) causes loss of water quality, flooding, and other problems.
B. Federal and state regulations require this Township to obtain a permit
for discharges from its MS4 and to implement a program of stormwater
controls.
C. A comprehensive program of reasonable regulation of connections and
discharges to municipal stormwater management facilities is
fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare, and the protection of
the people of the Township and all the people of the commonwealth,
their resources, and the environment.
D. Stormwater is an important resource.
E. Federal and state regulations require this municipality to obtain a
permit for discharges from its MS4 and to implement a program of
stormwater controls.
A. Manage accelerated runoff, erosion, aggradation, and degradation.
B. Meet NPDES MS4 permit requirements.
C. Meet state water quality requirements.
D. Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses in the
Township and the commonwealth.
E. Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
F. Provide proper maintenance of all permanent stormwater management
facilities that are constructed in the Township.
G. Provide procedures and standards for stormwater management and
planning.
H. Protect groundwater and surface water quality.
§ 13-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-1.3
AO:503
P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as amended, the "Storm Water Management Act," and
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act of 1968, P.L. 805, as
amended, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.).
§ 13-1.4. Applicability; regulated activities.
§ 13-1.5. Compatibility with other requirements.
Approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility to comply with or to secure required permits or approvals
for activities regulated by any other applicable codes, rules, statutes, or
ordinances.
§ 13-1.6. Landowner responsibility.
The granting of any exemption, permit, or approval by the Township does
not relieve the applicant from assuring that stormwater runoff from the
development site will not cause injury or damage to other persons or
property.
A. This chapter shall apply to all land and watercourses within Harris
Township.
B. This chapter shall only apply to permanent stormwater management
facilities and BMPs constructed as part of any of the regulated activities
listed in this section and to the ownership and maintenance of said
facilities and BMPs. Stormwater management and erosion and
sediment pollution control during construction activities are specifically
not regulated by this chapter, but shall continue to be regulated under
existing laws and ordinances.
C. The following activities are defined as "regulated activities" and shall
be regulated by this chapter:
(1) Land development;
(2) Subdivision;
(3) Construction of new or additional impervious or semipervious
surfaces (roadways, driveways, parking lots, etc.);
(4) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings;
(5) Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel;
(6) Installation of stormwater management facilities or appurtenances
thereto;
(7) Land disturbance.
§ 13-1.3 HARRIS CODE § 13-1.7
AO:504
§ 13-1.7. References to specific methods and publications.
Specific methods and publications indicated in this chapter shall, in all
cases, refer to the latest available edition and include revisions or
amendments thereto.
§ 13-1.8. Exemptions.
A. Activities identified below are exempt from the requirement to submit a
stormwater management site plan to the Township for review.
Exemption shall not relieve the applicant from implementing such
measures as are necessary to protect health, safety, and property. These
measures include adequate and safe conveyance of stormwater on the
site and as it leaves the site. This exemption shall not relieve the
applicant from meeting the special requirements for water quality and
groundwater recharge for high-quality (HQ) and exceptional-value (EV)
watersheds (DEP Chapter 93 and anti-degradation requirement) and
§ 13-3.4C and E of this chapter relative to recharge and water quality
volume requirements.
(1) All development activities having impervious surface or land
disturbance of less than 10% of the total site area up to a maximum
impervious area of 5,000 square feet. However, adequate and safe
conveyance of stormwater from the site must be provided. For
developments that are to be constructed in phases, the sum of all
final phases must be considered in establishing exemption
eligibility. Impervious cover shall include, but not be limited to, any
roof, parking or driveway areas and any new streets and sidewalks
or bikeways.
(2) Land disturbance associated with the construction or alteration of
one- and two-family dwellings, provided that the disturbance does
not alter any stormwater condition beyond the boundaries of the lot
or alter provisions of a previously approved stormwater
management site plan for the lot or encompassing subdivision.
Multiple-lot (greater than two) subdivisions cannot be exempted.
(3) Any site less than one acre in size that decreases the total site
impervious area following development and:
(a) Is not located within a recognized sensitive area (as defined in
Article II, Terminology, of this chapter);
(b) Is not defined as a water quality sensitive (WQS) development
(as defined in Article II, Terminology, and Appendix B,
Watershed Maps145); or
(c) Is not located in an area where existing downstream
stormwater problems are known to occur (the Township
Engineer shall make the final determination as to preexisting
145. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 13-1.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-1.8
AO:505
§ 13-1.9. Municipal liability.
The degree of stormwater management sought by the provisions of this
chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the Township, any appointed or
elected official of the Township, the Centre County Conservation District,
or any officer, engineer, or employee thereof for the erosion, sedimentation,
or flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 13-1.10. Erroneous approval.
Any approval or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading
or erroneous information provided by an applicant is void without the
necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use
established pursuant to such approval or other authorization is unlawful.
No action may be taken by a board, agency or employee of the Township
purporting to validate such a violation.
problems, but the Township must have supporting
documentation of past problems).
(4) In addition, the Township Engineer may waive the requirement to
prepare a stormwater management site plan for sites larger than
1.0 acre for which the overall site impervious area is being
decreased and which meets the other conditions identified above.
(5) Agriculture and silviculture activities as defined in this chapter that
are conducted according to requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter
102.
B. The diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel
and/or for the installation of stormwater management facilities or
modifications thereto cannot be exempted. These activities always
require the submission of a stormwater management site plan. The
exemptions in Subsection A(1) and (2) cannot be combined for use with
small residential subdivisions.
C. In addition to the general exemptions identified above, exemptions for
specific technical criteria are identified where applicable in Article III.
§ 13-1.8 HARRIS CODE § 13-1.10
AO:506
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 13-2.1. Word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as presented below. Additional definitions are provided in the
Act 167 plan definitions chapter.
§ 13-2.2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES — Activities associated with agriculture such
as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal heavy use
areas. This includes the work of producing crops, including tillage, land
clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting crops or
pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of conservation measures.
Construction of new buildings or impervious area is not considered an
agricultural activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of
the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another; also
the changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less
impervious; land disturbance.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer who has filed an application for
approval to engage in any regulated activities as defined in § 13-1.4 of this
chapter.
BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE) — Activities, facilities, designs,
measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from
regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote
groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes of this chapter.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, or any other
similar entity.
D. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
E. The words "used or occupied" include the words "intended, designed,
maintained, or arranged to be used, occupied or maintained."
§ 13-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-2.2
AO:507
Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one of two broad categories
or measures: "structural" or "nonstructural." In this chapter, nonstructural
BMPs or measures refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices
that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff,
whereas structural BMPs or measures are those that consist of a physical
device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff.
Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices
and devices, from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands,
to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter
strips, low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving,
grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins,
and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site, stormwater structures, facilities and
techniques to maintain or improve the water quality of surface runoff.
BUFFER AREA — Area that is protected from development in order to
prevent degradation of the water body or water quality.
CAPTURE DEPTH — Depth of runoff captured from a given area and either
allowed to evaporate, infiltrate, or be discharged through a spillway at a
negligible rate.
CARBONATE — A sediment formed by the organic or inorganic
precipitation of mineral compounds characterized by the fundamental
chemical ion CO3, the principal element in limestone and dolomite strata.
CHANNEL — A perceptible natural or artificial waterway that periodically
or continuously contains moving water having a definite bed and banks that
confine the water.
CLOSED OR UNDRAINED DEPRESSION — In a karst geologic area, a
distinct bowl-shaped depression in the land surface; size and amplitude are
variable; drainage is internal. It differs from a sinkhole in that the ground
surface is unbroken and usually occurs in greater density per unit area.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Centre County Conservation District.
CREDITS — A deduction from the required amount; in this chapter, implies
reduction of required water quality volumes due to using a recommended
practice.
DAM — An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another fluid
or semifluid, or a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad or other
purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or semifluid.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNEE — The agent of a Planning Commission and/or agent of the
governing body involved with the administration, review or enforcement
of any provisions of this chapter by contract or memorandum of
understanding.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
§ 13-2.2 HARRIS CODE § 13-2.2
AO:508
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design and
evaluation of stormwater management systems.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment structure designed to manage
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a
predetermined rate.
DEVELOPER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, or other
entity, or any responsible person therein or agent thereof, that undertakes
any regulated activity of this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract of land for which a regulated
activity is proposed.
DOLOMITE — A mineral consisting of calcium magnesium carbonate found
as compact limestone; or limestone or marble rich in magnesium carbonate.
DOWNSLOPE PROPERTY LINE — That portion of the property line of the
lot, tract, or parcels of land being developed located such that all overland
or pipe flow from the site would be directed towards it.
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A stormwater management facility
designed to transmit stormwater runoff and shall include streams, channels,
swales, pipes, conduits, culverts, storm sewers, etc.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee,
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
DRAINAGEWAY — The natural or man-made path of surface water from a
given area.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human activity
which disturbs the surface of the land, including but not limited to clearing
and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road maintenance;
building construction; and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of
soil, rock, or earth materials.
EROSION — The movement of soil particles by the action of water, wind,
ice, or other natural forces.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN — A plan that is
designed to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
EXFILTRATION — The process by which water or moisture moves from a
subsurface trench, bed, or other feature into the subsoil. Exfiltration is best
measured by a soil's percolation rate.
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The initial condition of a project site prior to the
proposed construction.
FLOOD — A general but temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams, rivers,
and other waters of this commonwealth.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from
any natural source or delineated by applicable Department of Housing
§ 13-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-2.2
AO:509
and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration, flood hazard
boundary, mapped as being a special flood hazard area.
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and discharge
the one-hundred-year-frequency flood. Unless otherwise specified, the
boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance
studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies
have defined the boundary of the one-hundred-year-frequency floodway, it
is assumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that the floodway extends from
the stream to 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and activities
necessary for the management of forestland. These include timber
inventory and preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural
treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and construction, timber
harvesting, site preparation and reforestation.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the elevation of the design high
water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, or diversion ridge. The space
is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.
GRASSED WATERWAY — A natural or constructed waterway, usually broad
and shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, used to conduct
surface water from cropland.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP — Infiltration rates of soils vary widely and are
affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface intake rates. Soils
are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C, and D) according to their minimum
infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare soil after prolonged wetting.
The NRCS defines the four groups and provides a list of most of the soils
in the United States and their group classification. The soils in the area of
the development site may be identified from a soil survey report that can
be obtained from local NRCS offices or conservation district offices. Soils
become less pervious as the HSG varies from A to D (NRCS).
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (AREA) — A surface that prevents the infiltration of
water into the ground. Impervious surfaces (or areas) shall include but not
be limited to roofs; additional indoor living spaces, patios, garages, storage
sheds and similar structures; and any new streets or sidewalks. Decks,
parking areas, and driveway areas are not counted as impervious areas if
they do not prevent infiltration.
IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention basin designed to retain
stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
INFILTRATION RATE — The infiltration rate of a soil is related to the soil's
final infiltration capacity and represents the rate at which water enters the
soil/air interface at the top of the soil profile. Infiltration rates are measured
in units of length/time.
§ 13-2.2 HARRIS CODE § 13-2.2
AO:510
INLET — A surface connection to a closed drain. A structure at the diversion
end of a conduit. The upstream end of any structure through which water
may flow.
INTERCEPTOR — A channel, berm, or dike constructed across a slope for
the purpose of intercepting stormwater, reducing the velocity of flow, and
diverting it to outlets where it may be disposed.
KARST — A type of topography that is formed over limestone, dolomite, or
gypsum by bedrock solution and that is characterized by closed depressions
or sinkholes, caves, and underground drainage (from AGI, Glossary of
Geology, 1972).
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Inclusive of any or all of the following meanings:
LAND/EARTH DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving grading, tilling,
digging, or filling of ground or stripping of vegetation or any other activity
that causes an alteration to the natural condition of the land.
LAND USE — The primary application employed in an area.
LIMESTONE — A rock that, by accumulation of organic remains, consists
mainly of calcium carbonate.
LINEAMENTS — Straight or gently curved, lengthy features frequently
expressed topographically as depressions or lines on the earth's surface.
They can be more easily observed at a height of 100 meters or more and are
usually found by researching aerial photographs or satellite photography.
They are usually located in areas of faulting or in dense jointing along some
rock stratigraphy.
MAIN STEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other runoff
conveyance facility used as a reach in the Spring Creek hydrologic model.
MINIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE — In relation to this chapter, the
minimum rate that can be discharged for any drainage area for design
storm events up to and including the ten-year event, regardless of the
modeled predevelopment runoff estimate.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
(1) A group of two or more buildings; or
The division or allocation of land or space between or among two
or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for
the purpose of, streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups, or other features;
(2)
A.
B. Any subdivision of land;
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.146
C.
146. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 13-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-2.2
AO:511
NATURAL CONSERVATION AREAS — A natural area protected during
development for its water quality or recharge enhancing abilities.
OUTFALL — Point where water flows from a conduit, stream, or drain.
OUTLET — Points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake, tidewater or
artificial drain.
PA DEP — Pennsylvania State Department of Environmental Protection.
PA DOT — Pennsylvania State Department of Transportation.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PERCOLATION RATE — The rate at which water moves through a soil
profile. Percolation rates are measured in units of time/length.
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Township.
POINT DISCHARGE — The discharge from a pipe or channel that
concentrates runoff at a single area.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated activities in
the Township are planned, conducted, or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — An individual registered in and licensed
by the State of Pennsylvania qualified to perform stormwater analysis and
design.
RECHARGE VOLUME — The volume of water that is required to be
recharged from developed sites.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Actions or proposed actions that have an
impact on stormwater runoff and that are specified in § 13-1.4 of this
chapter.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving earth
disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92a, 25 Pa.
Code Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.147
RETENTION BASIN — An impoundment in which stormwater is stored and
not released during the storm event. Stored water may be released from the
basin at some time after the end of the storm.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a storm
event of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For example, the
twenty-five-year return period rainfall has a four-percent probability of
occurring in any given year.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
147. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 13-2.2 HARRIS CODE § 13-2.2
AO:512
SAFE PASSAGE — The routing of peak runoff events, usually the onehundred-
year design event, safely through a structure without failure of
that structure.
SCOUR — Generally refers to the change in a channel configuration
provoked by sediment imbalance, due to natural or man-made causes,
between the supply and transport capacity of the channel.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin located
and designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other material transported
by water.
SENSITIVE (WATER QUALITY) AREA — An area protected because
development within that area could potentially cause contamination of
groundwater reservoirs. These sensitive land areas are defined in Appendix
B, Exhibit 1.148
SHEET FLOW — Runoff that flows over the ground surface as a thin, even
layer, not concentrated in a channel.
SINKHOLE — A localized, gradual or rapid sinking of the land surface
to a variable depth, occurring in areas of carbonate bedrock; generally
characterized by a roughly circular outline, a distant breaking of the ground
surface and downward movement of soil into bedrock voids.
SPILLWAY — A depression in the embankment of a pond or basin which
is used to pass peak discharge greater than the maximum design storm
controlled by the pond.
STABILIZATION — The proper placing, grading and/or covering of soil, rock
or earth to ensure their resistance to erosion, sliding or other movement.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory requirements
to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Title 25 of the
Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.149
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels that convey
intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources, but excludes
domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting
from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or manmade,
that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores,
or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater management
facilities include, but are not limited to, detention and retention basins,
open channels, storm sewers, pipes, and infiltration structures.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plan for managing stormwater
runoff in the Spring Creek Watershed adopted by the Centre County
Commissioners as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act
148. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
149. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 13-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-2.2
AO:513
167),150 and known as the "Spring Creek Watershed Act 167 Stormwater
Management Plan."
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by the
developer or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff will be
managed at the development site in accordance with this chapter.
"Stormwater management site plan" will be designated as "SWM site plan"
throughout this chapter. The contents of the SWM site plan are established
in Article IV of this chapter.
STRATA — Tabular or sheet-like mass, distinct layers of homogenous or
gradational sedimentary material (consolidated rock or unconsolidated
earth) of any thickness, visually separable from other layers above and
below by a discrete change in the character of the material deposited or by
a sharp physical break deposition, or both.
STRATIGRAPHIC UNIT — A stratum or body of strata recognized as a
unit in the classification of the rocks of the earth's crust with respect to
any specific rock character, property, attribute or for any purpose such as
description, mapping, and correlation.
STRUCTURAL FILL — For the purposes of this chapter, shall imply any soil
mass that is compacted in lifts to some tested criteria (standard or modified
proctor) such as those under foundations or adjacent to retaining walls;
areas that, for several years after construction, respond to precipitation
events similar to impervious areas.
SUBAREA — The smallest drainage unit of a watershed for which
stormwater management criteria have been established in the stormwater
management plan.
SWALE — A natural low-lying stretch of land or minor man-made
conveyance channel, which gathers or carries surface water runoff.
SWM — Stormwater management.
TOPOGRAPHY — The general configuration of a land surface or any part
of the earth's surface, including its relief and position of its natural and
man-made features; the natural or physical surface features of a region,
considered collectively as to its form.
TOWNSHIP — Harris Township, Centre County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and duly appointed by the subject Township
as its representative. In the event that a stormwater utility is formed, all
references to the Township Engineer shall be considered to also imply the
stormwater utility engineer.
UNDETAINED AREA — An area of a site that cannot be routed to a
stormwater management facility because of its location; generally small
areas around access drives or below stormwater management facilities.
150. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 13-2.2 HARRIS CODE § 13-2.2
AO:514
WATER QUALITY DEPTH — Depth of precipitation required to be used
in computing the water quality volume based on the percentage of
imperviousness of a site.
WATER QUALITY SENSITIVE (WQS) DEVELOPMENT — Land development
projects that have a high potential to cause catastrophic loss to local water
quality and could potentially threaten groundwater reservoirs. See § 13-3.2
for additional definition.
WATER QUALITY VOLUME — Volume of runoff required to be controlled
from a site in a water quality BMP.
WATERSHED — The entire region or area drained by a river or other body
of water, whether natural or artificial, a drainage basin or sub-basin.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams,
creeks, rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water,
wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of conveyance
of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or
artificial, within or on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
WATER TABLE — Upper surface of a layer of saturated material in the soil.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, ferns, and similar areas.
§ 13-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-2.2
AO:515

ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management Requirements
§ 13-3.1. General requirements.
A. All regulated activities in the Township which do not fall under the
exemption criteria shown in § 13-1.8 of this chapter shall submit a
stormwater management site plan to the Township for review. This plan
must be consistent with the Spring Creek Watershed Stormwater
Management Plan. These criteria shall apply to the total proposed
development even if development is to take place in phases. Impervious
cover shall include, but not be limited to, any roof, parking or driveway
areas, and any new streets and sidewalks. Any areas designed to
initially be gravel or crushed stone shall be assumed to be impervious
for the purposes of comparison to the waiver criteria. The DEP
Stormwater BMP Manual, as amended and updated, shall be used for
design of stormwater management facilities. No disturbance may be
performed prior to approval of a stormwater management site plan. All
activities (especially earth disturbance activities) must comply with this
chapter, Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams
Law.151
B. Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided in order to permit
unimpeded flow along natural watercourses, except as modified by
stormwater management facilities or open channels consistent with this
chapter.
(1) Stormwater management facilities and related installations also
shall be provided:
(a) To ensure adequate drainage of all low points along the
curbline of streets.
(b) To intercept stormwater runoff along streets at intervals
reasonably related to the extent and grade of the area drained,
and to prevent substantial flow of water across intersections or
flooded intersections during storms, in accordance with the
procedures contained in Design Manual Part 2 (DM-2),
Chapter 10, of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PA DOT).
(c) To ensure adequate and unimpeded flow of stormwater under
driveways in, near, or across natural watercourses or drainage
swales. Suitable pipes or other waterways shall be provided as
necessary.
(d) To properly drain stormwater runoff from all land development
projects, except as required by recharge criteria. All lot and
open areas shall be designed to drain to the nearest practical
151. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 13-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-3.1
AO:517
street or drainage system, existing or proposed, as defined by
the Township Engineer, with no impact on adjoining properties,
unless an area specifically designed for stormwater detention
is provided.
C. The existing points of concentrated drainage that discharge onto
adjacent property shall not be altered without permission of the altered
property owner(s) and shall be subject to any applicable discharge
criteria specified in this chapter.
D. Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge shall be subject to any
applicable discharge criteria in the general direction of existing
discharge, whether proposed to be concentrated or maintained as
diffused drainage areas, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. If
diffused flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto
adjacent property, the developer must document that adequate
downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the
concentrated discharge, or otherwise prove that no erosion,
sedimentation, flooding or other harm will result from the concentrated
discharge. If, in the opinion of the Township Engineer, there will be an
impact on the downstream adjacent property, the Township may require
that the developer obtain a stormwater easement. Where a
development site is traversed by watercourses, drainage easements
shall be provided conforming to the line of such watercourses. The
terms of the easement shall prohibit excavation, the placing of fill or
structures, and any alterations that may adversely affect the flow of
stormwater within any portion of the easement. Developers are
encouraged to allow stormwater easements to revert to a natural
condition. Mowing or similar types of vegetative control are
discouraged while removal of invasive species are encouraged.
E. When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainageways on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage, open
channels may be constructed conforming substantially to the line and
grade of such natural drainageways. Work within natural drainageways
shall be subject to approval by PA DEP through the joint permit
application process, or, where deemed appropriate by PA DEP, through
the general permit process.
F. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter that
would be located in or adjacent to waters of the commonwealth (any
and all rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm
sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other
bodies or channels of conveyance of surface and underground water, or
parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries
of this commonwealth) or wetlands shall be subject to approval by PA
DEP through the joint permit application process, or, where deemed
appropriate by PA DEP, the general permit process. When there is a
question whether wetlands may be involved, it is the responsibility of
the developer or his agent to show that the land in question cannot be
§ 13-3.1 HARRIS CODE § 13-3.1
AO:518
classified as wetlands; otherwise, approval to work in the area must be
obtained from PA DEP.
G. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter that
would discharge to or be located on state highway rights-of-way shall be
subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PA DOT).
H. Low-impact development (LID) is to be used to the maximum extent
practicable. Minimization of impervious surfaces and infiltration of
runoff through seepage beds, recharge trenches, etc., are encouraged,
where soil conditions permit, to reduce the size or eliminate the need
for detention facilities.
I. To promote overland flow and infiltration/percolation of stormwater,
roof drains should not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm
sewers, or roadside ditches unless approved by the Township Engineer
on a case-by-case basis.
J. Where deemed necessary by the Township Engineer, the applicant shall
submit an analysis of the impacts of detained stormwater flows on
downstream areas within the watershed. These impacts shall be
identified with concurrence from the Township Engineer. The analysis
shall include hydrologic and hydraulic calculations necessary to
determine the impact peak discharge modifications from the proposed
development have on critical locations such as dams, tributaries,
existing developments, undersized culverts, flood-prone areas, etc.
K. When stormwater management facilities are proposed within 1,000 feet
of a downstream municipality, the analysis of downstream impacts shall
be submitted to the downstream municipality's engineer or designated
representative for review and comment.
L. The applicant shall notify the owners of all adjacent properties.
Notification shall be via United States certified mail with copies of the
return receipts provided to the Township. Notification shall include the
following language: "A land development plan is being considered by
Harris Township for Tax Parcel (insert parcel number), as shown on the
attached exhibit. Public comment for this land development will be
received at a meeting of the Harris Township Planning Commission on
(insert date). If you cannot attend this meeting, comments may be
directed to Harris Township at (814) 466-6228." A letter and location
map exhibit must be approved by the Township prior to distribution to
the owners of the adjacent properties.
M. Approved stormwater management site plans must be on site at all
times during construction.
N. Use of alternate and/or new stormwater management controls will be
considered by the Township. A description of the proposed alternate
controls must be submitted to the Township, the Centre County
§ 13-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-3.1
AO:519
§ 13-3.2. Sensitive areas and developments.
Sensitive areas and water quality sensitive developments have been
identified which require special consideration with regard to stormwater
management.
§ 13-3.3. Performance standards.
Conservation District, and to DEP. The Township will coordinate any
approvals with the CCCD and/or DEP.
O. The stormwater management site plan must contain a proper long-term
ownership, operation and maintenance plan in accordance with Article
VII of this chapter.
A. "Sensitive areas" are defined as those areas that, if developed, have the
potential to cause catastrophic loss to a water authority well field.
These areas consist of the delineated one-year zone of contribution and
direct upslope areas tributary to the wells (see Appendix B, Exhibit
1152). Municipalities may update the sensitive area boundaries based on
new research or studies as required.
B. "Water quality sensitive (WQS) developments" are defined as a land
development project that has a high potential to cause catastrophic loss
to local water quality and could potentially threaten groundwater
reservoirs. The following is a provisional list of water quality sensitive
developments. This list may be amended at the discretion of the
Township.
(1) Vehicle fueling stations.
(2) Industrial manufacturing sites*.
(3) Salvage yards.
(4) Recycling centers.
(5) Hazardous material storage areas*.
(6) Interstate highways.
NOTES:
* The Township Engineer will make the determination relative to
what constitutes these classifications on a case-by-case basis.
The Pennsylvania DEP wellhead protection contaminant source
list shall be used as a guide in these determinations. Industrial
manufacturing site and hazardous material storage areas must
provide NPDES SIC codes.
152. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 13-3.1 HARRIS CODE § 13-3.3
AO:520
A. General. Post-development rates of runoff from any regulated activity
shall not exceed the peak release rates of runoff prior to development
for the design storms specified.
B. Sensitive area district boundaries. The location of sensitive areas or
sensitive area districts (SAD) within the watershed are illustrated on an
Official Map, which is available for inspection at the Township office. A
reduced-scale copy of this map is included as Exhibit 1 in Appendix B of
this chapter.153 The exact location of the boundaries of sensitive areas
are set by drainage areas tributary to each of the points of interest as
illustrated in Appendix B. The exact location of these boundaries as
they apply to a given development site shall be determined using
mapping at a scale which accurately defines the limits of the sensitive
area. If the project site is within the sensitive area (in whole or in part),
two-foot contour interval mapping shall be provided to define the limits
of the sensitive area. If the project site is adjacent to but within 500
linear feet of a defined sensitive area, a five-foot contour interval map
defining the limits of the sensitive area shall be included in the
stormwater management site plan to document the site's location
relative to the sensitive area.
C. Sites located in more than one district. For a proposed development site
which is traversed by a SAD boundary, the design criteria for sensitive
areas must be applied if post-development runoff is directed towards
the sensitive area.
D. Off-site areas. Off-site areas that drain from sensitive areas through a
proposed development site that is located entirely in a nonsensitive
area are not required to use or apply the sensitive area criteria.
E. Site areas. Where the site area to be impacted by a proposed
development activity differs significantly from the total site area, only
the proposed impact area shall be subject to the design criteria.
F. Downstream hydraulic capacity analysis. Any downstream or off-site
hydraulic capacity analysis conducted in accordance with these
standards shall use the following criteria for determining adequacy for
accepting increased peak flow rates:
(1) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the post-development runoff associated with a two-year return
period event within their banks at velocities consistent with
protection of the channels from erosion. Acceptable velocities shall
be based upon criteria included in the DEP Erosion and Sediment
Pollution Control Program Manual.
(2) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the post-development twenty-five-year return period runoff without
creating any hazard to persons or property.
153. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 13-3.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-3.3
AO:521
§ 13-3.4. Calculation methodologies.
Design criteria and calculation methodologies have been classified by
functional group for presentation as follows: 1) peak runoff rate discharge
requirements; 2) stormwater pond capture volumes; 3) recharge volumes;
4) storm drain design, including conveyance, channel protection, and
stability; and 5) water quality standards. These criteria and calculation
methodologies have been developed to simplify stormwater management
designs, unify methods, remove model parameter subjectivity, remove
improperly used methods, and to ensure stormwater management decisions
are based more realistically on hydrologic processes. In addition, common
sense should always be used as a controlling criteria. These standards
provide consistent and process-oriented design procedures for application
by land development professionals. It is recognized that in an attempt to
generalize the computational procedures, assumptions have been made
which on some occasions may be violated. If such a violation is identified,
alternate standards and procedures may be applied. Both the violation and
the alternate procedures to be applied must be documented by a hydrologist
or hydrogeologist. Any request for use of alternate standards or procedures
under this provision must be agreed to by the local Township Engineer prior
to formal submission of plans for consideration by the Township. A flow
chart documenting the stormwater management design process is provided
as Chart A-9, Stormwater Procedural Flow Chart, of this chapter.
(3) Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must
pass or convey flows from the tributary area must be designed in
accordance with DEP Chapter 105154 regulations (if applicable)
and, at a minimum, pass the post-development twenty-five-year
return period runoff.
(4) It must be demonstrated that the downstream conveyance channel,
other stormwater facilities, roadways, or overland areas must be
capable of safely conveying the one-hundred-year design storm
without causing damage to buildings or other infrastructure.
(5) Where the downstream conveyance channel or other facility is
located within a special flood hazard area (as documented on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map), it must be demonstrated that the limits
of said flood hazard area are not increased by the proposed activity.
(6) Stormwater management ponds that fall under the DEP Chapter
105 criteria of a "dam" must meet the criteria within Chapter
105.155
A. Peak runoff rate control.
(1) Exemption.
154. Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Ch. 105.
155. Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Ch. 105.
§ 13-3.3 HARRIS CODE § 13-3.4
AO:522
(a) Any site where the increase in post-development peak runoff
rates is determined to be negligible by the Township Engineer
is exempt from the requirement to provide stormwater
detention. In support of this exemption, it must be shown that
the downstream conveyance systems have adequate capacity
to convey the additional discharge without adversely affecting
downstream properties. This does not exempt the requirement
for implementation of designs for water quality, stormwater
conveyance, and/or recharge as required. A stormwater
management site plan and report documenting these design
elements is also required. The Township Engineer shall use a
five-percent increase as a general benchmark for defining
"negligible." The final definition of "negligible" shall be at the
Township Engineer's discretion. Prior to using this exemption
(and prior to any land development plan submission), the
design engineer must provide written documentation and
computations as to why no peak runoff control should be
required. The Township Engineer has the right to reject any
plan which uses this assumption without prior approval of the
Township Engineer. The intent of this exemption is to eliminate
the need for multiple or "piggyback" detention facilities as a
result of minor changes in imperviousness or land use
upstream of existing stormwater control facilities.
(b) Small sites (less than one acre) located directly adjacent to the
main stem of creeks or within the floodplain are not required to
provide stormwater detention unless directed to do so by the
Township Engineer as a result of a documented drainage
problem. All other stormwater management standards must be
implemented, including water quality, adequate stormwater
conveyance, and/or recharge as required. The Township
Engineer has the right to reject any plan that uses this
exemption without prior approval of the Township Engineer.
(2) Stormwater management analysis.
(a) Stormwater management analysis must be performed using
the following models. The size criteria are based on drainage
area size, including site area and all off-site area draining
across the development.
[1] Up to 100 acres in size: NRCS's TR-55 or TR-20.
[2] Over 100 acres in size: NRCS's TR-20 or HEC-1 (HECHMS).
(b) The Modified Rational Method using the Gert Aron Curves may
be used for any site less than or equal to two acres in size
without prior authorization from the Township Engineer. The
Modified Rational Method may also be used for sites between
two and five acres in size where the Township Engineer has
§ 13-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-3.4
AO:523
approved the method's use. In this case, the design engineer
must make a written request to the Township Engineer
explaining why the use of the Modified Rational Method is
more appropriate than the NRCS's methods for the site in
question. Use of the Modified Rational methodology should be
limited to the special cases identified above. In addition, since
the minimum discharge criteria are based on a calibration
of the NRCS runoff mode, their use is not appropriate if the
Modified Rational Method is used for runoff computations.
(c) The Township Engineer has the right to reject any SWM design
that uses hydrograph combinations with the Modified Rational
Method where the designer has not validated that the effects of
the timing differences are negligible. In addition, the Township
Engineer has the right to reject any SWM design that
improperly uses the method for determining runoff volumes or
does not properly apply the method.
(d) More intensive physically based models may be used at the
discretion of the Township Engineer, but only for sites greater
than 100 acres in size.
(e) Commercial software packages that use the basic
computational methods of TR-55 or TR-20 are permitted.
(f) The NRCS models and methods recommended above are based
on data collected from actual watersheds. In contrast to this,
stormwater management analysis for land development
activities is often conducted using property lines to define
drainage boundaries. Drainage areas based on property
boundaries are not true watersheds and are referred to here as
"hypothetical" drainage areas. It is known that these
hypothetical drainage areas do not respond like natural
watersheds. Peak runoff rates from hypothetical drainage
areas are much smaller than comparable runoff rates from
natural watersheds of the same size. Therefore, wherever
possible, pre- and post-development stormwater analysis
should be conducted for watersheds that are as nearly natural
as possible. Also, conducting stormwater analysis for a lot-bylot
comparison, such as within residential developments, is not
permitted. Partitioning drainage areas into different
subwatersheds for the post-development scenarios is
acceptable.
(g) It is noted that natural watershed boundaries should not be
used where the relative size of the watershed compared to the
site size would inappropriately distort the pre- to postdevelopment
runoff comparison. In these cases, a hypothetical
drainage area defined by the property boundary should be
used because it will allow for a better estimate of runoff
changes directly downstream of the site. In addition, the
§ 13-3.4 HARRIS CODE § 13-3.4
AO:524
designer should recognize that, within the Spring Creek
Watershed, typical hypothetical drainage areas, in their
predevelopment or natural condition, do not produce surface
runoff during minor to moderate rainfall events. Available
hydrologic models do not accurately reflect this condition. This
often results in post-development nuisance flooding since the
models overestimate the predevelopment runoff magnitude.
(3) Major natural drainage divides may not be altered without the prior
consent of the Township Engineer.
(4) Pre- and post-development stormwater management analysis shall
be conducted using the following design storms:
(a) One-year.
(b) Two-year.
(c) Ten-year.
(d) One-hundred-year.
(5) The twenty-four-hour precipitation depths as obtained from NOAA
Atlas 14 shall be used for stormwater management analysis.
(6) The NRCS's Type II precipitation distribution is required for all
stormwater management analyses.
(7) The NRCS's dimensionless unit hydrograph "k" factor shall be 484
for both pre- and post-development stormwater analyses.
(8) All undeveloped areas are to be modeled as meadow or woods in
good hydrologic condition. Existing impervious areas may be
modeled as being impervious for predevelopment conditions. The
Township may require a percentage of the existing impervious area
up to a maximum of 20% to be modeled as meadow in areas where
there are known existing stormwater concerns downstream of the
project area or where the site being developed has either deficient
or nonexisting stormwater management facilities. Developers of
sites with existing impervious areas are highly encouraged to set
up a meeting with the Township prior to design so that any
additional requirements are identified prior to plan submission.
(9) The NRCS's curve number (CN) shall be used as the rainfall to
runoff transformation parameter for all stormwater management
analyses.
(10) Curve numbers should be rounded to tenths for use in prepackaged
hydrologic models. It should be recognized that the CN is only a
design tool with a large degree of statistical variability. For large
sites, CN's should realistically be rounded to the nearest whole
number.
§ 13-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-3.4
AO:525
(11) The NRCS's method to determine unconnected impervious area
adjustments for CN can be used for distinctly defined impervious
land areas that flow onto pervious areas in a dispersed manner. The
method may only be used to calculate runoff from site impervious
areas that actually flow across pervious areas. The method cannot
be applied to the entire site using average weighted CN values.
(12) Soils underlain by carbonate geology (limestone or dolomite) shall
have a hydrologic soil group (HSG) B used for both pre- and postdevelopment
conditions, regardless of the NRCS or Soil Survey's
description, except for the following two conditions:
(a) Compacted structural fill areas shall use a minimum of HSG C
for post-development conditions, regardless of the NRCS or
Centre County Soil Survey's description. For most
developments, compacted structural fill areas are under
impervious surfaces, but may include islands within parking
areas, fringe land, etc. A HSG C shall also be applied to large
projects that clear and compact building pad areas for later
phases of development under an initial phase. The Township
Engineer shall make the final determination as to what areas of
a land development site constitute compacted structural fill.
The intent is to account for large compacted areas and not
minor grading within lawn areas.
(b) Soils identified as "on floodplains" or "on terraces above
floodplains" in the Centre County Soil Survey will use the HSG
as designated in the Soil Survey. Refer to Appendix A for a list
of the soils.156
(13) Soils not underlain by carbonate geology shall use the HSG as
specified by the NRCS or Soil Survey's description, except for the
following two conditions:
(a) Wooded areas on HSG C and D soils shall be treated as HSG B
for predevelopment conditions. Disturbed post-development
wooded areas shall carry the NRCS or Soil Survey's defined
HSG with a minimum HSG of B.
(b) Highly compacted structural fill areas shall use a minimum of
HSG C for post-development conditions, regardless of the
NRCS or Soil Survey's description. For most developments,
these areas are normally covered with impervious surfaces,
but may include islands within parking areas, fringe land, etc.
A HSG of C shall also be used for large projects that clear and
grade land for later phases of development. The Township
Engineer shall make the final determination as to what areas of
a land development site constitute compacted structural fill.
The intent is to account for large compacted areas and not
156. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 13-3.4 HARRIS CODE § 13-3.4
AO:526
minor grading within lawn areas or small areas around
buildings, etc.
(14) Areas draining to closed depressions must be modeled by removing
the storage volume from the predevelopment condition. The
designer may assume that infiltration in the closed depression does
not occur during a design runoff event. Areas draining to closed
depressions may also be used to adjust peak runoff rates to
stormwater management ponds for the post-development analysis.
This allowance has been developed to entice designers to
intentionally design or leave in place small closed depressions that
can reduce the total volume required from a stormwater
management pond. The site designer is responsible to document
downstream impacts if the closed depression were removed.
(15) Drainage areas tributary to sinkholes shall be excluded from the
modeled point-of-interest drainage areas defining predevelopment
peak flows. Assumptions that sinkholes spill over during some
storm events must be supported by acceptable documentation (as
determined by the Township Engineer). In addition, the design
professional must be aware that bypassing or sealing sinkholes will
frequently result in downstream flooding and should not be done if
existing downstream flooding already occurs. The site designer is
responsible to document downstream impacts if the sinkhole were
to stop taking stormwater runoff.
(16) Ponds or other permanent pools of water are to be modeled by the
methods established in the NRCS's TR-55 Manual (1986). However,
more rigorous documented methods are acceptable (as determined
by the Township Engineer).
(17) The NRCS antecedent runoff condition II ("ARC II," previously
"AMC II") must be used for all simulations. The use of continuous
simulation models that vary the ARC are not permitted for
stormwater management purposes. In addition, prior to any
continuous simulation model being used in the Spring Creek Basin
for any other purposes, the model unit hydrograph must be
modified for common events in additional to extreme events based
on an in-depth analysis of historical data from the basin.
(18) Time of concentration computational methodologies.
(a) The following time of concentration (Tc) computational
methodologies shall be used, unless another method is
preapproved by the Township Engineer:
[1] Predevelopment: NRCS's Lag Equation.
[2] Post-development; commercial, industrial, or other areas
with large impervious areas (greater than 20% impervious
area): NRCS's Segmental Method.
§ 13-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-3.4
AO:527
[3] Post-development; residential, cluster, or other low-impact
designs less than or equal to 20% impervious area: NRCS's
Lag Equation.
(b) The time of concentration is to represent the average condition
that best reflects the hydrologic response of the area. For
example, large impervious areas bordered by small pervious
areas may not consider the effect of the pervious areas in the
Tc computation. If the designer wants to consider the affect of
the pervious area, runoff from the pervious and impervious
areas must be computed separately with the hydrographs
being combined to determine the total runoff from the area.
(c) Under no circumstance will the post-development Tc be
greater than the predevelopment Tc for any watershed or
subwatershed modeling purposes. This includes when the
designer has specifically used swales to reduce flow velocities.
In the event that the designer believes that the postdevelopment
Tc is greater, it will still be set by default equal to
the predevelopment Tc for modeling purposes.
(d) Refer to Subsection A(28) regarding impervious area flashing
(IAF).
(19) Post-development minimum discharges.
(a) The following post-development minimum discharges are
permitted for use with the NRCS (CN) runoff model:
1-year return period Qpmin = 0.018 (DA) + 0.2
2-year return period Qpmin = 0.03 (DA) + 0.4
10-year return period Qpmin = 0.09 (DA) + 1.0
Where:
DA = The drainage area in acres
Qpmin = Minimum allowable peak runoff rate in cfs
(b) For return periods greater than 10 years, the minimum
discharge shall be equal to the computed predevelopment peak
runoff rate.
(c) The minimum discharge criteria above are not appropriate for
use with the Rational Method. This is because these values
were developed based on NRCS model corrections and do not
actually represent a true physical process or discharge.
However, common sense should be used by both the designer
and reviewer in the evaluation of acceptable minimum
discharges for use with the Rational Method.
(d) The intent of the minimum discharge is to allow reasonable
runoff release from a site when a hydrologic model has
§ 13-3.4 HARRIS CODE § 13-3.4
AO:528
produced a predevelopment runoff rate close to zero. The
method is not permitted for areas that previously drained
completely to sinkholes in order to bypass the sinkhole after
development.
(e) These minimum discharge values include the total of all
stormwater management facilities discharges and undetained
area discharges. Peak runoff rates for undetained fringe areas
(where the designer has made a realistic effort to control all
new impervious areas) will be computed using the
predevelopment time of concentration for the drainage areas
tributary to them. Undetained areas are those portions of the
site that cannot be routed to a stormwater management facility
due to topography and typically include lower pond berms or
small areas around entrance drives. The site drainage areas
used shall represent the predevelopment condition, even if
drainage areas are altered following development.
(20) All lined stormwater management ponds in carbonate and
noncarbonate areas must be considered impervious and may not be
used as pervious areas for stormwater management computations.
"Lined" here means lined with synthetic liners or bentonite. All
other compacted soil liners will be considered to be HSG D for
hydrologic computations.
(21) Stormwater management ponds that have a capture depth for the
purposes of water quality or volume capture shall assume a
negligible discharge from these structures during design event
routing. Only discharges from the primary principal spillway or
emergency spillway need to be considered. Discharges from
subsurface drains that tie into a principal spillway should not be
considered during design event routing. All subsurface drains are
to be equipped with a restrictor plate with a one-inch opening in
order to prevent the subsurface drain from functioning as a
primary orifice.
(22) Stormwater management ponds that have a pond capture,
recharge, or water quality component shall assume that the basin
is full to the controlling component volume at the beginning of
design event routing.
(23) Stormwater management ponds must provide safe passage of the
one-hundred-year return period peak runoff rate assuming that all
of the principal spillway orifices are fully clogged, and the principal
spillway overflow is 50% clogged. A minimum of a six-inch
freeboard must also be maintained above the resulting maximum
water surface elevations (WSE). Any embankment emergency
spillway can be assumed to be unclogged. SWM ponds with
embankments completely made up of natural undisturbed soils
(fully in cut) or where roadways act as the emergency spillway are
§ 13-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-3.4
AO:529
permitted. However, the design engineer must verify downstream
stability and control.
(24) All pre- and post-development comparisons of peak flows shall be
rounded to tenths of a cfs. The intent here is to recognize the
accuracy and precision limitations of hydrologic modeling
procedures. Again, small differences between pre- and postdevelopment
discharge rates should be permitted when no
negative downstream impacts will result.
(25) The full Modified Puls routing method must be used for stormwater
management pond analyses. Simplified methods of determining
pond size requirements such as those in TR-55 (1986) can only be
used for preliminary pond size estimates. The full Modified Puls
routing method must be used for stormwater management pond
analyses. Simplified methods of determining pond size
requirements such as those in TR-55 (1986) can only be used for
preliminary pond size estimates.
(26) Prepackaged hydraulic programs are not approved for the analysis
of underground stormwater management facilities unless it can be
verified that the program rounding subroutines used for the stage/
storage data do not affect the results. This is because, for very
small storage volumes, the program may round off the volume to a
significant percentage.
(27) Full supporting documentation must be provided for all stormwater
management designs.
(28) Designs must be checked for impervious area flash (IAF). This
check is used to determine if flooding may occur due to poor
modeling choices specifically related to the time of concentration.
This analysis requires that the watershed impervious area be
modeled without the pervious areas. The time of concentration
should also be determined from the impervious areas only. If the
IAF analysis results in a higher peak runoff rate at a culvert or
discharge from a pond, this higher rate must be used for the final
design/comparison. The check will frequently yield higher values if
a watershed's impervious area is located primarily near the
watershed outlet or point of interest.
B. Pond capture volumes (Cv).
(1) To minimize nuisance flooding from small precipitation events, a
runoff capture volume is required for all stormwater management
ponds that do not discharge directly to natural, well-defined (with
bed and banks) perennial streams. In general, natural well-defined
streams in the Spring Creek Basin are limited to those delineated
as USGS perennial streams. This should be treated as a guideline
and not a steadfast rule. The final determination is at the discretion
of the Township Engineer. The pond capture volume is a volume of
runoff that will be retained in a pond below the elevation of any free
§ 13-3.4 HARRIS CODE § 13-3.4
AO:530
surface principal spillway orifice. No principal spillway orifice
(except those connected to subsurface drains), regardless of how
small, shall be below the pond elevation equivalent to this volume.
(2) The Centre County Conservation District (CCCD) receives
numerous complaints regarding ponds that are located at the
downslope edge of a property that result in discharging runoff onto
downstream properties in an uncontrolled manner or where no
existing defined outlet channel exists. This is a very common
problem in areas underlain by carbonate rock. These discharges
can cause erosion and flooding downstream. While the pond
capture volume is intended to minimize some of these negative
effects, it cannot deter or reduce the impacts from poor design
practices. Therefore, whenever possible, the CCCD recommends
that the designer consider the downstream morphological changes
that may occur and, when possible, consider constructing
conveyance systems to a stable natural channel. In some cases, this
may require cooperation between landowners.
(3) The capture volume is defined as a runoff depth of 0.25 inch from
all impervious areas tributary to the stormwater management
facility. This volume will be allowed to infiltrate, evaporate, or
dewater from a subsurface drain system connected directly to the
facility's principal spillway. Supporting computations that show
that 90% of the capture volume can dewater in a maximum of 72
hours must be provided. For surface ponds, the maximum depth of
ponding for the capture volume shall be three feet (a health and
safety precaution). However, in areas under karst influence, a
limiting maximum ponding depth of 18 inches is recommended.
Designers may always increase the capture volume to a value
greater than the identified standard as long as the ponding depth
criteria are met.
(4) To simplify computational requirements for design event analysis,
designers do not need to calculate discharges from subsurface
drains related to the capture volumes if the filter media is sand, or
smaller than AASHTO 57 stone. The capture volume is to control
runoff rates from impervious areas and is not related to water
quality. However, pond designs that include a water quality volume
that is greater than the required capture volume are assumed to
have also met the required capture volume as long as it dewaters as
required.
(5) Designs that rely on the natural infiltration of in situ soils must
provide documentation supporting the infiltration rates used for
analysis. Infiltration rates reported in the Soil Survey of Centre
County or other published rates may be used at the discretion of
the Township Engineer.
§ 13-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-3.4
AO:531
(6) The pond capture volume should always be used when upslope
areas are developed where the pond's design creates a point
discharge that did not previously exist.
(7) Stormwater management detention facilities that connect directly
to storm drain pipe networks that discharge to natural well-defined
channels do not require a capture volume.
C. Recharge volumes (Rv).
(1) The purpose of the recharge portion of this chapter is twofold.
First, the recharge requirement is to mitigate the loss of
groundwater recharge associated with the creation of impervious
surfaces. In addition, the recharge criteria is to mitigate the
increase in runoff volume associated with the creation of
impervious surfaces. This increase in runoff volume has significant
impacts on downstream landowners. These impacts are most often
exhibited in the form of increased nuisance flooding and channel or
drainageway erosion and instability. According to local Township
Engineers and representatives of the Centre County Conservation
District, these problems are of significant local concern. The
magnitude of these problems increases with the percentage of
impervious coverage created on a site.
(2) Recharge mitigation shall be provided for runoff from all proposed
impervious areas. The required recharge volume shall be computed
as 0.5 inch of runoff from all proposed impervious areas. It is noted
that lined detention ponds and compacted fill areas are considered
to be impervious when calculating site impervious area for
recharge considerations. In addition, land areas covered by paver
blocks, pervious pavement, and other structural surface treatments
which permit surface infiltration can be treated as pervious areas
when calculating the site impervious area for recharge
considerations as long as the structural infiltration practice is
supported by sound design and appropriate construction
specifications. The Township Engineer may require submission of
supporting documentation prior to approving structural infiltration
areas as pervious areas.
(3) The following design practices can be used as credits to reduce the
recharge volume requirement:
(a) Residential roof areas (detached, duplex, and townhome
dwellings) and commercial/industrial buildings with roof areas
less than 5,000 square feet can be removed from the computed
impervious area when these roof areas are sumped to dry wells
designed in accordance with the following minimum standard:
[1] Sump design criteria. To meet the recharge criteria, sump
storage or voids volume shall be equal to 0.04 cubic feet
per square foot of roof area (0.5 inch rainfall depth). If
sump stone has a voids ratio of 40%, the total sump volume
§ 13-3.4 HARRIS CODE § 13-3.4
AO:532
will be 0.10 cubic feet per square foot of roof area. When
designed only to meet this recharge criteria, the maximum
size for a single sump is 100 cubic feet, and the minimum
sump surface area (A) to depth (D) ratio (A/D) must be a
minimum of 4/1. The sump depth less any freeboard should
not exceed 24 inches.
[2] This roof sump standard shall apply unless the Township
has a separate roof sump standard for water quantity or
peak control.
(b) All or portions of driveways, roadways, and parking areas can
be removed from the impervious area calculation when sheet
flow from these areas is directed to undisturbed natural buffer/
filter areas or constructed filter strips. This flow must be
dispersed as sheet flow as it crosses the buffer/filter area.
Sheet flow velocities should be nonerosive as they cross the
impervious area/filter interface.
[1] To ensure proper infiltration characteristics, the natural
soil profile within natural buffer/filter areas cannot be
disturbed during construction. Completely undisturbed
natural recharge areas serve this function best. However,
minor surface scaring, seeding, and landscaping is
permitted in these areas as long as natural grades are not
altered. In special cases, when approved by the Township
Engineer, minor grading, combined with soil profile
reconstruction, may be permitted in natural buffer/filter
areas. In addition, the following standards apply to natural
filter/buffer areas:
[a] Natural filter/buffer areas must have a minimum width
of five feet or 1/2 of the impervious area drainage
length immediately tributary to the buffer area,
whichever is greater. This width is measured parallel
to the direction of sheet flow.
[b] To qualify for a recharge volume credit, the surface
slope of natural filter/buffer areas must be conducive
to recharge and not result in flow concentration or
erosion. To meet this intent, the surface slope of the
area tributary to the natural buffer/filter area and the
surface slope of the natural buffer/filter area itself
may not exceed 5%. In special cases, steeper slopes
may be used if specifically authorized by the Township
Engineer.
[c] The total impervious area tributary to a natural buffer/
filter area cannot exceed twice the buffer/filter area.
[2] To qualify for a recharge volume credit, constructed filter
strips shall be designed to the following standards:
§ 13-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-3.4
AO:533
[a] The minimum filter strip width shall be five feet or 1/2
of the impervious area drainage length immediately
tributary to the constructed filter strip, whichever is
greater. This width is measured parallel to the
direction of sheet flow.
[b] The total impervious area tributary to a constructed
filter strip area cannot exceed twice the constructed
filter strip area.
[c] The surface slope of the area tributary to the
constructed filter strip area and the surface slope of
the constructed filter strip area itself may not exceed
5% and 3%, respectively. In special cases, steeper
slopes may be used if specifically authorized by the
Township Engineer.
[d] The filter strip surface shall consist of a minimum of
six inches of natural or reconstructed topsoil with a
stable grass surface treatment. Reconstructed topsoil
designs must be approved by the Township Engineer
prior to application. Reconstructed topsoil consists of
soils augmented by tillage and the addition of soil
amendments such as compost, lime, animal manures,
crop residues, etc.
[e] To minimize erosion of the topsoil layer during
construction, it is recommended that these areas be
sodded. However, the Township Engineer may permit
the use of an acceptable erosion control seeding
application. In this later case, any loss of topsoil and
seed must be replaced until a permanent vegetative
stand is achieved.
(c) Sidewalks separated from roadways and/or other impervious
surfaces by a grass strip of equal or greater width than the
sidewalk itself can be removed from the impervious area
calculation when the sidewalks are graded so that sheet flow
from the walk is directed to the grass strip. Sidewalks with
steep longitudinal slopes that themselves would act as
channels during runoff events cannot take advantage of this
credit. A five-percent longitudinal sidewalk slope shall be used
as the benchmark defining steep slopes.
(d) Impervious areas tributary to natural closed depressions can
be subtracted from the total site impervious area used in the
recharge volume calculation as long as a qualified geotechnical
engineer or soil scientist certifies to the soundness of these
site-specific applications. Water quality pretreatment may be
necessary prior to the direct discharge of runoff to existing
closed depressions or sinkholes.
§ 13-3.4 HARRIS CODE § 13-3.4
AO:534
(e) Impervious areas tributary to man-made closed depressions
can be subtracted from the total site impervious area as long as
a qualified geotechnical engineer or soil scientist certifies to
the soundness of these site-specific applications. Man-made
closed depressions can be created through the use of low-head
berms one foot or less in height.
(f) Additional credits may apply for undisturbed land areas that
are known to have high infiltration capacity and that are
maintained or enhanced. These areas must be defined and
quantified from actual site data collection.
(4) After credits, the remaining recharge volume shall be directed to a
recharge BMP such as infiltration trenches, beds, etc. These
facilities can be located in open areas or under pavement
structures. The appropriateness of the particular infiltration
practice proposed, as well as the design parameters used, shall be
supported by a geotechnical report certified by a qualified
professional (soil scientist, geologist, hydrogeologist, geotechnical
engineer, etc.).
(5) Stormwater recharge requirements or credits affect stormwater
management design requirements. For stormwater management
computations, the reduction of site CNs based only on a weighting
type analysis, as is sometimes done for cluster-type developments,
is not permitted. However, for stormwater management purposes,
the CN for recharged areas can be computed using the NRCS
method for disconnected impervious areas. The actual hydrologic
process that occurs within the basin must be stressed in all
recharge situations.
(6) These recharge requirements must be met on all sites unless it can
be demonstrated that recharge would be inappropriate. Any
request for such a waiver from these recharge requirements must
be accompanied by a supporting report certified by a qualified
professional (soil scientist, geologist, hydrogeologist, geotechnical
engineer, etc.).
(7) Developers and site design professionals are encouraged to use a
higher standard for recharge volume on sites where local site
conditions do not restrict a higher standard.
(8) Water quality sensitive (WQS) developments must use an
acceptable pretreatment BMP prior to recharge. Acceptable
pretreated BMPs for these developments include BMPs that are
based on filtering, settling, or chemical reaction processes such as
chemical coagulation.
(9) Accounting for recharge within lined stormwater management
ponds is not permitted. However, if unlined, uncompacted ponds
and/or depressed lawn areas are used to satisfy water quality or
capture volume criteria, these areas and volumes can also be used
§ 13-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-3.4
AO:535
to meet recharge requirements as previously defined. Additional
recharge volume may be credited to these areas as long as it is
demonstrated by a qualified professional that recharge processes
can naturally occur in these areas.
(10) Finally, because this analysis is concerned with trying to
adequately represent real processes that occur within the
watershed, there will be areas that cannot physically recharge
stormwater. These areas include exfiltration areas that are
commonly found at the base of wooded hillsides where clay pans
exist, and saturation areas near major streams or floodplains.
These areas may not accept recharge during most runoff events.
These areas are exempt from recharge requirements when these
conditions are documented and certified by a qualified professional
(soil scientist, geologist, hydrogeologist, or geotechnical engineer).
In addition, stormwater management techniques relying on
infiltration techniques are not permitted in these areas.
(11) The Township Engineer may waive the recharge requirement in the
following situations:
(a) The Township Engineer may waive the recharge requirement
in highly developed areas or areas undergoing redevelopment
where the Township Engineer has determined that forced
recharge could have adverse impacts on adjacent landowner
structures, property, or Township infrastructure. These
waivers should be limited to small land areas (generally less
than five acres in size), where the ability to place recharge
beds may be limited or may hinder redevelopment.
(b) The Township Engineer may waive the recharge requirement
in areas where a qualified soils scientist or geologist has
determined that none of the site soils are suitable for recharge,
or that the location of the suitable soils is such that harm to
adjoining properties could occur as stated under Subsection
C(11)(a) above.
(c) The Township Engineer may waive the recharge requirement
in areas where recharge cannot physically occur as
documented by a qualified soil scientist, geologist, or
hydrologist. These areas include:
[1] Exfiltration areas commonly found at the base of wooded
hillsides where clay pans or fragipans exist; and
[2] Saturation areas near major streams or floodplains.
(12) As identified above, recharge analysis and/or waiver requests must
be supported by a geotechnical report sealed by a qualified
professional (soil scientist, geologist, hydrogeologist, or
geotechnical engineer). The intent of this report will be to establish
the suitability of a particular parcel of land or area for recharge and
§ 13-3.4 HARRIS CODE § 13-3.4
AO:536
to identify areas on a development site appropriate for recharge. It
is recommended that the geotechnical/soils consultant discuss the
extent and approach to the analysis with the Township Engineer
prior to initiating the field investigation. At a minimum, this report
should include the following information:
(a) A description of the geotechnical site investigation performed,
including the methods and procedures used.
(b) Data presentation.
(c) Analysis results, including the following minimum information:
[1] A map identifying site areas inappropriate for recharge
along with supporting justification. In addition to
illustrating topographic features, significant geologic and
hydrologic features should be identified (rock outcrops,
sinkholes, closed depressions, etc.).
[2] Determination of the permeability coefficient for potential
recharge areas.
[3] Determination of the infiltration capacity of natural site
soils.
[4] Location, depth, and permeability coefficient for any
restrictive layers identified.
[5] Soil uniformity.
[6] Depth to bedrock in potential recharge areas, and a
statement reflecting the uniformity of the depth to bedrock
across the site.
[7] A statement relating to the site's proximity to fracture
zones within the bedrock.
[8] Additional information deemed pertinent by the
geotechnical engineer.
(d) Recommendations for any special design considerations
necessary for the design of recharge systems on the site. For
example, required soil depth over bedrock, appropriate surface
grades over recharge areas, appropriate hydraulic head over
recharge areas, etc.
(e) Justification as to why the site should be developed to a high
impervious density if the site has adverse soil and geotechnical
limitations, which prohibit the ability to induce natural
recharge. Explain how these limitations will not create the
potential for undue harm to the environment and the Spring
Creek Watershed when the site is developed.
§ 13-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-3.4
AO:537
(f) Where it has been shown that recharge cannot be performed
and a waiver of the recharge requirements is being requested,
the Township shall require that the first one inch of runoff from
all new impervious areas be treated through underdrained
facilities. These facilities may include underdrained basins,
rain gardens, and infiltration trenches. Treatment is to include
use of an amended topsoil to provide filtration of the
stormwater. All underdrain outlets are to include a restrictor
plate to prevent the underdrain system from functioning as a
primary outlet.
(13) The following guidelines are provided relative to the use of
subsurface exfiltration BMPs (often incorrectly referred to as
"engineered infiltration BMPs"):
(a) Soils should have a minimum percolation rate of 50 min/cm for
effective operation of subsurface exfiltration BMPs. If no site
soils have percolation rates of 50 min/cm, subsurface
exfiltration BMPs should not be used.
(b) A minimum of 30 inches of soil must be maintained between
the bottom of a subsurface exfiltration BMP and the top of
bedrock or seasonally high groundwater table. This statement
is subject to the recommendation of a qualified geotechnical
engineer.
(c) If the minimum percolation rate is not met and/or the minimum
soil depth cannot be maintained on a site, recharge should be
accommodated by directing shallow sheet flow from
impervious areas across surface filter strips and/or
undisturbed natural areas, or some other innovative surface
infiltration feature should be used. Limiting subsurface
percolation rates and/or depth to bedrock shall not by
themselves warrant a recharge waiver.
(14) In addition, since recharge is intended as a volume control,
innovative or new methods that address the significant increase in
the volume of runoff from sites having large impervious areas are
encouraged. These volume control alternatives can be used only if
they can be shown to function with the original intent through
sound engineering and science. The final determination of original
intent shall always be the right of the Township Engineer.
D. Storm drain conveyance system design. Storm drainage conveyance
systems consist of storm sewer pipes, swales, and open channels.
Computational methods for design of storm drain conveyance systems
shall be as follows:
(1) Recommended computational methods (models) for storm drain
design are based on site or watershed drainage area as follows:
(a) Up to 200 acres in size: Rational Method.
§ 13-3.4 HARRIS CODE § 13-3.4
AO:538
(b) Between 200 acres and 1.5 square miles in size: HEC-1; PSRM;
TR-20.
(c) Over 1.5 square miles in size: PSU-IV with the carbonate
adjustment factor at the discretion of the Township Engineer.
(d) Other methods as approved by the Township Engineer, such as
SWMM, SWIRM-ROUTE, etc.
(2) Rational coefficients.
(a) Rational coefficients used are to be from Rawls et al. (1981),
PADOT Design Manual 2-10, or using the Aron curves to
convert CNs to C. If the Aron curves are used, all CNs must be
applicable to the HSG, as identified by the NRCS.
(b) The design engineer may choose to use the following Rational
C coefficients without regard to soil HSG for small sites.
However, it is recommended that they be used only for storm
drains up to 24 inches in diameter. The use of these
conservative values shall fully be the choice of the design
engineer.
[1] All impervious areas: C = 0.95.
[2] All pervious areas: C = 0.30.
(3) Storm drains shall be designed at a minimum using a ten-year
runoff event without surcharging inlets. Storm drains tributary to a
multiple-site SWM facility across Township roads or crossing other
properties must convey, at a minimum, a twenty-five-year runoff
event without surcharging inlets. Runoff events in excess of the
indicated design event must be conveyed safely downstream.
(4) Inlets on grade cannot assume a sumped condition for hydraulic
modeling (i.e., top of inlet casting set below pavement surface in
parking areas).
(5) The Township Engineer may require the analysis of the onehundred-
year peak runoff rates for conveyance purposes in some
instances where regional SWM facilities are employed.
(6) Any storm drain within state or federal rights-of-way or that falls
under the design criteria of any higher authority must meet the
requirements of that agency in addition to the minimum
requirements of this chapter.
(7) The time of concentration (Tc) can be computed by any method
which best represents the subject watershed. However, the NRCS's
segmental method is not recommended for use with drainage areas
that are predominately undeveloped and are greater than 100
acres in size. The NRCS Lag Equation or another more appropriate
method should be used under these conditions.
§ 13-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-3.4
AO:539
(8) For any drainage area smaller than five acres in size, a Tc of five
minutes may always be assumed at the discretion of the design
engineer (for the post-development condition), without needing to
provide supporting documentation.
(9) Precipitation values applicable to the entire Spring Creek Drainage
Basin are those reflected in the PA DOT's IDF curves for Region 2,
regardless if the area was formerly considered in Region 3.
(10) Storm drain conveyance system stability (swales, open channels,
and pipe discharge aprons) shall be computed using a ten-year
return period peak runoff rate.
(11) Storm sewers, where required by zoning and land use densities,
shall be placed under or immediately adjacent to the roadway side
of the curb, or as directed by the Township, when parallel to the
street within the right-of-way.
(12) When located in undedicated land, they shall be placed within a
drainage easement not less than 20 feet wide as approved by the
Township Engineer.
(13) The use of properly designed, graded and turfed drainage swales is
encouraged in lieu of storm sewers in commercial and industrial
areas and, where approved by the Township Engineer, in
residential areas. Such swales shall be designed not only to carry
the required discharge without excessive erosion, but also to
increase the time of concentration, reduce the peak discharge and
velocity, and permit the water to percolate into the soil, where
appropriate.
(14) Inlet types and inlet assemblies.
(a) Inlet types and inlet assemblies shall conform to the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Standards for
Roadway Construction as approved by the Township Engineer.
[1] Inlets shall, at a minimum, be located at the lowest point of
street intersections to intercept the stormwater before it
reaches pedestrian crossing; or at sag points of vertical
curves in the street alignment which provide a natural
point of ponding of surface stormwater.
[2] Where the Township deems it necessary because of special
land requirements, special inlets may be approved.
[3] The interval between inlets collecting stormwater runoff
shall be determined in accordance with DM-2, Chapter 10,
Section 3, "Capacity of Roadway Hydraulic Facilities."
(b) In curbed sections, the maximum encroachment of water on
the roadway pavement shall not exceed half of a through traffic
lane or one inch less than the depth of curb during the ten-year
§ 13-3.4 HARRIS CODE § 13-3.4
AO:540
design storm of five-minute duration. Inlets shall be provided
to control the encroachment of water on the pavement. When
inlets are used in a storm system within the right-of-way limits
of a street in lieu of manholes, the spacing of such inlets shall
not exceed the maximum distance of 450 feet.
(15) Accessible drainage structures shall be located on a continuous
storm sewer system at all vertical dislocations, at all locations
where a transition in storm sewer pipe sizing is required, at all
vertical and horizontal angle points exceeding 5°, and at all points
of convergence of two or more influent storm sewer mains. The
construction locations of accessible drainage structures shall be as
indicated on the land development SWM site plan or area SWM site
plan approved by the Township.
(16) When evidence available to the Township indicates that existing
storm sewers have sufficient capacity as determined by hydrograph
summation and are accessible, the subdivider may connect their
stormwater facilities to the existing storm sewers so long as the
peak rate of discharge does not exceed the amount permitted by
this chapter.
(17) All other storm drain design methods are to be the same as
specified in existing local ordinances.
(18) Computational procedures other than those indicated here should
follow the methods of the Federal Highway Administration's Urban
Drainage Design Manual [Hydraulic Engineering Circular No 22.
(HEC-22)].
E. Water quality standards.
(1) Water quality performance standards. To minimize adverse impacts
to stream health resulting from stormwater nonpoint source (NPS)
pollution, standards are provided for the implementation of water
quality best management practices (BMPs) to reduce NPS pollutant
loadings resulting from land development activities. The following
performance standards and guidelines shall be addressed at all
sites where stormwater management is required.
(a) Site designs shall minimize the generation of stormwater
runoff through the use of low-impact design techniques.
(b) Stormwater runoff from all land development activities should
be treated through the use of nonstructural and structural
BMPs to effectively treat the adverse impacts of stormwater
runoff, including NPS pollutants.
(c) Water quality BMPs shall be incorporated into site designs to
treat the required water quality volume as defined below.
§ 13-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-3.4
AO:541
(d) The use of nonstructural BMPs shall always take priority over
the use of structural BMPs. The use of innovative BMPs and
low-impact site planning is encouraged to reduce the
generation of stormwater runoff and effectively treat
pollutants transported in stormwater from the site.
(e) The use of multiple nonstructural water quality techniques
along with new, emerging, and innovative techniques is
encouraged to improve the quality of stormwater runoff to
receiving areas and reduce and/or eliminate the need for
structural BMPs. The Township Engineer should be consulted
to clarify the design concept for meeting or exceeding the
intent of this section.
(f) Where nonstructural BMPs are unable to effectively treat all of
the stormwater runoff generated from land development
activities, structural BMPs shall be designed to capture and
treat the computed water quality volume (WQv).
(g) The priority pollutant source areas to be treated with BMPs are
streets, parking lots, driveways, and roof areas.
(h) Due to the karst nature of the watershed, stormwater
discharges from water quality sensitive developments and
discharges to sensitive wellhead protection areas (defined in
Appendix B, Exhibit 1157) will require special consideration. In
these instances, the applicant shall provide water quality
pretreatment (use of a filtering BMP and/or special structural
design features) to prevent the discharge of stormwater
contaminants to groundwater resources. In addition,
hydrogeologic studies may be required to document potential
karst-related impacts.
(i) Prior to stormwater management and water quality design,
applicants should consult with the Township Engineer to verify
stormwater quality criteria and present proposed features and
concepts for the treatment of stormwater runoff. Following this
meeting, the Township Engineer shall define any needed
support studies or documentation.
(2) Water quality volume (WQv).
(a) The required water quality volume that must be treated for
nonsensitive areas underlain by carbonate rock (see exhibits in
Appendix B158) within the Spring Creek Basin shall be
computed as:
157. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
158. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 13-3.4 HARRIS CODE § 13-3.4
AO:542
WQdepth = 0.25+(0.012)2.9(0.044(SIA))
WQv = WQdepth(A)/12
Where:
WQv = Water quality volume in acre-feet
WQdepth = Depth in inches that must be captured for
impervious areas
SIA = Percent of site impervious area (all paved
areas and roof with asphalt-based roofs)
A = Total of all paved areas and asphalt-based
roofs on site in acres
(b) The required water quality volume that must be treated for any
WQS development, on sites in sensitive areas underlain by
carbonate rock, and all areas not underlain by carbonate rock
is to be computed within the entire Spring Creek Basin as:
WQdepth = the larger of 0.5 inch or 0.25+(0.012)2.9(0.044(SIA))
WQv = WQdepth(A)/12
Where:
WQv = Water quality volume in acre-feet
WQdepth = Depth in inches that must be captured for
impervious areas
SIA = Percent of site impervious area (all paved
areas and roof with asphalt-based roofs)
A = Total of all paved areas and asphalt-based
roofs on site in acres
(c) For designs in which the final roof material is unknown, the
design engineer must assume an asphalt-based roof.
(d) The water quality volume must be captured and treated
through a water quality BMP over an extended period of time
as per the specific requirements of each structure. Credits to
reduce the effective impervious area are applicable as
presented in Chapter 4 of the stormwater management plan.
(3) Water quality credits. Due to the karst nature of the Spring Creek
Basin, the nonstructural water quality credits and techniques
identified below may be limited for suitability and use based on
development type and location. These limitations for use are
specified in the restrictions section for each credit. The Township
Engineer may require additional documentation or investigation
prior to use of each specific credit to reduce the risks of sinkhole
development or groundwater contamination for sensitive areas and
development types. No area may be double counted for use with
§ 13-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-3.4
AO:543
credits. The combined credits of natural area conservation and
vegetated filter strips is limited to 50% of the site's impervious
area. The drainageway credit is limited to 50% of the site's
impervious area. The drainageway protection credit is limited to
50% of the site's impervious area. The maximum total water quality
credit for any site may therefore be 100% of the site's impervious
area.
Nonstructural Technique Water Quality Credit
Drainageway protection
(DWP)
Subtract drainageway protection
areas from impervious site area in
WQv computation
Natural area conservation
(NAC)
Subtract conserved natural areas
from impervious site area in WQv
computation
Filter/buffer area Subtract impervious areas
discharged over pervious areas
from impervious site area in WQv
computation
(4) Drainageway protection.
(a) A water quality credit is given for the protection of natural
drainageways on a development site. Natural karst
drainageways within the Spring Creek Watershed often do not
exhibit a defined channel bed and banks. More often, these
drainageways appear as wide, shallow parabolic swales. These
drainageways are an integral part of the natural drainage
system and often exhibit significant infiltration capacity.
Protection of these drainageways is critically important to the
health of the watershed.
(b) The drainageway protection (DWP) area is defined as an area
centered on the drainageway and having a minimum width of
300 feet. The Township Engineer may modify the defined
minimum width in cases where natural landforms define an
appropriate alternate width.
(c) The impervious area used in the WQv equation for the
development site may be reduced by twice the area of the
preserved drainageway (two-to-one ratio).
[1] Restrictions on the credit.
[a] Drainageway protection areas must remain in an
undisturbed condition during and after construction
activities. There can be no construction activity within
these areas, including temporary access roads or
storage of equipment or materials. Temporary access
for the construction of utilities crossing this protection
§ 13-3.4 HARRIS CODE § 13-3.4
AO:544
area may be permitted at the Township Engineer's
discretion. However, the alignment of any such
crossing must be perpendicular to the drainageway.
[b] These areas should be placed in a conservation
easement or be permanently preserved through a
similarly enforceable agreement with the Township.
[c] The limits of the undisturbed DWP area and
conservation easement must be shown on all
construction plans.
[d] The DWP area must be located on the development
site.
[e] The maximum total DWPA credit is 100% of the site
impervious area.
[f] Water quality credits are not permitted for water
quality sensitive (WQS) developments.
[2] Sensitive area and development restrictions.
[a] DWP areas may not be counted as a credit in sensitive
areas unless the impervious area actually flows across
the area as sheet flow.
[b] Untreated urban runoff from sensitive development
types may not be directed to DWP areas without
pretreatment.
(5) Natural area conservation. A water quality credit is given for
natural areas that are conserved at the development site, thereby
maintaining predevelopment water quality characteristics. The
impervious area used in the WQv equation for the development site
may be reduced by the natural area conserved in the water quality
volume computations. Natural area conservation is different than
vegetated filter strip/recharge area and drainageway protection in
that in some cases surface runoff may never be directed over the
natural area (i.e., if upslope wooded areas are conserved).
(a) Restrictions on the credit.
[1] Natural areas must remain in an undisturbed condition
during and after construction activities. Temporary
incidental land disturbance activities associated with
utility construction may be permitted within the
conservation area.
[2] These areas should be placed in a conservation easement
or similarly enforceable agreement with the Township.
§ 13-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-3.4
AO:545
[3] The limits of the undisturbed area and conservation
easement must be shown on all construction plans.
[4] The area must be located on the development site.
[5] Water quality credits are not permitted for water quality
sensitive (WQS) developments.
[6] The maximum total NAC credit is 50% of the site
impervious area. However, the combination of NAC VFRS
is also 50%.
(b) Sensitive area and development restrictions.
[1] NAC areas may not be counted as a credit in sensitive
areas unless the impervious area actually flows across the
area as sheet flow.
[2] Untreated urban runoff from sensitive development types
may not be directed to natural areas without
pretreatment.
(6) Filter/buffer area.
(a) A water quality credit is given when stormwater runoff is
effectively treated via a filter/buffer area or strip. A filter/buffer
area is a vegetated boundary characterized by uniform mild
slopes. Filter strips may be forested or vegetated with turf
grass. Effective treatment is achieved when impervious area
runoff is directed as sheet flow across vegetative filter or buffer
areas (i.e., concentrated flow discharged to a filter strip does
not meet water quality reduction criteria).
(b) The area draining via overland sheet flow to an undisturbed,
natural, vegetated filter strip (natural unmaintained meadow
or forested area) can be subtracted from the site impervious
area (IA) on a 1:1 area ratio in the water quality volume
computation. Impervious areas draining across constructed
(disturbed or regarded) pervious areas can be subtracted from
the site impervious area (IA) on a 1:1/2 area ratio in the water
quality volume computation.
[1] Restrictions on the credit.
[a] The maximum impervious area that can be included in
this credit shall be computed as follows:
IAc = WIA LIA
Where:
IAc = Impervious area recharge credit (L2)
§ 13-3.4 HARRIS CODE § 13-3.4
AO:546
LIA = Length of impervious area measured
perpendicular to the sheet flow
direction (L)
WIA = Width of impervious area (L).
Maximum width permitted for credit is
the smaller of 100 feet or twice the
width of the vegetated filter strip
[b] To qualify for a water quality credit, natural and
constructed filter areas or strips must meet the same
restrictions identified for natural or constructed
recharge areas with regard to width, length, slope,
tributary drainage length, and construction. These
restrictions are presented in Chapter 3.
[c] Runoff shall enter the filter/buffer strip as overland
sheet flow.
[d] Filter/buffer areas shall remain undisturbed/
unmanaged other than to remove accumulated trash
and debris.
[e] Water quality credits are not permitted for water
quality sensitive (WQS) developments.
[f] The maximum total water quality credit for vegetative
filter/buffer areas is 50% of the site impervious area.
However, the combination of NAC and filter/buffer
areas is also 50%.
[2] Sensitive area and development restrictions.
[a] Untreated urban runoff from WQS developments may
not be directed to filter/buffer areas without
pretreatment.
(7) Comments related to water quality credits.
(a) Concurrence of the Township Engineer is required prior to the
use of all water quality credits for the reduction of the water
quality treatment volume. The Township Engineer may
approve the use of additional credits based upon sufficient
documentation regarding suitability for sensitive development
types and areas, pollutant removal effectiveness, and
maintenance criteria. Multiple water quality credits cannot be
claimed for the identical area of the site (i.e., a stream buffer
credit and disconnecting roof recharge area cannot both be
claimed for the same area).
(b) Additional impervious coverage reduction using low-impact
development techniques (development practices which reduce
the impact of urban runoff such as narrower residential road
§ 13-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-3.4
AO:547
§ 13-3.5. Erosion and sedimentation control requirements.
§ 13-3.6. Sinkhole protection.
The use of sinkholes for stormwater management must be carefully planned
because discharging runoff directly into existing sinkholes is not an
engineered stormwater solution. Aside from potential water quality effects,
cover collapse sinkholes that exist throughout the watershed can be
unstable, and it should be assumed that they could stop taking water at any
time. Numerous sinkholes throughout the region already flood during larger
runoff events. Nonetheless, in the watershed, there are large drainage
areas that completely drain to existing sinkholes, and all upslope
development tributary to them cannot be realistically stopped. Therefore,
the following sections have been developed:
sections, smaller culs-de-sac, smaller parking stalls, smaller
building setbacks to reduce driveway lengths, etc.) will also
reduce the required water quality treatment volume. Many
of these techniques require prior approval by the Township
before implementation into land development design.
A. Whenever the vegetation and topography are to be disturbed, such
activity must be in conformance with Chapter 102, Title 25, Rules and
Regulations, Part I, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of
Environmental Protection, Subpart C, Protection of Natural Resources,
Article II, Water Resources, Chapter 102, "Erosion and Sediment
Control," and in accordance with the Centre County Conservation
District and the standards and specifications of the appropriate
Township government.
B. Additional erosion and sedimentation control design standards and
criteria that must be or are recommended to be applied where recharge
or water quality BMPs are proposed and include the following:
(1) Areas proposed for these BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase, so as
to maintain their maximum infiltration capacity.
(2) These BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff until the
entire contributory drainage area to the BMP has received final
stabilization.
C. Adequate erosion protection shall be provided along all open channels
and at all points of discharge.
A. Stormwater from roadways, parking lots, storm sewers, roof drains, or
other concentrated runoff paths shall not be discharged directly into
sinkholes without prior filtration in accordance with Subsection B
below.
B. Sinkholes capable of absorbing substantial amounts of stormwater shall
be protected by diverting such runoff around the sinkhole (refer to
§ 13-3.4 HARRIS CODE § 13-3.6
AO:548
Subsection F) or, upon recommended approval of the Township
Engineer, by planting and maintaining a dense filter path of suitable
vegetative material in such a manner and location to disperse and slow
the runoff to a sheet flow condition to promote the maximum possible
filtration and sedimentation of impurities.
(1) The filter path must be at least 100 feet in length and 20 feet in
width. Ten-foot-wide filter paths are acceptable if land slope is less
than 2%.
(2) Filter paths shall be designed and installed so that they filter sheet
flow rather than concentrated flow. If concentrated flow occurs,
grading and shaping or the use of best management practices such
as grass waterways or drop structures may be required.
(3) Sedimentation basins designed to DEP Chapter 102159 standards or
permanent stormwater storage criteria, whichever is larger, and
proposed vegetative filter paths, in conjunction with temporary
stone filter check dams, shall be installed prior to subdivision or
land development construction activities, where sinkholes are used
to accept stormwater discharges.
C. If increased runoff is to be discharged into a sinkhole, even in filtered
conditions, a hydrogeologic assessment of the effects of such runoff on
the increased risk of land subsidence and adverse impacts to existing
sinkhole floodplains and groundwater quality shall be made by a
qualified professional and submitted with the stormwater management
site plan. Such discharge shall be prohibited if the Township Engineer
determines that such poses a hazard to life, property or groundwater
resources.
D. All sinkholes shall be posted by permanent on-site notices clearly visible
at the sinkhole prohibiting any disposal of refuse, rubbish, hazardous
wastes, organic matter or soil into the sinkhole. Rock fill may be
permitted in the sinkhole for the purpose of preventing dumping of said
materials.
E. To protect sensitive karst areas, the Township Engineer may require
basins to contain an impervious liner. The liner may be of the
impervious membrane type, placed in accordance with the
manufacturer's recommendations, or may be constructed by mixing
bentonite, or an approved alternative, with existing soil available at the
site as approved by the Township Engineer.
F. If it is determined that runoff from upslope developing areas should be
diverted around a sinkhole due to existing problems, the Township
Engineer may require additional upstream volume controls as required
to protect downstream areas.
159. Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Ch. 102.
§ 13-3.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-3.7
AO:549
§ 13-3.7. Design criteria for stormwater management facilities.
Materials, workmanship and methods. All materials, workmanship and
methods of work shall comply at a minimum with the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Form 408 Specifications, as accepted and
commonly used by the respective Township, and shall be considered to be
incorporated into this chapter as if copied in full. In the event a conflict
arises between the requirements of this chapter and the Form 408
Specifications, the Municipal Engineer shall resolve the difference, and his
opinion shall be binding.
A. General.
(1) Facilities in state rights-of-way. Any stormwater facility located on
state highway rights-of-way shall be subject to approval by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PA DOT). Any
stormwater facility that discharges directly onto state highway
rights-of-way shall be subject to review by the PA DOT.
(2) Water obstructions. Any facilities that constitute water
obstructions (e.g., culverts, bridges, outfalls, or stream
enclosures), and any work involving wetlands as directed in PA DEP
Chapter 105 regulations160 (as amended or replaced from time to
time by PA DEP), shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 105
and will require a permit from PA DEP. Any other drainage
conveyance facility that does not fall under Chapter 105
regulations must be able to convey, without damage to the drainage
structure or roadway, runoff from the twenty-five-year design storm
with a minimum of 1.0 foot of freeboard measured below the lowest
point along the top of the roadway. Roadway crossings located
within designated floodplain areas must be able to convey runoff
from a one-hundred-year design storm with a minimum of 1.0 foot
of freeboard measured below the lowest point along the top of
roadway. Any facility that constitutes a dam as defined in PA DEP
Chapter 105 regulations may require a permit under dam safety
regulations. Any facility located within a PA DOT right-of-way must
meet PA DOT minimum design standards and permit submission
requirements.
(3) Conveyance facilities. Any drainage conveyance facility and/or
channel that does not fall under Chapter 105 regulations must be
able to convey, without damage to the drainage structure or
roadway, runoff from the return period design storm as specified in
§ 13-3.4D. Conveyance facilities to or exiting from stormwater
management facilities (i.e., detention basins) shall be designed to
convey the design flow to or from that structure. Roadway
crossings located within designated floodplain areas must be able
to convey runoff from a one-hundred-year design storm. Any facility
160. Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Ch. 105.
§ 13-3.7 HARRIS CODE § 13-3.7
AO:550
located within a PA DOT right-of-way must meet PA DOT minimum
design standards and permit submission requirements.
B. Stormwater basin design considerations. Stormwater management
basins for the control of stormwater peak discharges shall meet the
following minimum requirements:
(1) The design of all facilities over limestone formations shall include
measures to prevent groundwater contamination and, where
required, sinkhole formation. Soils used for the construction of
basins shall have moderate to low erodibility factors (i.e., "K"
factors of 0.32 or less). Any basin greater than four feet in height,
measured from the top of berm to the downslope toe of the
abutment, must also contain:
(a) Berm soil specifications;
(b) A determination if site soils are available for the construction
of the berm or cutoff trench;
(c) An impervious cutoff trench, which extends the full length of
the downstream berm located in fill.
(2) Energy dissipaters and/or level spreaders shall be installed at
points where pipes or drainageways discharge to or from basins.
Generally, outlet pipes designed to carry the predevelopment, oneyear
storm flow will be permitted to discharge to a stream with only
an energy dissipater. Discharges to drainage swales shall be spread
with a level spreader or piped to an acceptable point.
(3) Outlet structures.
(a) Outlet structures within detention/retention basins shall be
constructed of reinforced concrete or an approved alternate.
With the exception of those openings designed to carry
perennial stream flows, design openings nine inches or less
shall have nonclogging trash racks, and all openings over 12
inches shall have childproof nonclogging trash racks. Outlet
aprons shall be designed and shall extend at a minimum to the
toe of the basin slope. Where spillways will be used to control
peak discharges in excess of the ten-year storm, the control
weirs shall be constructed to withstand the pressures of
impounded waters and convey flows at computed outlet
velocities without erosion.
(b) All metal risers, where approved for use, shall be suitably
coated to prevent corrosion. A trash rack or similar
appurtenance shall be provided to prevent debris from
entering the riser. All metal risers shall have a concrete base
attached with a watertight connection. The base shall be
sufficient weight to prevent flotation of the riser. An anti-vortex
§ 13-3.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-3.7
AO:551
device, consisting of a thin vertical plate normal to the basin
berm, shall be provided on the top of all metal risers.
(4) Emergency spillway.
(a) Stormwater management facilities.
[1] Any stormwater management facility (i.e., detention basin)
designed to store runoff and requiring a berm or earthen
embankment required or regulated by this chapter shall be
designed to provide an emergency spillway to handle flow
up to and including the one-hundred-year postdevelopment
conditions. The height of embankment must
be set as to provide a minimum 0.5 foot of freeboard above
the elevation required to safely pass the one-hundred-year
post-development inflow. Should any stormwater
management facility require a dam safety permit under PA
DEP Chapter 105, the facility shall be designed in
accordance with Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of
Chapter 105 concerning dam safety which may be
required to pass storms larger than a one-hundred-year
event.
[2] Any underground stormwater management facility (pipe
storage systems) must have a method to bypass flows
higher than the required design (up to a one-hundred-year
post-development inflow) without structural failure or
causing downstream harm or safety risks.
[3] Any stormwater management facility that has a paved
roadway as the lower berm should safely convey the onehundred-
year storm under the paved roadway.
(b) Emergency spillways shall be constructed of reinforced
concrete, vegetated earth, or riprap in accordance with
generally accepted engineering practices. All emergency
spillways shall be constructed so that the detention basin berm
is protected against erosion. The minimum capacity of all
emergency spillways shall be the peak flow rate from the onehundred-
year design storm. The dimensions of the emergency
spillways can be determined from the Centre County Erosion
and Sediment Control Handbook. Emergency spillways shall
extend along the upstream and downstream berm
embankment slopes. Protection should be provided on the
upstream embankment a minimum of three feet below the
spillway crest elevation. Protection at the downstream slope of
the spillway shall, as a minimum, extend to the toe of the berm
embankment. The emergency spillway shall not be located on
or discharge over uncompacted earthen fill and/or easily
erodible material.
§ 13-3.7 HARRIS CODE § 13-3.7
AO:552
(c) Rock-filled gabions may be used where combination berm and
emergency spillway structures are required to prevent
concentrated flows. The Township Engineer may require the
use of open concrete lattice blocks, stone riprap, or concrete
spillways when slopes would exceed four feet horizontal to one
foot vertical and spillway velocities might exceed Natural
Resources Conservation Service standards for the particular
soils involved.
(5) Antiseep collars. Antiseep collars shall be installed around the
principal pipe barrel within the normal saturation zone of the
detention basin berms. The antiseep collars and their connections
to the pipe barrel shall be watertight. The antiseep collars shall
extend a minimum of two feet beyond the outside of the principal
pipe barrel. The maximum spacing between collars shall be 14
times the minimum projection of the collar measured perpendicular
to the pipe.
(6) Slope of detention basin embankment. The top or toe of any slope
shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from any property line.
Whenever possible, the side slopes and basin shape shall be
amenable to the natural topography. Straight side slopes and
rectangular basins shall be avoided whenever possible.
(a) Exterior slopes of compacted soil shall not exceed three feet
horizontal to one foot vertical and may be further reduced if
the soil has unstable characteristics.
(b) Interior slopes of the basin shall not exceed three feet
horizontal to one foot vertical, except with approval of the
Township. Retaining walls will be required if a stable slope
cannot be maintained. All retaining walls shall be designed as
per the procedures outlined in the American Association of
State Highway Officials, Standard Specifications for Highway
Bridges, 1973. Details and calculations prepared and stamped
and signed by a registered professional engineer shall be
submitted to the Township Engineer for any retaining walls
greater than 4 1/2 feet in height.
(c) Where concrete, stone or brick walls are used with side slopes
proposed to be steeper than three feet horizontal to one foot
vertical, the basin shall be fenced by a permanent wire (or
other material approved by the Township) fence 42 inches in
height, and a ramp constructed of durable, nonslip material to
a grade of less than 10% for maintenance vehicles shall be
provided for access into the basin.
(7) Width of berm. The minimum top width of detention basin berms
shall be 10 feet.
(8) Slope of basin bottom. In order to ensure proper drainage of the
detention basin, a minimum grade of 2% shall be maintained for all
§ 13-3.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-3.7
AO:553
basins used exclusively for peak runoff control. Water quality or
recharge basins with filtration systems incorporated into them may
have a minimum grade of 0.5%.
(9) The lowest floor elevation of any structure constructed within 50
feet to a detention basin or other stormwater facility shall be two
feet above the detention basin berm. The distance between any
residential structure and any stormwater facility shall be a
minimum of 50 feet. The distance between any nonresidential
structure and any stormwater facility shall be a minimum of 25
feet. The Township Engineer may require fencing at the basin.
(10) Landscaping and planting specifications must be provided for all
stormwater management basins and be specific for each type of
basin.
(11) The maximum water depth shall not exceed five feet.
(12) Basin liners.
(a) Basins should be lined with impervious liners only in areas with
a high risk of sinkhole formation or potential groundwater
contamination as determined by a geotechnical engineer.
However, where a liner is deemed necessary or appropriate,
the use of controlled, compacted natural clay liners for SWM
basins should be considered. Locally available clay, when
properly installed, can provide near impervious conditions
(approximately E-6 cm/s or less). Some of the advantages of
using controlled, compacted, natural clay soil liners are:
[1] Can offer better long-term solution as a basin liner versus
geosynthetics because of greater thickness and the ability
to withstand settlement;
[2] Can be constructed to allow relatively uniform leakage
rates to facilitate groundwater recharge but not to an
excessive degree that overloads karst bedrock;
[3] When properly constructed in two or more eight- to teninch-
thick lifts, rapid movement of surface water through
the clay liner is eliminated (rapid leaks can occur in
geosynthetic lined basins due to poor seaming, punctures,
or other factors);
[4] Cleaning/maintenance of clay-lined stormwater basins will
be easier/safer versus geosynthetic liners which could
easily be damaged during maintenance operations; and
[5] The abundance of clayey soils (derived from limestone
residuum) within the Spring Creek Watershed can provide
adequate, cost-effective, soil resources for construction of
clay liner systems at most development projects.
§ 13-3.7 HARRIS CODE § 13-3.7
AO:554
(b) However, the installation of any low-permeability clay liner
system needs to be carefully controlled, and the designer
needs to ensure that specifications meet standards to ensure
integrity.
C. Construction of basins.
(1) Basins shall be installed prior to or concurrent with any
earthmoving or land disturbances which they will serve. The
phasing of their construction shall be noted in the narrative and on
the plan. Basins that include water quality or recharge components
shall have those components installed in such a manner as to not
disturb or diminish their effectiveness.
(2) Construction specifications in accordance with the minimum
criteria of the Township must be provided for all embankments
pursuant to Subsection B(1) of this section.
(3) Compaction test reports shall be kept on file at the site and be
subject to review at all times, with copies being forwarded to the
Township Engineer upon request.
(4) When rock is encountered during the excavation of a pond, it shall
be removed to an elevation of at least 12 inches below the proposed
basin floor (for a manufactured liner, 24 to 30 inches). All exposed
cracks and fissures are to be structurally filled.
(5) Temporary and permanent grasses or stabilization measures shall
be established on the sides and base of all earthen basins within 15
days of construction.
(6) A quality control program is critical for embankment fills.
Therefore, whenever embankment fill material in excess of three
feet is to be used, each layer of compacted fill shall be tested to
determine its density per ASTM 2922 or ASTM 3017. The density of
each layer shall be 98% of a standard proctor density analysis per
ASTM 698.
D. Construction inspection. Inspections may be conducted by the
Township Engineer during the construction of the stormwater
management basin and facilities. Such inspections do not constitute
approval of construction methods or materials. The design professional
shall perform site inspections as may be necessary to ensure that all
stormwater management facilities are constructed in accordance with
the approved plans.
E. Special use basins.
(1) The design and construction of multiple-use stormwater detention
facilities are strongly encouraged. In addition to stormwater
management, facilities should, where appropriate, allow for
recreational uses, including ball fields, play areas, picnic grounds,
§ 13-3.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-3.7
AO:555
§ 13-3.8. Easements.
Stormwater management facilities located outside of existing or proposed
rights-of-way shall be located within and accessible by easements as
follows:
etc. Provision for permanent wet ponds with stormwater
management capabilities may also be appropriate. Prior approval
and consultation with the Township are required before design.
Multiple-use basins should be constructed so that potentially
dangerous conditions are not created. Water quality basins or
recharge basins that are designed for a slow release of water or
other extended detention ponds are not permitted for recreational
uses, unless the ponded areas are clearly separated and secure.
(2) Multiple development basins. Stormwater management facilities
designed to serve more than one property or development in the
same watershed are encouraged. Staged construction of existing or
proposed multiple-use detention facilities by several developers in
conjunction with watershed development is encouraged. Each
developer shall be responsible for the incremental increase in
runoff generated by the respective development and incremental
construction improvements necessary for the overall detention
facility. Prior approval and consultation with the Township is
required before design of such facilities.
(3) Alternative detention facilities. Alternative stormwater detention
facilities, including rooftop, subsurface basins or tanks and in-pipe
detention storage, or other approved alternative designs are
permitted as determined by the Township Engineer.
A. Drainage easements. Where a tract is traversed by a watercourse,
drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a drainage
easement paralleling the line of such watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream. The width of the drainage easement will be
adequate to preserve the unimpeded flow of natural drainage in the
one-hundred-year floodplain, in accordance with computed top widths
for water surface elevations determined under § 13-3.4A(2) of this
chapter.
B. Access easements. Where proposed stormwater management facilities
are not adjacent to proposed or existing public rights-of-way or are not
accessible due to physical constraints, as determined by the Township
Engineer, a twenty-foot-wide passable access easement specifying
rights of entry shall be provided. Access easements shall provide for
vehicle ingress and egress on grades of less than 10% for carrying out
inspection or maintenance activities.
C. Maintenance easements. A maintenance easement shall be provided
which encompasses the stormwater facility and appurtenances and
provides for access for maintenance purposes. The maintenance
§ 13-3.7 HARRIS CODE § 13-3.8
AO:556
§ 13-3.9. Prohibited discharges and connections.
Nonstormwater discharges are to be regulated as noted below. In general,
nonstormwater discharges are prohibited from entering any portion of
the municipal separate storm sewer system or any waters of the
commonwealth, except as noted below:
easement must be located outside of the one-hundred-year surface
elevation and the stormwater facility and appurtenances.
D. Easements shall stipulate that no trees, shrubs, structures, excavation
or fill be placed and no regrading be performed within the area of the
easement without written approval from the Township upon review by
the Township Engineer. Upon approval of the Township Engineer, such
landscaping may be placed in maintenance easements, provided it does
not impede access.
E. Whenever practicable, easements shall be parallel with and conjunctive
to property lines of the subdivision.
F. All easement agreements shall be recorded with a reference to the
recorded easement indicated on the site plan. The format and content
of the easement agreement shall be reviewed and approved by the
Township Engineer and Solicitor. (See § 13-7.4.)
G. When stormwater conveyance pipes or channels are located in
undedicated land, they shall be placed within a drainage easement not
less than 20 feet wide as approved by the Township Engineer.
A. Prohibited discharges.
(1) No person in the Township shall allow, or cause to allow,
stormwater discharges into the Township's storm sewer system
which are not composed entirely of stormwater, except as provided
in Subsection A(2) below and discharges allowed under a state or
federal permit.
(2) Discharges that may be allowed, based on a finding by the
Township, as determined by the Township Engineer, that the
discharge(s) do not significantly contribute to pollution of surface
waters of the commonwealth, are:
(a) Discharges from firefighting activities.
(b) Potable water sources, including dechlorinated waterline and
fire hydrant flushings.
(c) Irrigation drainage.
(d) Routine external building washdown (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
(e) Air-conditioning condensate.
§ 13-3.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-3.9
AO:557
(f) Water from individual residential car washing.
(g) Springs.
(h) Water from crawl space pumps.
(i) Uncontaminated water from foundation or from footing drains.
(j) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(k) Lawn watering.
(l) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or
hazardous materials have not occurred (unless all spill
material has been removed) and where detergents are not
used.
(m) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(n) Uncontaminated groundwater.
(o) Diverted stream flow.
(p) Uncontaminated pumped groundwater.
(3) In the event that the Township determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection A(2) above significantly
contribute to pollution of waters of the commonwealth, or is so
notified by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection (PA DEP), the Township will notify the responsible
person to cease the discharge.
(4) Upon notice provided by the Township under Subsection A(3)
above, the discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined
by the Township, to cease the discharge consistent with the degree
of pollution caused by the discharge.
(5) Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities
under state law.
B. Prohibited connections. The following connections are prohibited,
except as provided in Subsection A(2) above:
(1) Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
which allows any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage,
process wastewater, and wash water, to enter the storm sewer
system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor
drains and sinks.
(2) Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or
industrial land use to the storm sewer system which has not been
documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by
the Township.
§ 13-3.9 HARRIS CODE § 13-3.9
AO:558
ARTICLE IV
SWM Site Plan Requirements
§ 13-4.1. General requirements.
§ 13-4.2. Plan contents.
The SWM site plan shall consist of all applicable calculations, maps, and
plans. A note on the maps shall refer to the associated computations and
erosion and sediment pollution control plan by title and date. The cover
sheet of the computations and erosion and sediment pollution control plan
shall refer to the associated maps by title and date. All SWM site plan
materials shall be submitted to the Township in a format that is clear,
concise, legible, neat, and well organized; otherwise, the SWM site plan
shall be disapproved and returned to the applicant. Said plan shall be
prepared by a registered professional land surveyor, qualified geologist,
landscape architect, architect, or engineer licensed in the State of
A. From and after the date of enactment of this chapter, a stormwater
management site plan and other information specified herein shall be
submitted to the Township for all lands subdivided or for which land
development plans are prepared after the enactment of this chapter. A
stormwater management site plan and other information specified
herein shall be submitted at the same time and together with
submission of a preliminary subdivision or land development plan,
along with a completed checklist supplied by the Township indicating
the items contained within the submission.
B. Such plans and information shall be considered part of said zoning and
subdivision documents and shall be reviewed in accordance with
procedures established thereunder. Preliminary approval or final
approval of a subdivision or land development plan, or the issuance of a
zoning permit, shall be contingent upon submission of a stormwater
management site plan and other materials specified herein, and
approval of the stormwater management site plan in accordance with
provisions of this chapter.
C. All stormwater management site plans shall be submitted to the
Township Engineer for review and comment. Such review shall include
a statement by the Township Engineer specifying the provisions of this
chapter which have not been met by the plan as submitted.
D. Once a stormwater management site plan has been approved together
with a subdivision or land development plan approval, or together with
the issuance of a zoning permit, said stormwater management site plan
shall be valid only for the subdivision, land development, or zoning
permit approved. Any further development on the lot or lots requiring a
revision of the approved plan or other construction or activities as
defined by Chapter 12, Zoning, of the Code of the Township of Harris
shall require the submission of a new, amended, or revised stormwater
management site plan and other information specified herein.
§ 13-4.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-4.2
AO:559
Pennsylvania, with said preparer's seal and registration number affixed to
the plan. The following items shall be included in the SWM site plan:
A. Stormwater management report:
(1) General description of project.
(2) General description of permanent stormwater management
techniques, including construction specifications and materials to
be used for stormwater management facilities.
(3) Complete hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural computations for all
stormwater management facilities.
(4) A written maintenance plan for all stormwater features, including
detention facilities and other stormwater management elements.
(5) Identification of ownership and maintenance responsibility for all
permanent stormwater management facilities.
(6) Required information.
(a) The stormwater management report must include a narrative
which clearly discusses the project and summary tables which,
at a minimum, provide the following information:
[1] Narrative:
[a] The overall stormwater management concept.
[b] The expected project schedule.
[c] Location map.
[d] Total site area, pre and post, which must be equal or
have an explanation as to why it is not.
[e] Total site impervious area.
[f] Total off-site areas.
[g] Number of stormwater management facilities (ponds),
if applicable.
[h] Type of development.
[i] Predevelopment land use.
[j] Whether site is underlain by carbonate geology.
[k] Whether site is a water quality sensitive (WQS)
development.
[l] Whether site is in a defined sensitive area.
§ 13-4.2 HARRIS CODE § 13-4.2
AO:560
[m] Types of water quality and recharge systems used, if
applicable.
[n] Other pertinent information, as required.
[2] Summary tables:
[a] Predevelopment:
[i] Hydrologic soil group (HSG) assumptions, curve
numbers (CN).
[ii] Computation of average slope, hydraulic length,
computed time of concentration.
[iii] Required peak rate of runoff.
[b] Post-development:
[i] Undetained areas, areas to ponds.
[ii] Land use for each subarea.
[iii] Hydrologic soil group (HSG) assumptions, curve
numbers (CN).
[iv] Time of concentration computed for each
subarea.
[v] Post-development peak rate of runoff routed to
ponds and out.
[vi] Pond maximum return period design data,
including: maximum water surface elevation,
berm elevation, and emergency spillway
elevation.
[vii]Water quality depth and volume requirements.
[viii] Recharge volume requirements.
[ix] Morphology requirements.
[x] Capture volumes required.
(b) Reports that do not clearly indicate the above information may
be rejected for review by the Township's Engineer or
representative and will be returned to the applicant.
B. Plans for tracts of less than 20 acres shall be drawn at a scale of one
inch equals no more than 50 feet; for tracts of 20 acres or more, plans
shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals no more than 100 feet.
Plans shall be submitted on the following sheet sizes: 18 feet by 24
inches, 24 inches by 36 inches, or 36 inches by 42 inches. All lettering
shall be drawn to a size to be legible if the plans are reduced to half
§ 13-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-4.2
AO:561
size. All sheets comprising a submission shall be on one size. The
following information, unless specifically exempted in writing by the
Township Engineer, must be shown on the plans, prepared in a form
which meets the requirements for recording in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Centre County, Pennsylvania. The contents of the
map(s) shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) The name of the development, the name and address of the owner
of the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing
the plan.
(2) The date of submission and revision.
(3) The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities or
other identifiable landmarks.
(4) Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(5) Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other bodies of water within the
project area.
(6) Other physical features, including flood hazard boundaries,
sinkholes, closed depressions, wetlands, streams, existing
drainagecourses, areas of natural vegetation to be preserved, and
the total extent of the upstream area draining through the site. In
addition, any areas necessary to determine downstream impacts,
where required for proposed stormwater management facilities,
must be shown.
(7) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary sewers,
and waterlines within 20 feet of property lines.
(8) An overlay showing soil names and boundaries, including rock
outcrops.
(9) Total area of impervious surfaces proposed.
(10) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings.
(11) Final contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(12) A graphic and written scale.
(13) A North arrow.
(14) The total tract boundary and size with distances marked to the
nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.
(15) Existing and proposed land use(s).
(16) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that would be affected by the project and the
§ 13-4.2 HARRIS CODE § 13-4.2
AO:562
extent of the watershed or subarea that drains through the project
site.
(17) Horizontal and vertical profiles of all open channels, including
hydraulic capacity.
(18) Overland drainage paths.
(19) Access easements around all stormwater management facilities
that would provide ingress to and egress from a public right-of-way.
(20) A note on the plan indicating the location and responsibility for
maintenance of stormwater management facilities that would be
located off site. All off-site facilities shall meet the performance
standards and design criteria specified in this chapter.
(21) A construction detail of any improvements made to sinkholes and
the location of all notes to be posted, as specified in this chapter.
(22) Complete drainage systems for the site, including details for
construction. All existing drainage features, which are to be
incorporated in the design, shall be so identified. If the site is to be
developed in stages, a general SWM site plan for the entire site
shall be presented with the first stage, and appropriate
development stages for the drainage system shall be indicated.
(23) Location and selected plan material used for vegetative filter paths
to sinkholes, and the location of all notices to be posted.
(24) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging the
stormwater management system to be a permanent fixture that can
be altered or removed only after approval of a revised plan by the
Township.
(25) A note indicating that as-built drawings will be provided by the
developer for all stormwater facilities prior to occupancy or the
release of the surety bond.
(26) The following signature block for the registered professional
preparing the stormwater management site plan:
"I, _________________________, hereby certify that the stormwater
management site plan meets all design standards and criteria of
the Harris Township Stormwater Management Ordinance."
(27) The following signature block for the Township Engineer reviewing
the stormwater management site plan:
"I, _________________________, have reviewed this stormwater
management site plan in accordance with the design standards
and criteria of the Harris Township Stormwater Management
Ordinance.
§ 13-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-4.2
AO:563
(28) The location of all erosion and sedimentation control facilities.
C. Supplemental information:
(1) A soil erosion and sediment pollution control plan, where
applicable, including all reviews and approvals, as required by PA
DEP.
(2) Soils investigation report, including boring logs, compaction
requirements, and recommendations for construction of detention
basins.
(3) Karst features identification and analysis reports and a
hydrogeologic assessment of the effects of runoff on sinkholes.
(4) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes and peak flows)
on adjacent properties and on any existing municipal stormwater
collection system that may receive runoff from the project site.
(5) A declaration of adequacy and highway occupancy permit from the
PA DOT district office when utilization of a PA DOT storm drainage
system is proposed.
(6) All permits required by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and Army Corps of Engineers and other
regulatory agencies.
D. Stormwater management facilities.
(1) All stormwater management facilities must be located on a plan
and described in detail.
(2) When groundwater recharge methods such as seepage pits, beds or
trenches are used, the locations of existing and proposed septic
tank infiltration areas and wells must be shown.
(3) All calculations, assumptions, and criteria used in the design of the
stormwater management facilities must be shown.
(a) A sketch of the berm embankment and outlet structure
indicating the embankment top elevation, embankment side
slopes, top width of embankment, emergency spillway
elevation, perforated riser dimensions, pipe barrel dimensions
and dimensions and spacing of antiseep collars.
(b) Design computations for the pipe barrel and riser.
(c) A plot or table of the stage-storage (acre-feet vs. elevation) and
all supporting computations.
(d) Flood routing computations.
(e) A detailed plan of the trash rack and anti-vortex device.
§ 13-4.2 HARRIS CODE § 13-4.2
AO:564
§ 13-4.3. Plan submission.
For all activities regulated by this chapter, the steps below shall be followed
for submission. For any activities that require a PA DEP joint permit
application and regulated under Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and Waterway
Management) or Chapter 106 (Floodplain Management) of PA DEP's Rules
and Regulations,161 require a PA DOT highway occupancy permit, or require
any other permit under applicable state or federal regulations, the permit(s)
shall be part of the plan.
§ 13-4.4. Plan review.
(4) Record set (as-built) plans. At the completion of the project, and as
a prerequisite for the release of the guarantee or issuance of an
occupancy permit, the owner or his representative shall:
(a) Provide certification of completion from a registered
professional verifying that all permanent facilities have been
constructed according to the plans and specifications and
approved revisions thereto; and
(b) Provide a set of approved stormwater management site plan
drawings showing all approved revisions and elevations and
inverts to all manholes, inlets, pipes, and stormwater control
facilities.
A. The SWM site plan shall be submitted by the developer as part of the
preliminary plan submission for the regulated activity.
B. Four copies of the SWM site plan and stormwater management report
shall be submitted.
C. Distribution of the SWM site plan will be as follows:
(1) Two copies to the Township accompanied by the requisite
municipal review fee, as specified in this chapter.
(2) One copy to the Township Engineer.
(3) One copy to the County Planning Commission/Department.
A. The Township Engineer shall review the SWM site plan for consistency
with the adopted Spring Creek Watershed Act 167 Stormwater
Management Plan. The Township shall require receipt of a complete
plan, as specified in this chapter.
B. The Township Engineer shall review the SWM site plan for any
submission or land development against the provisions of Chapter 11,
Subdivision and Land Development, not superseded by this chapter.
161. Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Chs. 105 and 106.
§ 13-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-4.4
AO:565
C. For activities regulated by this chapter, the Township Engineer shall
notify the Township, in writing, within 30 calendar days, whether the
SWM site plan is consistent with the stormwater management plan.
Should the SWM site plan be determined to be consistent with the
stormwater management plan, the Township Engineer will forward an
approval letter to the developer with a copy to the Township Secretary.
D. Should the SWM site plan be determined to be inconsistent with the
stormwater management plan, the Township Engineer will forward a
disapproval letter to the developer with a copy to the Township citing
the reason(s) for the disapproval. Any disapproved SWM site plans may
be revised by the developer and resubmitted consistent with this
chapter.
E. For regulated activities specified in § 13-1.4 of this chapter, the
Township Engineer shall notify the Township Zoning Officer, in writing,
within a time frame consistent with the Township Code and/or Chapter
11, Subdivision and Land Development, whether the SWM site plan is
consistent with the stormwater management plan and forward a copy of
the approval/disapproval letter to the developer. Any disapproved SWM
site plan may be revised by the developer and resubmitted consistent
with this chapter.
F. For regulated activities requiring a PA DEP joint permit application, the
Township Engineer shall notify PA DEP whether the SWM site plan is
consistent with the stormwater management plan and forward a copy of
the review letter to the Township and the developer. PA DEP may
consider the Township Engineer's review comments in determining
whether to issue a permit.
G. The Township shall not approve any subdivision or land development
for regulated activities specified in § 13-1.4 of this chapter if the SWM
site plan has been found to be inconsistent with the stormwater
management plan, as determined by the Township Engineer. All
required permits from PA DEP must be obtained prior to approval.
H. The Township Zoning Officer shall not issue a zoning permit for any
regulated activity specified in § 13-1.4 of this chapter if the SWM site
plan has been found to be inconsistent with the stormwater
management plan, as determined by the Township Engineer, or without
considering the comments of the Township Engineer. All required
permits from PA DEP must be obtained prior to issuance of a building
permit.
I. The developer shall be responsible for completing an as-built survey of
all stormwater management facilities included in the approved SWM
site plan. The as-built survey and an explanation of any discrepancies
with the design plans shall be submitted to the Township Engineer for
final approval. In no case shall the Township approve the as-built survey
until the Township receives a copy of an approved declaration of
§ 13-4.4 HARRIS CODE § 13-4.4
AO:566
§ 13-4.5. Modification of plans.
§ 13-4.6. Resubmission of disapproved plans.
A disapproved SWM site plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions
addressing the Township Engineer's concerns documented in writing, to
the Township Engineer in accordance with § 13-4.3 of this chapter and be
subject to review as specified in § 13-4.4 of this chapter. The applicable
Township review fee must accompany a resubmission of a disapproved
SWM site plan.
adequacy, highway occupancy permit from the PA DOT district office,
and any applicable permits from PA DEP.
J. The Township's approval of a SWM site plan shall be valid for a period
not to exceed five years. This five-year time period shall commence on
the date that the Township signs the approved SWM site plan. If
stormwater management facilities included in the approved SWM site
plan have not been constructed, or if an as-built survey of these
facilities has not been approved within this five-year time period, then
the Township may consider the SWM site plan disapproved and may
revoke any and all permits. SWM site plans that are considered
disapproved by the Township shall be resubmitted in accordance with
§ 13-4.6 of this chapter.
A. A modification to a submitted SWM site plan for a development site that
involves a change in stormwater management facilities or techniques,
or that involves the relocation or redesign of stormwater management
facilities, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as
stated on the SWM site plan as determined by the Township Engineer,
shall require a resubmission of the modified SWM site plan consistent
with § 13-4.3 of this chapter and be subject to review as specified in
§ 13-4.4 of this chapter.
B. A modification to an already approved or disapproved SWM site plan
shall be submitted to the Township, accompanied by the applicable
review fee. A modification to a SWM site plan for which a formal action
has not been taken by the Township shall be submitted to the Township,
accompanied by the applicable Township review fee.
§ 13-4.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-4.6
AO:567

ARTICLE V
Inspections
§ 13-5.1. Schedule of inspections.
A. The Township Engineer or his Township assignee shall inspect all
phases of the installation of the permanent stormwater management
facilities.
B. During any stage of the work, if the Township Engineer determines that
the permanent stormwater management facilities are not being
installed in accordance with the approved stormwater management site
plan, the Township shall revoke any existing permits until a revised
SWM site plan is submitted and approved, as specified in this chapter.
§ 13-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-5.1
AO:569

ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses
§ 13-6.1. Required fees.
The fees required by this chapter are the Township review fees. The
Township review fees shall be established by the Township to defray review
costs incurred by the Township and the Township Engineer. All fees shall be
paid by the applicant.
§ 13-6.2. Fee schedule.
The Township shall establish a review fee schedule by resolution of the
Township governing body based on the size of the regulated activity and
based on the Township's costs for reviewing SWM site plans. The Township
shall periodically update the review fee schedule to ensure that review costs
are adequately reimbursed.
§ 13-6.3. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required by this chapter shall, at a minimum, cover:
A. Administrative costs.
B. The review of the SWM site plan by the Township and the Township
Engineer.
C. The site inspections.
D. The inspection of stormwater management facilities and drainage
improvements during construction.
E. The final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management
facilities and drainage improvements presented in the SWM site plan.
F. Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this chapter, correct violations, and assure proper
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
G. Meetings.
§ 13-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-6.3
AO:571

ARTICLE VII
Operation and Maintenance Requirements
§ 13-7.1. Stormwater management controls and facilities.
Stormwater management controls and facilities as defined herein include
all structural and nonstructural stormwater conveyance and management
controls, including water quantity and quality best management practices.
§ 13-7.2. Performance guarantee.
The applicant should provide a financial guarantee to the Township for the
timely installation and proper construction of all stormwater management
controls as required by the approved stormwater plan and this chapter
equal to the full construction cost of the required controls.
§ 13-7.3. Maintenance responsibilities.
A. The SWM site plan for the development site shall contain an operation
and maintenance plan prepared by the developer and approved by the
Township Engineer. The operation and maintenance plan shall outline
required routine maintenance actions and schedules necessary to
ensure proper operation and function of the facility(ies).
B. The responsible party or entity responsible for the maintenance must
also be identified. The SWM site plan for the development site shall
establish responsibilities for the continuing operation and maintenance
of all proposed stormwater control facilities and temporary permanent
erosion control facilities, consistent with the following principles:
(1) If a development consists of structures or lots that are to be
separately owned and in which streets, sewers and other public
improvements are to be dedicated to the Township, stormwater
control facilities may also be dedicated to and maintained by the
Township.
(2) If a development site is to be maintained in a single ownership or if
sewers and other public improvements are to be privately owned
and maintained, then the ownership and maintenance of
stormwater control facilities shall be the responsibility of the owner
or private management entity.
(3) Facilities may be incorporated within individual lots so that the
respective lot owners will own and be responsible for maintenance
in accordance with recorded deed restrictions. A description of the
facility or system and the terms of the required maintenance shall
be incorporated as part of the deed to the property.
(4) Ownership and maintenance may be the responsibility of a
property owners' association. The stated responsibilities of the
property owners' association in terms of owning and maintaining
the stormwater management facilities shall be submitted with final
§ 13-7.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-7.3
AO:573
§ 13-7.4. Declaration of stormwater access and maintenance
easement for privately owned stormwater facilities.
Prior to final approval of the stormwater management site plan, the
property owner shall sign and record a declaration of stormwater access
and maintenance easement (DSAME) covering all stormwater control
facilities that are to be privately owned. The DSAME shall contain the
following elements:
plans for determination of their adequacy, and upon their approval
shall be recorded with the approved subdivision plan among the
deed records of Centre County, Pennsylvania. In addition, the
approved subdivision plan and any deed written from said plan for
a lot or lots shown herein shall contain a condition that it shall be
mandatory for the owner or owners of said lot to be members of
said property owners' association.
(5) For stormwater management facilities that are proposed as part of
the site development plan, the developer will be required to
execute a developer agreement and a maintenance agreement with
the Township for the construction and continued maintenance of
the facilities prior to the signature approval on the final plan.
Access for inspection by the Township of all such facilities deemed
critical to the public welfare at any reasonable time shall be
provided.
C. The governing body, upon recommendation of the Township Engineer,
shall make the final determination on the continuing maintenance
responsibilities prior to final approval of the stormwater management
site plan. The governing body reserves the right to accept the
ownership and operating responsibility for any or all of the stormwater
management controls.
A. Name and address of the property owner.
B. Name of land development for which the DSAME is required.
C. Statement noting that, as a condition of approval, a DSAME is required.
D. Statement noting that the DSAME shall run in perpetuity with the land.
E. Statement that the property owner create an easement for the purpose
of access to the stormwater facilities for ingress, egress, and regress.
F. Metes and bounds description of the stormwater access and
maintenance easement.
G. Statement that heirs and assigns of the owner, by accepting a deed from
the owner, agree to be subject to the conditions of the DSAME.
H. Statement that the stormwater easement shall be a permanent
easement and that the stormwater management facilities located within
the easement will be maintained by the owner, their heirs and assigns
§ 13-7.3 HARRIS CODE § 13-7.4
AO:574
§ 13-7.5. Post-construction maintenance inspections.
and shall be responsible for repairs as may be required in accordance
with the approved stormwater easement maintenance plan.
I. The creation of the stormwater easement shall be deemed an
agreement by the owner to maintain the stormwater management
facilities, with all costs of maintenance to be the responsibility of the
owner. The agreement shall also state that no alteration of the facilities
is permitted without formal plan approval by DEP, the Centre County
Conservation District and the Township.
J. Statement noting that no structures are permitted within the easement
and that no grading that will adversely impact the function of
stormwater facilities within the easement.
K. A statement noting that no barriers, fences or other obstructions that
may impede stormwater flow are permitted.
L. A statement noting that the owner will be responsible for maintenance
of the easement, including mowing and annual upkeep.
M. Statement noting that in case any provisions contained in this DSAME
are for any reason declared invalid, that such invalidity shall not affect
any other provision hereof.
N. Statement that the owner, their heirs, successors, and assigns agree to
indemnify and hold harmless the Township, Centre County, and the
Township Engineer from any and all claims, costs, damages, and
expenses legally and reasonably incurred as a result of this DSAME and
the easements hereby created.
O. Statement noting the following: "The owner hereby acknowledges the
Township's right to access the stormwater easements to inspect the
stormwater management facilities. The owner also acknowledges the
Township's right, upon notice to the owner, to repair and/or maintain
the stormwater facilities in accordance with the stormwater access and
maintenance plan. All costs, including materials, labor, engineering,
and legal costs, of such repair or maintenance activities shall be the
sole responsibility of the owner." In the event of nonpayment by the
owner, the Township shall seek legal options for receipt of payment,
including placement of a municipal lien on the property.
A. Stormwater facilities should be inspected by the landowner/developer
or responsible entity (including the Township Engineer for dedicated
facilities) on the following basis:
(1) Annually.
(2) During or immediately after every ten-year or greater storm event.
§ 13-7.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-7.5
AO:575
B. The entity conducting the inspection should be required to submit a
report to the Township regarding the condition of the facility and
recommending necessary repairs, if needed.
C. Maintenance inspections may be performed by the Township to ensure
proper functioning of all stormwater facilities. These inspections may,
at a minimum, be performed annually and/or following major storm
events. If the Township determines at any time that any permanent
stormwater facility has been eliminated, altered or improperly
maintained, the owner of the property shall be advised of corrective
measures required and given three days to initiate appropriate action in
accordance with a time schedule dictated by the Township. If such
action is not taken by the property owner, the Township may cause the
work to be done and backcharge all costs to the property owners.
§ 13-7.5 HARRIS CODE § 13-7.5
AO:576
ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 13-8.1. Right of entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized representatives of
the Township may enter, at reasonable times, upon any property within the
Township to inspect the condition of the stormwater structures and facilities
in regard to any aspect regulated by this chapter.
§ 13-8.2. Notice of violation.
§ 13-8.3. Enforcement.
The Township governing body is hereby authorized and directed to enforce
all of the provisions of this chapter. All inspections regarding compliance
with the SWM site plan and the recorded declaration of stormwater access
easement shall be the responsibility of the Township Engineer or other
qualified persons designated by the Township. Inspection frequency will be
as deemed necessary by the Township Engineer and will be based on past
performance of the facility, compliance history of the owner of the facility
with inspection and maintenance requirements, and weather conditions.
A. In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter, or fails to conform to the requirements of any permit issued
hereunder, the Township shall provide written notification of the
violation. The notice will direct the responsible party to comply with all
the terms of this chapter within seven days or such additional period,
not to exceed 30 days, as the designated Township representative shall
deem reasonable. In addition, the designated Township representative
shall give notice to the owner, applicant, developer, property manager
or other person responsible for the property or the violation that if the
violation is not corrected, the Township may correct the same and
charge the landowner or other person responsible the cost thereof, plus
penalties as specified herein for failure to comply.
B. Such notice may be delivered by the United States mail, first class,
postage prepaid, or by certified or registered mail; or by personal
service; or if the property is occupied, by posting the notice at a
conspicuous place upon the affected property.
C. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of these violation(s). Failure to
comply within the time specified shall subject such person to the
penalty provision of this chapter. All such penalties shall be deemed
cumulative and shall not prevent the Township from pursuing any and
all other remedies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the real
property on which any regulated activity is proposed to occur, is
occurring, or has occurred to comply with the terms and conditions of
this chapter.
§ 13-8.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-8.3
AO:577
A. A set of design plans approved by the Township shall be on file at the
site throughout the duration of the construction activity. Periodic
inspections may be made by the Township or designee during
construction.
B. Adherence to approved plan. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to undertake any regulated activity under § 13-1.4 on any
property except as provided for in the approved SWM site plan and
pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to
alter or remove any control structure required by the SWM site plan
pursuant to this chapter or to allow the property to remain in a
condition which does not conform to the approved SWM site plan.
C. At the completion of the project, and as a prerequisite for the release of
the performance guarantee, the owner or his representatives shall:
(1) Provide a certification of completion from an engineer, architect,
surveyor or other qualified person verifying that all permanent
facilities have been constructed according to the plans and
specifications and approved revisions thereto.
(2) Provide a set of as-built drawings.
D. After receipt of the certification by the Township, a final inspection shall
be conducted by the governing body or its designee to certify
compliance with this chapter.
E. Prior to revocation or suspension of a permit, the governing body will
schedule a hearing to discuss the noncompliance if there is no
immediate danger to life, public health or property.
F. Suspension and revocation of approvals.
(1) Any approval issued under this chapter may be suspended or
revoked by the governing body for:
(a) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of
the approval.
(b) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other
applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the
project.
(c) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act
during construction or development which constitutes or
creates a hazard or nuisance, pollution or which endangers the
life or property of others, or as outlined in this article.
(2) A suspended approval shall be reinstated by the governing body
when:
(a) The Township Engineer or his designee has inspected and
approved the corrections to the stormwater management and
§ 13-8.3 HARRIS CODE § 13-8.3
AO:578
§ 13-8.4. Public nuisance.
§ 13-8.5. Violations and penalties.
§ 13-8.6. Appeals.
erosion and sediment pollution control measure(s), or the
elimination of the hazard or nuisance;
(b) The governing body is satisfied that the violation of the
ordinance, law, or rule and regulation has been corrected.
(3) An approval that has been revoked by the governing body cannot
be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under
the procedures outlined in this chapter.
G. Occupancy permit. An occupancy permit shall not be issued until all
stormwater issues have been addressed to the Township's satisfaction.
The occupancy permit shall be required for each lot owner and/or
developer for all subdivisions and land development in the Township.
A. The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $1,000 for each violation and recoverable with costs. Each
day that the violation continues shall be a separate offense.
B. In addition, the Township, through its Solicitor, may institute injunctive,
mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in
equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent
jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary
or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate forms of
remedy or relief.
C. The cost of removal, fines and penalties hereinabove mentioned may be
entered by the Township as a lien against such property, or properties
of individual members of a property owners' association, in accordance
with the existing provisions of the law.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Township or its designee,
relevant to the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the Township
Zoning Hearing Board within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Township Zoning Hearing
Board, relevant to the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the
County Court of Common Pleas in the county where the activity has
taken place within 30 days of the Zoning Hearing Board's decision.
§ 13-8.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-8.6
AO:579
DISPOSITION LIST
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
265 12-11-2006 Centre Region Growth
Boundary/Sewer Service Area
Implementation Agreement
NCM
266 12-11-2006 Agreement for Regional
Emergency Management
Program
NCM
267 Not adopted
268 Not adopted
269 7-9-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 8
270 7-9-2007 Street vacation NCM
271 8-13-2007 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 11
272 9-10-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 8
273 8-13-2007 Agreement for Spring Creek
Watershed Commission
NCM
274 11-13-2007 Sewers: on-lot sewage
disposal facilities amendment
Ch. 9, Art. IV
275 Not adopted
276 NCM
277 3-26-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 12
278 8-11-2008 Cable television NCM
279 11-10-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 12
280 11-24-2008 Local services tax Ch. 2, Art. III
281 12-8-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 12
282 12-8-2008 Administration and
government: Official Map
Ch. 1, Art. IV
283 2-9-2009 Centre Region Council of
Governments
NCM
284 4-13-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 12
§ 13-8.6 HARRIS CODE § DL-1
AO:580
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
285 7-13-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 8
286 Not adopted
287 12-14-2009 Health and safety: solid waste
amendment; recycling
amendment
Ch. 5, Arts. IX and
X
288 10-11-2010 Construction codes: property
maintenance and fire code
Ch. 10, Art. III
289 8-9-2010 Joint Articles of Agreement
for Hess Field Complex
NCM
290 10-11-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 8
291 1-3-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 8
292 4-11-2011 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 11
293 4-25-2011 Lease rental debt NCM
294 6-13-2011 Health and safety: park rules
and regulations amendment
Ch. 5, Art. VIII
295 7-11-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 12
296 10-10-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 12
297 2-13-2012 Public safety and conduct:
chickens
Ch. 6, Art. II
298 10-10-2011 Construction codes: uniform
construction code
Ch. 10, Art. II
299 Not adopted
300 11-14-2011 Taxation: earned income and
net profits tax
Ch. 2, Art. I
301 4-9-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 12
302 4-9-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 12
303 6-11-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 12
304 7-9-2012 Referendum vote NCM
305 12-10-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 12
306 10-8-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 8
307 9-24-2012 Lease rental debt NCM
308 11-12-2012 Intergovernmental
agreement: Municipal Health
Insurance Cooperative
NCM
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:581
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
309 12-17-2013 Centre Region Growth
Boundary/Sewer Service Area
Implementation Agreement
NCM
310 4-23-2014 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 11
311 2-9-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 12
312 6-9-2014 Adopting joint articles of
agreement for Centre Region
Code Agency
NCM
313 8-11-2014 Stormwater management Ch. 13
314 1-28-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 12
315 1-5-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 12
316 12-8-2014 Intergovernmental
agreement: Health Insurance
Cooperative Trust
NCM
317 12-8-2014 Intergovernmental
agreement: PSATS
Unemployment Compensation
Group Trust
NCM
318 1-28-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 12
319 3-9-2015 Memorandum of
understanding with Centre
County Conservation District
NCM
320 3-9-2015 Joint Articles of Agreement
for Schlow Centre Region
Library
NCM
321 11-9-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 12
322 11-9-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 12
323 11-13-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 12
324 4-11-2016 Adopting Ordinance Ch. AO
325 5-9-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 12
326 1-2-2017 Cooperative Agreement for
the Preparation of the Centre
Regional Pollutant Reduction
Plan
NCM
327 8-14-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 8
328 9-11-2017 Construction codes: property
maintenance and fire code
Ch. 10, Art. III
§ DL-1 HARRIS CODE § DL-1
AO:582
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
329 9-11-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 8
330 2-12-2018 Penn Prime Trust
Membership
NCM
331 9-10-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 12
332 8-15-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 12
333 10-8-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 12
334 11-13-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 8
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:583

Zone standards
District Minimum Lot Size Minimum Width Maximum Coverage Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard Maximum Height
Ag 10 acres 300 10% 50 100 75 35
R-1 single-family 7,500 50 30% 20 8 30 35
R-1 single-family 20,000 100 30% 20 8 30 35
R-2 single-family 6,500 80 30% 20 10 30 
R-2 two family 8,500 80 30% 20 15 30 
R-2 semi-detached 10,000 90 30% 20 10 30 
R-2 attached 4,500 90 30% 20 10 
R-3 single-family 6,500 80 30% 20 10 30 35
R-3 two family 8,500 80 30% 20 15 30 35
R-3 single-family semi-detached 4,250 90 30% 30 15 30 35
R-3 two-family semi-detached 10,000 90 30% 30 15 40 35
R-3 single attached 4,500 90 30% 20 15 40 
R-Village single-family 3,000 60 25% 0 3 6 35 
R-Cultural single-family 1 acre 80 30% 20 10 30 

 