Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 925]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 3301.5 of the Borough Code (53 P.S. § 48301.51), the
codification of a complete body of legislation for the Borough of Irwin,
County of Westmoreland, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as revised,
codified and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by General
Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 260, together with an Appendix,
is hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of
the Borough of Irwin, which shall be known and is hereby designated as the
"Code of the Borough of Irwin," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of
the prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued
in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by
the Borough Council of the Borough of Irwin, and it is the intention of
said Borough Council that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such
provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only
new or changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to
be enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Inconsistent legislation repealed.
A. Repeal of inconsistent ordinances. Except as provided in § 1-4,
Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal, below, all
ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed as
of the effective date given in § 1-15; provided, however, that such repeal
shall only be to the extent of such inconsistency, and any valid
legislation of the Borough of Irwin which is not in conflict with the
provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in full force and
effect.
B. Repeal of specific ordinances. The Borough Council of the Borough of
Irwin has determined that the following ordinances are no longer in
effect and hereby specifically repeals the following legislation:
1. Editor’s Note: See now 8 Pa.S.C.S.A. § 3301.5.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:3
§ 1-4. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
(1) Former Chapter 5, Code Enforcement, Part 1A, BOCA National
Building Code; Part 2, BOCA National Fire Prevention Code; Part 3,
BOCA International Property Maintenance Code; Part 4, Adoption
of Plumbing Code; Part 5, Adoption of National Electrical Code;
Part 6, Adoption of CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code, of
the 1993 Code.
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to April 9, 2014.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Borough prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Borough or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Borough.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Borough or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Borough or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Borough.
§ 1-3 IRWIN CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation; new
provisions.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Borough or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Borough.
S. Any currently effective ordinance providing for intergovernmental
cooperation or establishing an intermunicipal agreement.
A. Nonsubstantive changes. In compiling and preparing the ordinances
and resolutions of the Borough for adoption and revision as part of the
Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were
made in one or more of said ordinances and resolutions. It is the
intention of the Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had
been previously formally amended to read as such.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copy of Code.
At least one copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with
the Ordinance Book in the office of the Borough Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copy
or copies shall be certified to by the Borough Secretary, as provided by
law, and such certified copy or copies shall remain on file in the office of
the Borough Secretary, available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature, as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part
hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included
in the Code. These changes are enacted to bring provisions into
conformity with the desired policies of the Borough Council, and it is
the intent of the Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code as if the legislation so changed had been previously
formally amended to read as such. All such changes and revisions shall
be deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the Code specified in
§ 1-15.
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-6 IRWIN CODE § 1-10
1:6
Borough Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the postbound
book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copy or copies
of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the
Borough Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and
all legislation adopted by the Borough Council subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which the Borough Council shall adopt specifically
as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by
reference until such changes or new legislation are printed as supplements
to said Code books, at which time such supplements shall be inserted
therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Borough Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notice
of introduction, the availability of a copy or copies of the Code for inspection
by the public and the filing of an attested copy of this ordinance with the
county, as required by law, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due
and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Borough
to be misrepresented thereby. Any person who violates or permits a
violation of this section of this ordinance shall, upon being found liable
therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred
by the Borough in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall
be imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the
Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals
the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Borough are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 1-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough Council that this
ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after September 13, 2014.
§ 1-14 IRWIN CODE § 1-15
1:8
Chapter 6
CABLE COMMISSION
§ 6-1. Basic Cable Commission.
The Borough of Irwin hereby ordains and enacts that, for the purpose
of regulating basic cable rates and services to customers residing within
the Borough of Irwin, enforcing Cable Act provisions including, but not
limited to, prohibiting cable operations from transferring a system within
36 months after acquiring it, limiting the number of subscribers that might
be served by a multiple-system operator, limiting the number of channels
occupied on a system by a program supplier in which the system operator
has an interest, and prohibiting operators and suppliers from engaging in
unfair trade practices, the Borough assigns jurisdiction over the regulation
of rates and services and those items listed above to a local commission
board which shall consist of the Borough of Irwin Council.
§ 6-2. Definitions.
When used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following terms and their derivatives shall have the meanings herein given
(and when not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present
tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the
singular, and words in the singular number include the plural):
BASIC CABLE — The tier of service regularly provided to all subscribers
that includes the retransmission of all must-carry broadcast television
signals as defined in §§ 76.55 to 76.61 of the FCC Rules (or, in the absence
of at least three must-carry signals, any unaltered broadcast television
signals) and the public, educational and governmental channels, as required
by the franchising authority pursuant to Title VI of the Communications Act.
CABLE SERVICE —
§ 6-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a local commission board within
the Borough of Irwin which shall have jurisdiction over and regulatory
powers of the items listed hereinabove.
Chapter 12
FIREMEN'S RELIEF ASSOCIATION
A. The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or
other programming service; and
B. Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such
video programming or other programming service.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-1
1:9
§ 12-1. Recognition of Firemen's Relief Association.
§ 12-2. Certification to Auditor General.
The Borough Council shall annually certify to the Auditor General of the
commonwealth, the name(s) of the active associations and the percentage of
service they contribute to the protection of the Borough. Such certification
shall be on forms prescribed by the Auditor General.
§ 12-3. Annual appropriation.
There is annually appropriated from the Borough Treasury all such sums
of money that may hereafter be paid into the Borough Treasury by the
Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania on account of taxes paid on
premiums of foreign fire insurance companies in pursuance of the Act
of December 18, 1984, No. 205, § 701 et seq., as hereafter amended,
supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of
Pennsylvania.2 Such monies received by the Borough Treasurer from the
State Treasurer shall be distributed to the duly recognized association(s)
within 60 days of receipt. The funds shall be distributed on the basis of the
percentage of service established in the certification to the Auditor General
and with other provisions of the Act.
Chapter 20
MANAGER
§ 20-1. Creation.
The office of Borough Manager is hereby created by the Council of the
Borough.
A. The following association is hereby recognized as actively engaged in
providing fire protection and/or emergency services in the Borough:
(1) Irwin Volunteer Fire Department Relief Association.
B. The above-named association has been formed for the benefit of its
members and their families in case of death, sickness, temporary or
permanent disability or accident suffered in the line of duty.
C. The above-named association of the Borough is designated the proper
association to receive such funds as are due and payable to the Borough
Treasurer by the Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania from the tax on
premiums from foreign fire insurance companies.
2. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.701 et seq.
§ 12-1 IRWIN CODE § 20-2
1:10
§ 20-2. Term of office.
The Borough Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term of office by
a majority of all of the members of the Borough Council. The said Borough
Manager shall serve at the pleasure of the said Council and may be removed
at any time by a majority vote of its members.
§ 20-3. Qualifications.
The Borough Manager shall be chosen on the basis of his executive and
administrative abilities, with special preference being given to his actual
experience in, or his knowledge of, accepted practices and procedures with
respect to the duties of the office of Borough Manager as are outlined in
this chapter.
§ 20-4. Compensation. [Amended 12-30-1974 by Ord. No. 9-1974;
5-12-1975 by Ord. No. 630; 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
The Borough Manager shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed
from time to time by Borough Council The said Borough Manager shall also
be eligible for such additional benefits as are from time to time granted
by the Council to the salaried employees of the Borough. He shall be
reimbursed for any and all out-of-pocket personal expenses incurred in
the performance of his duties as Manager of the Borough, outlined in this
chapter, with mileage being reimbursed at the then prevailing Internal
Revenue Service rates. The Borough Manager shall receive a yearly
vacation, which shall be determined from time to time by resolution of
Council for the Borough of Irwin.
§ 20-5. Bond. [Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
Before taking office, the Borough Manager shall furnish a fidelity bond,
in the amount determined by resolution of Borough Council, conditioned
upon the faithful performance of his duties, with a bona fide corporation
authorized to do business in the State of Pennsylvania as a surety. The
premium shall be paid by the Borough.
§ 20-6. General duties of Manager.
The Borough Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the
Borough and shall have and exercise all powers and duties assigned to him
by statute and such other authority as may be granted by the Council. He
shall act as a liaison between the citizens of the Borough and their Council,
as well as between the Borough as a political subdivision and other political
entities. He shall be responsible to the Council as a whole for the proper
and efficient administration of the affairs of the Borough. His powers and
duties shall relate to the general management of all Borough business not
expressly by statute or otherwise conferred upon other Borough officials.
§ 20-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-7
1:11
§ 20-7. Powers and duties of Manager.
Subject to review and recall by future ordinances of the Borough Council,
the powers and duties of the Borough Manager shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
A. He shall supervise and be responsible for the activities of all municipal
departments, excluding the Police Department.
B. He shall hire, subject to confirmation of the Council no later than the
next regular or special Council meeting, all employees (other than
those under civil service or other tenure-of-office laws) at such
compensation as may be set or authorized by the Council. He shall also,
when he deems it necessary for the best interests of the Borough,
suspend without pay any employee under his supervision; subject,
however, to ratification by the Council at its next regular or special
meeting. All employees shall perform their duties subject to the
direction of the Borough Manager or that of the supervisor or
department head to whom the Manager may assign such employees.
C. The Borough Manager shall supervise all department heads, including
the Director of Public Works. Every department of the Borough,
excluding the Police Department, shall be under the supervision and
control of the Borough Manager. In the absence of a department head,
the Borough Manager shall be directly in charge of any and all
employees within that department.
D. The Borough Manager shall examine all proposed contracts to which
the Borough may be a party and may sign on behalf of the Borough any
contract authorized by the Borough Council, except where the Council
directs that some other office or officer shall do so.
(1) It shall be the duty of the Borough Manager to see to it that all
terms of any contract to which the Borough is a party are fully
performed by all parties thereto.
(2) He shall see that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits
and privileges granted by the Borough are observed.
E. The Borough Manager shall be the general purchasing agent of the
Borough, and except where specific provision to the contrary is made
by law or by the Council, he shall make all purchases of supplies,
materials and equipment authorized by the Council in the manner
prescribed by and subject to the limitations imposed by law. No
purchase shall be made or obligation incurred excepting upon
authorization by the Council, and no expense shall be incurred, except
for the purpose for which no prior appropriation is required by law, if
the amount thereof is not covered by an unexpended appropriation for
the purpose. He shall keep an account of all purchases and shall, from
time to time or when directed by the Council, make a full written report
thereof. He shall also formulate and issue rules and regulations, subject
§ 20-7 IRWIN CODE § 20-7
1:12
to the approval of Council, governing the purchase of all municipal
supplies and equipment.
F. The Borough Manager shall prepare and submit to the Council before
the close of the fiscal year, or on such alternate date as the Council may
direct, a preliminary proposed budget for the next fiscal year with an
explanatory budget message. In doing so, the Borough Manager shall
review estimates of needed revenues and expenditures submitted by all
department heads in the Borough and may revise the same and request
other supporting data before submitting the said preliminary budget to
the Council.
G. It shall be the duty of the Borough Manager to keep a current account
showing at all times the fiscal condition of the Borough, including the
current and anticipated expenses, appropriations, cash on hand, and
anticipated revenue of all municipal funds and accounts, and he shall
see to the collection of all money due the Borough.
H. The Borough Manager shall keep a current inventory showing all real
and personal property of the Borough and its location and shall be
responsible for the care and custody of all such property, including
equipment, buildings, parks and all other Borough property, which is
not by law assigned to some other officer or body for care and control.
I. The Borough Manager shall prepare and have custody of all municipal
records required by law to be kept by the Borough and not by a specific
officer. Where the law makes it the duty of a specific officer to keep or
maintain records, the Borough Manager shall make available to such
officer all necessary clerical assistance for the preparation of such
records and shall make available a place for the custody of such
records. Where the law requires or provides for certification of any
records or documents by an officer of the Borough, the Borough
Manager shall cause such records and documents to be properly
prepared and presented to such officer for his signature.
J. The Borough Manager shall investigate any and all benefits, including
grants, bequests, allocations and reliefs, that may from time to time
become available to the Borough from both public and private sources.
In doing so, he shall determine all eligibility requirements and report to
Council as to whatever position the Borough might satisfy in regard to
those requirements and make recommendations as to satisfying any
requirements when the Borough is not in compliance therewith.
K. The Borough Manager shall act as the official Borough Secretary and
shall assume the functions of this office in accordance with the Borough
Code. He shall also be Borough Controller, unless such officers, or
either of them, are duly filled by appointment, and he shall perform the
duties of each such office in the absence of such appointment to either
of them. He shall hold other such municipal offices or head one or more
of the municipal departments as the Council may from time to time
direct.
§ 20-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-7
1:13
Chapter 24
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
L. The Borough Manager shall attend all meetings of the Borough Council
and shall keep the Council informed as to the affairs of the Borough and
shall have the right to take part in the discussion at said meetings. He
shall receive notice as to any and all special meetings of the Council or
its committees.
(1) He shall prepare the agenda for each meeting of the Council and
supply facts pertinent thereto.
(2) He shall keep the Council informed as to the conduct of Borough
affairs; submit periodic reports of the condition of the Borough
finances and other reports as the Council requests; and make such
recommendations to the Council as he deems necessary.
M. The Borough Manager shall cause to be kept a complete set of maps
and plats showing the location of all Borough utilities and other
municipal properties, all streets and other public places, and all lots or
parcels of land subdivided according to law.
N. The Borough Manager shall maintain an office in the Borough Building
and shall spend such time in the performance of his duties as may be
required by Council.
O. Any and all complaints regarding services of personnel of the Borough
shall be referred to the Borough Manager. He, or some officer
designated by him, shall investigate and dispose of all such complaints,
and the Borough Manager shall thereupon report to the Council.
P. In the event that the Borough Manager shall be absent from the
Borough or be incapacitated from performing the duties of this position,
he shall delegate one qualified member of his staff who shall perform
the duties of the Borough Manager during his absence or disability. The
person so designated shall not perform such duties for a period
exceeding two weeks without the approval of the Council. The Borough
Manager shall not have any other employment, directly or indirectly,
individually or through a corporation or partnership, without prior
written approval of the Council of the Borough.
§ 20-7 IRWIN CODE § 20-7
1:14
ARTICLE I
Indemnification
[Adopted 12-8-1980 by Ord. No. 694 (Ch. 1, Part 2, of the 1993
Code)]
§ 24-1. Applicability. [Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
Subject to the provisions set forth in this article, the Borough shall
indemnify any councilperson, mayor, officer, employee or agent of the
Borough, elected or appointed, who was or is a party or is threatened
to be made a party to any threatened, pending or completed action, suit
or proceeding, whether civil, criminal, equitable, administrative or
investigative (other than an action by or in the right of the Borough),
by reason of the fact that he is or was a councilperson, mayor, officer,
employee or agent of the Borough, against expenses (including attorneys'
fees, judgments, fines and amounts paid in settlement actually and
reasonably incurred by him in connection with such action, suit or
proceeding), if he acted in good faith and in a manner he reasonably
believed to be in, or not opposed to, the best interests of the Borough and,
with respect to any criminal action or proceeding, had no reasonable cause
to believe his conduct was unlawful. The termination of any action, suit or
proceeding by judgment, order, settlement, conviction or upon a plea of nolo
contendere or its equivalent shall not of itself create a presumption that
the person did not act in good faith and in a manner which he reasonably
believed to be in, or not opposed to, the best interests of the Borough and,
with respect to any criminal action or proceeding, had no reasonable cause
to believe that his conduct was unlawful.
§ 24-2. Parties to completed action or suit.
The Borough shall indemnify any councilperson, mayor, officer, employee or
agent of the Borough who was or is a party or is threatened to be made a
party of any threatened, pending or completed action or suit by or in the
right of the Borough to procure a judgment in its favor by reason of the
fact that he is or was a councilperson, mayor, officer, employee or agent
of the Borough, against expenses (including attorneys' fees) actually and
reasonably incurred by him in connection with the defense or settlement of
such action or suit, if he acted in good faith and in a manner he reasonably
believed to be in, or not opposed to, the best interests of the Borough;
provided, however, that no indemnification shall be made in respect of any
claim, issue or matter as to which such person shall have been adjudged
to be liable for negligence or misconduct in the performance of his duty
to the Borough and only to the extent that the Court of Common Pleas of
Westmoreland County shall determine upon application that, despite the
adjudication of liability, but in view of all the circumstances of the case,
such person is fairly and reasonably entitled to indemnity for such expenses
which the Court of Common Pleas of Westmoreland County or such other
court shall deem proper.
§ 24-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-3
1:15
§ 24-3. Successful defense of action or suit.
To the extent that a councilperson, mayor, officer, employee or agent of the
Borough has been successful on the merits or otherwise in the defense of
any action, suit or proceeding referred to in §§ 24-1 and 24-2 of this article,
or in defense of any claim, issue or matter therein, he shall be indemnified
against expenses (including attorneys' fees) actually and reasonably
incurred by him in connection therewith.
§ 24-4. Determination of applicability.
Any indemnifications under §§ 24-1 and 24-2 of this article (unless ordered
by a court) shall be made by the Borough only as authorized in the specific
case upon a determination that indemnification of the councilperson, mayor,
officer, employee or agent is proper in the circumstances because he has
met the applicable standards of conduct set forth in such section of this
article. Such determination shall be made:
§ 24-5. Payment of expenses incurred.
No expenses incurred in defending a civil, equitable or criminal action,
suit or proceeding shall be paid by the Borough in advance of the final
disposition of such action, suit or proceeding as authorized in the manner
provided in § 24-4 of this article upon receipt of an undertaking by or on
behalf of the councilperson, mayor, officer, employee or agent to repay such
amount, unless it shall ultimately be determined that he is entitled to be
indemnified by the Borough as authorized in this article.
§ 24-6. Exclusiveness of indemnification.
The indemnification provided by this article shall not be deemed exclusive
of any other rights to which those seeking indemnification may be entitled
under any laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or otherwise, both as
to actions in his official capacity and as to actions in another capacity while
holding such office, and shall continue as to a person who has ceased to be
a councilperson, mayor, officer, employee or agent, and shall inure to the
benefit of the heirs, executors and administrators of such a person.
§ 24-7. Authorization to purchase insurance.
The appropriate officers of the Borough are hereby authorized and directed
to purchase insurance (to the extent that such insurance is available and
the premium thereon reasonable) on councilpersons, mayors, officers,
employees and agents as described in this article, which insurance shall
A. By the Council by a majority vote of a quorum consisting of the
councilpersons who were not parties to such action or suit proceeding.
B. If such quorum is not obtainable or, even if obtainable, a majority vote
of a quorum of disinterested councilpersons so directs, by independent
legal counsel in a written opinion.
§ 24-3 IRWIN CODE § 24-7
1:16
inure against liability arising from errors and omissions in the performance
of their duties in the course of their employment; provided, however, that
the liability of elected or appointed officials or officers for surcharge in
accordance with the law shall not be affected hereby.
§ 24-8. Liability for surcharge.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to affect, alter or change
the liability of elected or appointed officials or officers of the Borough for
surcharge in accordance with the law.
§ 24-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-8
1:17
Chapter 30
PENSIONS
§ 24-8 IRWIN CODE § 24-8
1:18
ARTICLE I
Police Pension Plan
[Adopted 8-10-2011 by Ord. No. 902]
§ 30-1. Agreement adopted.
Effective as of April 1, 2011, the accompanying joinder agreement and the
terms of the Pennsylvania State Association of Boroughs Master Retirement
Trust are hereby adopted by the employer, to be known as the "Borough of
Irwin Police Pension Plan" (the "plan").3
§ 30-2. Continuation of plan.
Said plan shall be deemed to be a successor to and a continuation of the
prior plan.
3. Editor's Note: The agreement and pension plan are on file in the Borough office.
§ 30-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-2
1:19

ARTICLE II
Nonuniformed Employees Pension Plan
[Adopted 8-10-2011 by Ord. No. 903]
§ 30-3. Agreement adopted.
Effective as of April 1, 2011, the accompanying joinder agreement and the
terms of the Pennsylvania State Association of Boroughs Master Retirement
Trust are hereby adopted by the employer, to be known as the "Borough of
Irwin Employee Pension Plan."4
§ 30-4. Continuation of plan.
Said plan shall be deemed to be a successor to and a continuation of the
prior plan.
4. Editor's Note: The agreement and pension plan are on file in the Borough office.
§ 30-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-4
1:21
Chapter 34
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
230.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 34-1. Planning Commission created.
The Planning Commission of the Borough is hereby created with the powers
and duties of a planning agency as set forth in the Municipalities Planning
Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., and any amendments thereto.
§ 34-2. Membership.
The members of the Borough Planning Commission appointed pursuant to
this chapter shall consist of five members, none of whom are members of
the Borough Council, the Borough's Mayor, or employees of the Borough.
§ 34-3. Appointment, termination and vacancy.
§ 34-4. Conduct of business.
A. All members of the Borough Planning Commission shall be appointed by
the Borough Council.
B. The term of each of the members of the Borough Planning Commission
shall be for a period of four years or until his successor is appointed and
qualified; provided, however, that the terms of the members first
appointed shall be so fixed that no more than two members shall be
reappointed or replaced during any one calendar year in the future.
C. The Chairman of the Borough Planning Commission shall notify the
Borough Council concerning any termination and/or vacancy in the
Planning Commission, and such vacancy shall be filled for the
unexpired term.
A. The Borough Planning Commission shall elect its own Chairman and
Vice Chairman and shall create and fill any other offices that it may
deem appropriate. Officers shall serve annual terms and may succeed
themselves.
B. The Planning Commission shall keep a full record of its business and
shall annually present a written report of its activities to the Borough
Council on or before March 1 of each and every year. Interim reports
shall be submitted to the Borough Council at its request.
§ 30-4 IRWIN CODE § 34-5
1:22
§ 34-5. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the Borough Planning Commission shall be those
established by the statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, which
appear and are set forth in the Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S.
§ 10101 et seq.
Chapter 38
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police pension plan — See Ch. 30, Art. I.
§ 38-1. Establishment.
A police department is hereby established in and for the Borough of Irwin.
The Chief of Police shall be the chief executive of the Police Department. He
shall, under the direction and supervision of the Mayor, be in charge of the
police force and have supervision over its members in the exercise of their
powers, duties and authorities.
§ 38-2. Classifications.
Subordinate to the Chief of Police in the Police Department, the
classification of "patrolman" is hereby established. The number of persons,
if any, to serve as patrolmen, on a full-time and/or part-time basis, and the
compensation of each shall be determined by the Borough Council from
time to time.
§ 38-3. Special policemen.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall affect the authority of the Mayor to
appoint special policemen during emergencies.
Chapter 44
RECREATION BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 175.
§ 34-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1
1:23
§ 44-1. Creation of Recreation Board.
There is hereby created a recreation board known as the "Recreation Board
of the Borough of Irwin."
§ 44-2. Membership; powers; tenure; vacancies; service without pay.
The Board shall be composed of five members, to be appointed by the
Council, with the power to provide, conduct and maintain public recreation
areas, facilities and centers subject to all the responsibilities of the
recreation-enabling legislation. The Board members shall serve for terms of
five years and until their successors are appointed, except that the members
first appointed shall be so appointed that the term of one member shall
expire annually thereafter. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner
as original appointments and for the unexpired term. Members shall serve
without pay.
§ 44-3. Officers; bylaws, rules and regulations; meetings.
The Recreation Board shall appoint from its membership a Chairman and
such other officers as it may deem necessary for the orderly procedure
of its business and may adopt bylaws, rules and regulations covering its
procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of the state laws. The
Recreation Board shall, from time to time, make rules governing the
operation and conduct of the recreational facilities operated by the Board.
The Board shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as it may
designate.
§ 44-4. Maintenance, operation and supervision of recreational
facilities. [Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
The Borough of Irwin shall maintain, operate and supervise the public
parks, play fields and all outdoor and indoor recreation areas and facilities
owned or controlled by the Borough.
§ 44-5. Acceptance of grants and gifts; contracts; appropriations.
The Recreation Board may accept any grant, gift, bequest or donation of
services, equipment, real estate or money from any individual or group,
to be used as specified by the donor or by the terms of acceptance. The
Recreation Board shall have no authority to enter into any contract or incur
any obligation binding upon the Borough other than current obligations or
contracts to be fully executed within the then-current fiscal year, and all
within the budget appropriations made by the Borough Council.
§ 44-6. Executive Director or Superintendent of Recreation.
[Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
The Recreation Board shall have the power to recommend to the Borough
Council a Recreation Director who possesses the necessary qualifications
and who has demonstrated by actual work his ability to organize and direct
§ 44-1 IRWIN CODE § 44-6
1:24
a community recreation system and supervise the activities of such other
personnel as may be deemed necessary in carrying out the program.
§ 44-7. Deposit and disbursement of funds. [Amended 7-7-1993 by
Ord. No. 791]
Funds appropriated by Borough Council and budgeted for recreation shall
be disbursed by the Borough Manager upon recommendation from the
Recreation Board, with the approval of Borough Council, within the budget
appropriations made. Funds received by the Recreation Board from sources
other than budgeted appropriations shall be deposited by the Borough for
recreational use and disbursed as the above budgeted funds are disbursed,
except that funds received by gift, bequest or otherwise shall be disbursed
in accordance with the terms of such gift or bequest or the terms of the
acceptance thereof.
§ 44-8. Reports; fiscal year.
The Recreation Board shall make full and complete reports to Borough
Council at such times as may be designated or requested by Borough
Council. The fiscal year of said Recreation Board shall conform to that of
the Borough.
§ 44-9. Powers vested in Recreation Board.
Such powers as are now or may hereafter be provided by statute of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or by ordinance of the Borough, relating
to the development and operation of recreation systems, public parks, and
playgrounds, are hereby vested in the Recreation Board, to be exercised
by it subject to any and all restrictions contained in such powers and
ordinances.
Chapter 50
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
§ 44-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-9
1:25

ARTICLE I
Compensation of Councilmen and Mayor
[Adopted 3-13-1989 by Ord. No. 764 (Ch. 1, Part 1A, § 101, of the
1993 Code)]
§ 50-1. Salaries and remunerations. [Amended 2-12-1997 by Ord.
No. 811]
Effective as of the date of enactment of this article, each Borough
Councilperson shall receive, as wages, the sum of $1,875 per year, and the
Borough Mayor shall receive, as wages, the sum of $2,500 per year.
§ 50-2. Salary limitations.
Notwithstanding any other provisions herein contained, no Council member
nor Mayor shall receive a sum in excess of that amount permitted by the
statutory provisions of the Borough Code and in such cases made and
provided.
§ 50-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-2
1:27
Chapter 55
TAX COLLECTOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 238.
§ 50-2 IRWIN CODE § 50-2
1:28
ARTICLE I
Compensation
[Adopted 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791 (Ch. 1, Part 1A, § 102, of the
1993 Code)]
§ 55-1. Compensation of Tax Collector.
The elected Tax Collector shall be entitled to receive 4% of all real estate
taxes.
§ 55-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-1
1:29

ARTICLE II
Tax Certification Fees
[Adopted 3-8-2006 by Ord. No. 872]
§ 55-2. Appointment to provide service and charge fee.
Effective with the date of this article, the Borough Council of the Borough
of Irwin appoints the locally elected Tax Collector, his/her predecessor
or successor, as the agent authorized to provide and issue real estate
tax certification upon request by the real estate property owner or his
authorized agent and hereby authorizes said Tax Collector to assess, collect
and retain, as compensation for providing said tax certification service, a
fee of $15 per taxing year certified; further, a fee is hereby established to be
collected and retained by the above-designated person(s) for the issuance
of a duplicate tax bill or facsimile thereof, said fee shall be $7.50 for each
document issued.
§ 55-3. Fees set by resolution.
Council may from time to time revise said fees by resolution.
§ 55-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-3
1:31
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 75
ALARM DEVICES
§ 55-3 IRWIN CODE § 55-3
1:32
ARTICLE I
False Alarm Fees
[Adopted 9-14-2011 by Ord. No. 905]
§ 75-1. Warnings and fines.
A. Warnings and fines are hereby imposed upon property owners and
other citizens and residents of the Borough of Irwin in possession of
real and/or personal property who call for the assistance of the Borough
of Irwin Police Department and/or the Borough of Irwin Volunteer Fire
Department personnel which later is found to be false and unnecessary
because of there being no threat of harm to any person or damage to
real or personal property.
B. The caller shall give the police or fire department:
(1) His or her name, address and telephone number;
(2) Location and address of the perceived threat of harm to persons or
damage to real or personal property; and
(3) Reasonable explanation of why the caller perceives immediate
threat to the health, welfare and safety of persons or destruction of
any real or personal property.
C. The Borough of Irwin hereby imposes the following fines for response to
calls and requests from property owners and other residents of the
Borough of Irwin which result in the irrefutable determination that the
call alleging a threat of injury to persons or damage to real or personal
property was false and unnecessary. Such false alarm fines are hereby
imposed as follows: [Amended 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 961]
(1) First occurrence: warning notice.
(2) Second occurrence: $50.
(3) Third occurrence: $100.
(4) Fourth occurrence: $125.
(5) Fifth occurrence: $175.
(6) Sixth occurrence: $350.
(7) Seventh occurrence and any thereafter: $550 per incident.
D. In addition, the following fines will be imposed upon alarm businesses
and/or alarm users:
(1) A one-hundred-dollar fine charged to an alarm business that fails to
provide required information to law enforcement and/or fire
department dispatch at the time of a request for law enforcement
response to an alarm signal.
§ 75-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-1
1:33
§ 75-2. Extinguishment of past record of calls.
If any person subject to the terms, conditions and fines of this article has not
called or summoned the Borough of Irwin Police Department or the Borough
of Irwin Volunteer Fire Department for a continuous and uninterrupted
period of four years, then and in that event any notation for prior submitted
calls for false alarms shall be extinguished.
(2) A one-hundred-dollar fine charged to an alarm business or an alarm
user who fails to maintain or provide any of the required
information specified in the article to any law enforcement officer
and/or fire department conducting a related alarm investigation.
(3) A one-hundred-dollar fine shall be charged to each alarm business
that requests law enforcement and/or fire department response to
a false alarm that is the result of the alarm business's installation,
system repairs, or system service.
E. The Borough of Irwin Police Department and the Borough of Irwin
Volunteer Fire Department shall keep a record of names, addresses,
telephone numbers and dates of occurrences of all persons whose calls
turn out to be false alarms.
§ 75-1 IRWIN CODE § 75-2
1:34
ARTICLE II
Smoke and Carbon Monoxide Detectors
[Adopted 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 970]
§ 75-3. Smoke detectors and fire prevention: residential occupancy.
A. All buildings and structures used for residential occupancy, including
but not limited to single-family dwellings, multifamily dwellings,
multifamily apartment houses, condominiums, boardinghouses, lodging
homes, rooming houses, tourist homes, bed-and-breakfast homes,
dormitories, hotels, motels and residential buildings, shall have smoke
detectors installed in each sleeping area of said building or structure.
Where bedrooms or rooms habitually used for sleeping are separated
by other use areas, such as kitchens, living rooms or dining rooms, they
shall be considered as separate sleeping areas for the purpose of this
section. Additionally, in each multifamily dwelling, condominium
building, or apartment house containing three or more units and in
each boardinghouse, lodging home, rooming house, bed-and-breakfast
home, tourist home, dormitory, hotel, motel and resident building,
smoke detectors shall be installed in the cellar and/or basement and on
every floor in common areas (e.g., basements, cellars, hallways,
corridors, etc.) in addition to those placed in sleeping areas.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of each new residential
occupancy unit and each existing residential occupancy unity in any
structure having at least one occupant to install smoke detectors as
heretofore provided. It shall be the joint responsibility of the owner and
the tenants/residents in all occupied units, and of the owner in all other
cases, to maintain said smoke detectors. Such maintenance shall
include keeping the smoke detector units serviceable by replacing
batteries when necessary or by keeping them connected to an electric
source so that they remain capable of transmitting an audible signal in
the presence of smoke.
C. Multiple-dwelling-unit building and structures. A multiple-dwelling-unit
building and structure shall be defined as a building and/or structure
that contains more than one housekeeping unit of one or more rooms
providing complete, independent living facilities, including permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. All
multiple-dwelling-unit buildings and structures shall be subject to the
following requirements:
(1) At least one operating fire extinguisher, regularly tested in
intervals required by industry standards, shall be placed in all
common areas of the building and/or structure in a place that is
easily observed and accessible; and
(2) Interconnected smoke detectors shall be required for the entire
building and/or structure, for all buildings and/or structures that
are built, renovated, subject to an addition, or otherwise require a
building permit following the enactment of this article.
§ 75-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-4
1:35
§ 75-4. Smoke detectors: nonresidential occupancy.
§ 75-5. Carbon monoxide detectors.
§ 75-6. Specifications; maintenance.
Each smoke detector shall be capable of sensing visible or invisible particles
of combustion and shall be capable of producing an audible alarm thereof.
Each carbon monoxide detector shall be capable of detecting carbon
monoxide through the use of a biometric sensor or other operable sensor.
A. In all buildings and/or structures in the Borough for which a use and/or
occupancy permit has been issued, and is not a building or structure
used for residential occupancy and in compliance with § 75-3 above,
smoke detectors shall be installed and placed so as to provide adequate
coverage for the structure in accordance with standards set forth in the
International Fire Code, International Building Code, Uniform
Construction Code, and other such codes adopted pursuant to the
Borough of Irwin Code § 110-1.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of each new structure and
each existing structure having at least one occupant, other than those
buildings and structures used for residential occupancy and in
compliance with § 75-3 above, to install smoke detectors as heretofore
provided. It shall be the joint responsibility of the owners and tenants/
occupants in all such occupied units, and of the owner in all such
unoccupied units, if any, to maintain said smoke detectors. Such
maintenance shall include keeping the smoke detector units serviceable
by replacing batteries when necessary or by keeping them connected to
an electrical source so that they remain capable of transmitting an
audible signal in the presence of smoke.
A. Carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed in all buildings and
structures within 15 feet of any fossil-fuel-burning fireplace, appliance,
furnace, heating source and any other fossil-fuel-burning device, and
any garage. Fossil fuel shall include, without limitation, gasoline, coal,
propane, natural gas, heating oil, and other similar fuels, and shall also
be defined to include wood, wood pellets, corn kernels, pits, and other
similar combustible fuel used to heat homes or otherwise be
combusted.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of each new occupancy unit,
residential, commercial or otherwise, and each existing occupancy unit
in any structure having at least one occupant to install carbon monoxide
detectors as heretofore provided. It shall be the joint responsibility of
the owner and the tenants/residents in all occupied units and of the
owner in all other cases to maintain said carbon monoxide detectors.
Such maintenance shall include keeping the carbon monoxide detector
units serviceable by replacing batteries when necessary or by keeping
them connected to an electric source so that they remain capable of
transmitting an audible signal in the presence of carbon monoxide.
§ 75-4 IRWIN CODE § 75-6
1:36
Each detection device utilized shall be maintained in operable condition and
shall be of a type certified by a nationally recognized inspection agency,
such as Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., as a properly operating fire and/or
carbon monoxide detection device for the protection of life and safety.
§ 75-7. Prohibited acts.
In addition to any owner or tenant who fails to carry out the obligations
imposed hereby, any person or persons who remove or destroy any smoke
and/or carbon monoxide detector(s) (except the owner or tenant for the
purpose of immediate replacement) shall be deemed in violation of this
article.
§ 75-8. Power supply.
§ 75-9. Alternative fire detection and/or prevention systems.
Alternative fire and/or carbon monoxide detection and/or prevention
systems may be installed as a substitute for the smoke and/or carbon
monoxide detectors required hereunder, provided that such alternative
smoke and/or carbon monoxide detectors/prevention system has been
individually approved and a permit therefor issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer of the Borough (or such other persons as the Borough
Council shall designate by resolution). Alternate smoke and/or carbon
monoxide detection and/or prevention systems installed and in operation
prior to and on the effective date of this article of this chapter are hereby
deemed acceptable, provided that such systems are in conformance with
the standards of this article of this chapter.
A. In any new construction, smoke and/or carbon monoxide detectors shall
be hard-wired directly to the building's power supply.
B. In all existing structures, it is preferred that smoke detectors be
hardwired to the building's power supply; however, a monitored battery
supply is acceptable where a hardwired smoke and/or carbon monoxide
detector is not economically feasible.
C. All areas of existing structures that are renovated, which shall be
defined to include, at a minimum, the alteration of a portion of the
structure that includes the opening up of any walls or ceilings in a room
or area of a structure where a detector is required under this Code,
shall be constructed to include hardwired smoke and/or carbon
monoxide detectors.
D. All additions to existing structures shall be constructed to include
hardwired smoke and/or carbon monoxide detectors, where
appropriate under this article of Chapter 75.
§ 75-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-10
1:37
§ 75-10. Effect on other provisions of Code.
This article is intended to establish a minimum requirement for fire
detection devices in buildings and structures located within the Borough.
Residents and building owners in the Borough are encouraged to research
fire safety and install additional smoke and/or carbon monoxide detectors
exceeding the requirements of this article, if appropriate. The standards
provided herein are additional to the provisions of the codes adopted
pursuant to the Borough of Irwin Code § 110-1 and any other provision of
the Borough of Irwin Code. To the extent that the standards provided in
other sections of this Code are more stringent or, in the alternative, the
provisions of this Article II of Chapter 75 are more stringent, the more
stringent provisions shall be controlling.
§ 75-11. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who violates this article shall, upon conviction thereof
before any District Justice of the Borough or any other court having
jurisdiction over the same, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 and costs of prosecution for each offense and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the county jail for
not more than 30 days.
B. Any architect, engineer, builder, contractor, agent, person or
corporation employed in connection therewith who may have assisted
in the commission of any such violation shall each be guilty of a
separate offense and, upon conviction thereof before any District
Justice in the Borough or other court having jurisdiction over the same,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and costs of
prosecution for each offense and, in default of payment of such fine and
costs, to imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 30 days.
C. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 75-10 IRWIN CODE § 75-11
1:38
Chapter 80
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation regulations — See Ch.
175, Art. I.
Sexually oriented businesses — See Ch. 204.
§ 75-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-11
1:39

ARTICLE I
Public Consumption
[Adopted 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791 (Ch. 6, Part 8, of the 1993
Code)]
§ 80-1. Definitions.
Unless the context otherwise requires, as used in this article, the following
words or phrases shall be construed according to the definitions set forth
below:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid
containing more than 1/2 of 1% of alcohol by volume which is fit for
beverage purposes.
CONTAINER — Any bottle, can or other vessel in which alcoholic beverages
are contained.
§ 80-2. Consumption.
No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage in any quantity upon
any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, stairway, thoroughfare or other public
property within the Borough, nor shall any person consume any alcoholic
beverage within five feet of any public way or thoroughfare while on a
private stairway, doorway or other private property open to public view
without the express or implied permission of the owner, his agent or other
party in lawful possession thereof.
§ 80-3. Possession.
No person shall possess any container of alcoholic beverage, whether
wrapped or unwrapped, which has been opened or on which the seal has
been broken in any manner on any public street, avenue, alley, thoroughfare
or other public property within the Borough, nor shall any person possess
any container of alcoholic beverage within five feet of any public way or
thoroughfare while on a private stairway, doorway or other private property
open to public view without the express or implied permission of the owner,
his agent or other person in lawful possession thereof.
§ 80-4. Exceptions.
The provisions of §§ 80-2 and 80-3 above shall not apply to interior portions
of any private dwelling, habitat or building, nor to the consumption or
possession by persons in the areas herein designated of any duly prescribed
and dispensed medication having alcoholic content as set forth in § 80-1
hereof; provided, further, that the provisions of said §§ 80-2 and 80-3 above
shall not apply to premises duly licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control
Board and to persons then and there patrons of said licensee.
§ 80-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-5
1:41
§ 80-5. Violations and penalties.
Whosoever violates any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
§ 80-5 IRWIN CODE § 80-5
1:42
ARTICLE II
Bottle Clubs
[Adopted 11-13-1996 by Ord. No. 808 (Ch. 13, Part 5, of the 1993
Code)]
§ 80-6. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to prohibit the operation of establishments
commonly referred to as "bottle clubs" within the municipal boundaries
of the Borough of Irwin. It shall, therefore, be unlawful for any person,
establishment, business, corporation, partnership, enterprise or other
adult-entertainment-related business to operate any bottle club
establishment within the Borough of Irwin.
§ 80-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOTTLE CLUB — Refers to a person, establishment, business, corporation,
sole proprietorship, enterprise or other adult-entertainment-related
business that does not possess a valid Pennsylvania liquor license that
permits the adult general public to bring into the business enterprise their
own alcoholic beverages for consumption while patronizing said business
during the presentation of various adult entertainment activities, including,
but not limited to, nude dancing, exotic dancing or other similar adult
entertainment.
§ 80-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person, establishment, business, corporation, partnership, sole
proprietorship, enterprise or other adult entertainment-related business
that shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine
not to exceed $600 and any other sanctions permissible by law, including
incarceration, if found guilty.
§ 80-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-8
1:43
Chapter 84
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 84-1. License required for certain amusement places and devices.
[Amended 10-13-1981 by Ord. No. 700; 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
Any individual, firm or corporation desiring to operate or to continue the
operation of a billiard parlor, pool room, bowling alley, or any place of
business where pinball machines, jukeboxes or any other instruments
playing recorded music, including coin-operated radios or televisions, are
maintained within the Borough limits shall make application to the
Manager, particularly specifying the nature and character of the business
or installation and location of the same. The Mayor shall thereupon initiate
and direct an investigation, and, if Council should deem it to be proper to
be carried on at the location proposed, the Manager shall issue a license
for the operation or continued operation of the said business or installation
upon the payment of a license fee as provided for in § 84-2 of this chapter.
§ 84-2. License fees. [Amended 10-13-1981 by Ord. No. 700;
7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
Certain fees, in amounts as established from time to time by resolution of
the Borough Council, shall be paid before a license shall be issued for the
types of business and/or installations recited in § 84-1 of this chapter.
§ 84-3. Inspection of establishments; revocation of license.
All billiard parlors, pool rooms, bowling alleys and places of business where
pinball machines or jukeboxes or any other instruments playing recorded
music, excepting radios or televisions, are maintained that are so licensed
shall be subject to inspection by the proper Borough officers from time to
time, and when same shall become noxious or offensive so as to become a
common nuisance, the license shall be revoked following notice to licensee
and a hearing before Council.
§ 84-4. Disposition of license fees.
The license fees hereby collected under the provisions of this chapter shall
be paid to the Manager for the use and benefit of the Borough.
§ 84-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No.
791]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs
and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 80-8 IRWIN CODE § 84-6
1:44
§ 84-6. Annual basis of license.
The license fees imposed under the provisions of this chapter are imposed
for the period of one year commencing January 1 of each calendar year and
terminating December 31 of each calendar year (or fraction thereof).
§ 84-7. Authority for enactment.
This chapter has been enacted under the authority of the Act of December
31, 1965, P.L. 1257, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6901.5
§ 84-8. Enforcement. [Added 12-13-1988 by Ord. No. 700]
The Borough of Irwin Police are the specifically designated Borough officers
charged with the responsibility to periodically inspect for proper
compliance for licenses required for amusement places and devices covered
by this chapter.
§ 84-9. Definitions. [Added 10-13-1988 by Ord. No. 700]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated in this section:
DEVICES — Any and all mechanical and/or electrically operated devices
used for amusement or entertainment purposes, into which a United States
coin or a slug or token or similar object has been placed for the purpose
of operating said device, such as, but not limited to, video games, coinoperated
televisions, coin-operated radios and fortune-telling machines.
Chapter 88
ANIMALS
5. Editor's Note: See now 52 P.S. § 6924.101.
§ 84-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-9
1:45

ARTICLE I
Pigs Prohibited
[Adopted 9-14-1959 by Ord. No. 370 (Ch. 2, Part 1, § 101, of the
1993 Code)]
§ 88-1. Prohibitions; violations and penalties. [Amended 5-12-1975
by Ord. No. 608; 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep any pig or
hog at any place within the Borough or to maintain any pig pen or hog pen
at any place therein under penalty, for each and every violation hereof, upon
conviction thereof, of a fine of not more than $600 and costs of prosecution
and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not
more than 30 days. Each day's violation of any provision of this article shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 88-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-1
1:47

ARTICLE II
Destruction of Pigeons
[Adopted 8-21-1961 by Ord. No. 7-1961 (Ch. 2, Part 2, of the 1993
Code)]
§ 88-2. Destruction of unowned pigeons authorized.
The Police Department of the Borough is authorized to take any necessary
action to provide for the destruction or killing of unowned pigeons within
the geographical limits of the Borough by any humane means.
§ 88-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-2
1:49

ARTICLE III
Disposal of Pet Waste
[Adopted 7-13-1992 by Ord. No. 784 (Ch. 2, Part 3, of the 1993
Code)]
§ 88-3. Animal defecation on public and private property restricted.
No person having possession, custody or control of any animal shall
knowingly or negligently permit any dog or other animal to commit any
nuisance, i.e., defecation or urination, upon any gutter, street, driveway,
alley, curb or sidewalk in the Borough of Irwin, or upon the floors or
stairways of any building or place frequented by the public or used in
common by the tenants, or upon the outside walls, walkways, driveways,
alleys, curbs or stairways of any public area, or upon any private property
other than the property of the owner of such animal.
§ 88-4. Disposal of animal feces.
Any person having possession, custody or control of any dog or other animal
which commits a nuisance, i.e., defecation or urination, in any area other
than the private property of the owner of such dog or other animal, as
prohibited in § 88-3, shall be required to immediately remove any feces from
such surface and either:
§ 88-5. Dogs accompanying blind or handicapped persons
exempted.
The provisions of §§ 88-3 and 88-4 hereof shall not apply to a guide dog
accompanying any blind persons or to a dog used to assist any other
physically handicapped person.
§ 88-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No.
791]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
A. Carry same away for disposal in a toilet.
B. Place same in a nonleaking container for deposit in a trash or litter
receptacle.
§ 88-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-6
1:51

ARTICLE IV
Dangerous Animals
[Adopted 10-10-2001 by Ord. No. 840 (Ch. 1, Part 1, §§ 102 and 103,
of the 1993 Code)]
§ 88-7. Prohibition; violations and penalties; definitions.
§ 88-8. Exclusions.
The provisions of § 88-7 of this article shall not apply to any person or entity
who is regularly engaged in the retail business involving the sale of those
animals described herein, provided said person or entity is licensed under
the applicable state and/or federal laws to be engaged in said business.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep any
inherently dangerous animal at any place within the Borough of Irwin
or to maintain any such animal at any place therein, under penalty, for
each and every violation hereof, upon conviction thereof, of a fine of not
more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of
such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Each
day's violation of any provisions of this article shall constitute a
separate offense.
B. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
INHERENTLY DANGEROUS ANIMAL — Any animal which, because of
its general nature, possesses the ability to cause serious bodily harm
or death and which cannot be domesticated, including, but not limited
to, poisonous and nonpoisonous reptiles and amphibians, constrictor
snakes or other similar animals.
§ 88-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-8
1:53
Chapter 95
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Removal of vegetation along streets and
sidewalks — See Ch. 225, Art. VII.
§ 95-1. Vegetative growth as nuisance.
§ 95-2. Responsibility for removing, cutting or trimming.
The owner of any premises or the occupant of premises occupied by other
than the owner shall remove, trim or cut all grass, weeds or other
vegetation growing or remaining upon such premises in violation of the
provisions of § 95-1.
§ 95-3. Notice to remove, trim or cut; Borough may do work and
collect cost and additional amount.
The Borough Council or any officer or employee of the Borough of Irwin
designated thereby for this purpose is hereby authorized to give notice, by
personal service or by United States Mail, to the owner or occupant, as the
case may be, of any premises whereon grass, weeds or other vegetation is
growing or remaining in violation of the provisions of § 95-1 of this chapter,
directing and requiring such occupant to remove, trim or cut such grass,
A. No person, firm or corporation owning or occupying any property
within the Borough of Irwin shall permit any grass or weeds or any
vegetation whatsoever not edible or planted for some useful or
ornamental purpose to grow or remain upon such premises so as to
exceed a height of seven inches; nor shall any noxious weeds prohibited
by the Noxious Weed Control Law (3 P.S. § 255.8) or by regulations of
the Department of Agriculture be permitted to grow within the Borough
of Irwin, including:
(1) Marihuana.
(2) Chicory, succory or blue daisy.
(3) Canadian thistle.
(4) Multiflora rose.
(5) Johnson grass.
B. Any grass, weeds or other vegetation growing upon any premises in the
Borough of Irwin in violation of any of the provisions of this section is
hereby declared a nuisance and detrimental to the health, safety,
cleanliness and comfort of the inhabitants of the Borough of Irwin.
§ 88-8 IRWIN CODE § 95-3
1:54
weeds or vegetation so as to conform to the requirements of this chapter
within five days after issuance of such notice. Whenever, in the judgment of
the Borough Manager or other designated Borough official, it shall appear
to be impracticable to give notice as above provided, either because the
owner or occupant cannot readily be found or because a search for the
owner or occupant would entail unreasonable delay, the Borough of Irwin
or any officer or employee of the Borough designated thereby for that
purpose may give notice by conspicuously posting on the property where
such nuisance exists a notice or order directing and requiring that such
nuisance be abated within five days. In case any person, firm or corporation
shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply with such notice within the period of
time stated therein, the Borough of Irwin may order the removal, trimming
or cutting of such grass, weeds or vegetation, and the cost thereof, together
with a penalty of 10% of the cost thereof, shall be collected by the Borough
from such person, firm or corporation in the manner provided by law.
§ 95-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $600 and, in default of payment, to undergo imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter
continues after notice shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 105
CODE ENFORCEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 110.
§ 105-1. Code Enforcement Officer.
The Borough Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for the day-today
inspections of all matters related to the enforcement of the Borough's
building codes and enforcing the applicable BOCA codes which have been
previously adopted by the Borough Council. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall also be responsible for routine inspections of buildings and structures
within the Borough to ensure compliance with applicable BOCA regulations
and Borough ordinances. Additionally, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
assure that all building sites have been inspected prior to the issuance of a
building permit and in general be responsible for the following:
A. Reviewing all scaled drawings delineating construction plans, which
shall be required prior to issuance of a permit.
B. Inspecting all footings prior to the placement of concrete.
§ 95-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-1
1:55
§ 105-2. Inspection fees. [Amended 3-8-2000 by Ord. No. 833]
The following Code Enforcement Officer inspection fees shall be assessed
against any person, contractor or other entity engaged in renovation, repair
or new construction within the Borough (to be paid in advance of the
applicable inspection):
§ 105-3. Penalty for commencing work without permit.
C. Inspecting all structural work prior to the same being covered over.
D. Ensuring that a licensed electrician inspects all electrical work both at
the rough-in stage as well as a final inspection when work is completed.
E. Inspection of all scaffolding over 10 feet in height for safety prior to
use.
A. Footing inspections prior to the placement of concrete: $30. [Amended
12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 946]
B. Inspection of structural building work prior to underlying structure
being covered over: $30. [Amended 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 946]
C. Inspection of electrical work at rough-in and final stages by a licensed
electrician, the fee to be based upon the fees charged by the electrician.
Any and all electrical work being performed upon and within any
building or other structure, whether the same be new construction,
renovation and/or other repair, that would otherwise require the
issuance of a building permit from the Borough, shall be inspected by a
certified licensed electrical inspector. The electrical inspection referred
to herein shall be conducted both at the rough-in stage of construction
and/or renovation as well as at the final stage of construction and/or
renovation. The fees for these electrical inspections shall be paid by the
property owner and shall be based upon the actual fees as charged by
the licensed electrical inspector.
D. Inspection of plumbing work at rough-in and final inspection upon
completion of work: $30. [Amended 12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 946]
E. All scaffolding over 10 feet in height shall be inspected by the Code
Enforcement Officer; however, there shall be no inspection fee for this
service.
A. Individual. Any individual resident who commences any building,
renovation or other work that would require application and issuance of
a building permit as set forth in this chapter shall be fined in the
amount of $35.
B. Contractor. Any contractor who commences any building, renovation or
other work that would require application and issuance of a building
permit as set forth in this chapter shall be fined in the amount of $100.
§ 105-1 IRWIN CODE § 105-4
1:56
§ 105-4. Building permit fees. [Amended 12-14-2016 by Ord. No.
946]
Building permit fees shall be assessed as follows:
Construction Cost Permit Fee
$1 to $500 $30
$501 to $1,000 $40
$1,001 to $5,000 $50
$5,001 to $10,000 $60
Over $10,000 $70 plus $10 for each $1,000 over $10,000
Chapter 110
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 105.
§ 110-1. Adoption of Uniform Construction Code. [Amended
5-12-2004 by Ord. No. 864; 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 972]
The Borough of Irwin hereby adopts the Uniform Construction Code
(hereinafter referred to as the "code"), as designated and defined by the
Pennsylvania Construction Code Act (hereinafter referred to as the "Act"),
as amended and supplemented, and the regulations promulgated by the
Department of Labor and Industry thereunder (hereinafter referred to as
the "regulations"), as amended and supplemented from time to time, as
provided in the Act and regulations, as the Borough of Irwin Building Code.
The Uniform Construction Code contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401 to
405,6 as amended from time to time, consists of the following:
A. The provisions of Chapters 2 through 10, 11 through 29 and 31 through
35 of the International Building Code 2009 (first printing) and Chapter
11 and Appendix E of the International Building Code of 2015. This
includes all errata issued by the International Code Council.
B. National Electric Code 2008 as issued by the National Fire Protection
Association on July 26, 2007. This includes all errata issued by the
National Fire Protection Association.
C. The International Mechanical Code 2009 (first printing). This includes
all errata issued by the International Code Council.
6. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101 to 7210.1103.
§ 105-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-1
1:57
§ 110-2. Revisions. [Amended 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 972]
The hereinafter sections of the above-referenced codes which form a part of
the Uniform Construction Code are hereby completed, modified or revised
as follows:
D. The International Fuel Gas Code 2009 and its appendixes (first
printing). This includes all errata issued by the International Code
Council.
E. The International Plumbing Code 2009 and its appendixes, except
Appendix A (first printing). This includes all errata issued by the
International Code Council.
F. The International Residential Code For One- and Two-Family Dwellings
2009, Chapter 44, Referenced Standards, and Appendixes A, B, C, D, G
and Q, (first printing). This includes all errata issued by the
International Code Council.
G. The International Fire Code 2009 and Appendixes B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I
and J (first printing). This includes all errata issued by the International
Code Council.
H. The International Energy Conservation Code 2009 and the appendix
(first printing). This includes all errata issued by the International Code
Council.
I. Sections AE 501 to AE 503 and AE 601 to AE 605 of Appendix E of the
International Residential Code 2009 (first printing). This includes all
errata issued by the International Code Council.
J. The International Existing Building Code for Buildings and Facilities
2009 and the appendix (first printing) and the accessibility provisions in
the International Existing Building Code for Existing 2015. This
includes all errata issued by the International Code Council.
K. The International Urban-Wildland Interface Code 2009 and Appendixes
B, C, D, E, F, G and H (first printing). This includes all errata issued by
the International Code Council.
L. ICC International Property Maintenance Code 2018.
A. References to "jurisdiction" shall be "the Borough of Irwin."
B. The International Building Code § 1612.3, insert "October 4, 1995" as
date of issuance.
C. The International Building Code § 3412.2, insert: "June 1, 2004."
D. International Mechanical Code § 106.5.2, insert: "as set forth in a
separate resolution adopted by the Borough of Irwin Council."
E. International Mechanical Code § 106.5.3(2) and (3), insert: "0%."
§ 110-1 IRWIN CODE § 110-2
1:58
F. International Mechanical Code § 108.4, insert "summary offense" in the
[specific offense] portion, and insert "$1,000" for the amount of fine,
and insert "30 days" for the term of imprisonment.
G. International Mechanical Code § 108.5, insert: "a fine of not less than
$300 or more than $1,000."
H. International Fuel Gas Code § 106.2, insert: "as set forth in a separate
resolution adopted by the Borough of Irwin Council."
I. International Fuel Gas Code § 106.6.3(2) and (3), insert: "0%."
J. International Fuel Gas Code § 108.4, insert "summary offense" in the
[specific offense] portion, and insert "$1,000" for the amount of fine,
and insert "30 days" for the term of imprisonment.
K. International Fuel Gas Code § 108.5, insert: "not less than $300 or more
than $1,000."
L. International Plumbing Code § 106.6.2, insert: "as set forth in a
separate resolution adopted by the Borough of Irwin Council."
M. International Plumbing Code § 108.4, insert "summary offense" in the
[specific offense] portion, and insert "$1,000" for the amount of fine,
and insert "30 days" for the term of imprisonment.
N. International Plumbing Code § 106.6.3(2) and (3), insert: "0%."
O. International Plumbing Code § 108.5, insert: "not less than $300 or
more than $1,000."
P. International Plumbing Code § 305.6.1, insert: "40 inches" in both
locations.
Q. International Plumbing Code § 904.1, insert: "24 inches."
R. International Residential Code For One- and Two-Family Dwellings
Table R 301.2(1), insert the following:
(1) Ground snow load: 40 lbs.
(2) Wind speed (mph): 90.
(3) Seismic design category: D1.
(4) Weathering: severe.
(5) Frostline depth: 36 inches.
(6) Termite: moderate to heavy.
(7) Decay: slight to moderate.
(8) Winter design temperature: 5° F.
(9) Ice shield underlayment: Yes.
§ 110-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-2
1:59
§ 110-3. Administration and enforcement.
(10) Flood hazard: Map dated October 4, 1995.
(11) Air freezing index: 1,000.
(12) Mean annual temperature: 25° F.
S. International Residential Code § P2603.6.1, insert: "40 inches" in both
places.
T. International Residential Code § P3103.1, insert: "24 inches" in both
places.
U. International Fire Code § 109.3, insert "summary offense" in the
[specific offense] portion, and insert "$1,000" for the amount of fine,
and insert "30 days" for the term of imprisonment.
V. International Fire Code § 111.4, insert: "$300" and "$1,000."
W. International Fire Code §§ 3404.2.9.6.1, 3406.2.4.4, 3506.2 and 3804.2,
insert: "Any area mapped on the current FEMA flood mapping as a flood
area (maps are dated October 4, 1995)."
X. International Existing Building Code § 1201.2, insert: "June 1, 2004."
A. The Borough of Irwin hereby elects to administer and enforce the
provisions of §§ 110-1 through 110-4 of this chapter, the Pennsylvania
Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §§ 7210-101 to
7210-1.103, as amended from time to time, the regulations
promulgated thereunder, and the code.
B. Administration and enforcement of the code within the Borough of
Irwin shall be undertaken in any of the following ways, as determined
by appropriate action of the Borough of Irwin Council from time to time
by adoption of a resolution:
(1) Designating an employee of the Borough to serve as the municipal
code official to act on behalf of the Borough.
(2) Retaining one or more construction code officials or third-party
agencies to act on behalf of the Borough.
(3) Entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement
for structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units
and utility and miscellaneous-use structures.
C. Administration and enforcement of the code within the Borough of
Irwin may also be undertaken by entering into an agreement with one
or more municipalities to provide for the joint administration and
enforcement of this act by the adoption of an ordinance approving an
intermunicipal agreement pursuant to 53 Pa.C.S.A, Chapter 23,
Subchapter A, relating to intergovernmental cooperation.
§ 110-2 IRWIN CODE § 110-4
1:60
§ 110-4. Board of Appeals.
§ 110-5. Continuation of existing regulations.
All ordinances, resolutions, regulations and policies of the Borough of Irwin
not affected, modified or repealed by this chapter, the code, act or
regulations shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 110-6. Fees and costs.
The Borough of Irwin hereby imposes and assesses fees and costs for
the administration and enforcement of said code, act, regulations and this
chapter, which fees and costs shall be established by the Borough of Irwin
Council by resolution from time to time.
§ 110-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation that violates any of the provisions of this
chapter, the code, act and/or regulations commits a summary offense and
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000
A. Pursuant to 35 P.S. § 7210.501(c) and 34 Pa. Code § 403.121, the
Borough of Irwin hereby establishes a Board of Appeals consisting of
five members.
B. The composition of the Board of Appeals is governed by the following:
(1) All members of the Board of Appeals shall be qualified by training
and experience to pass on matters pertaining to building
construction. Training and experience may consist of licensure as
an architect or engineer, experience in the construction industry,
and training or experience as an inspector or plan reviewer.
(2) All members of the Board of Appeals hold office at the pleasure of
the Borough of Irwin.
(3) Members of the Borough of Irwin's governing body and its code
administrators may not serve on the Board of Appeals.
(4) The Borough of Irwin may fill a position on the Board of Appeals
with a qualified person who resides outside of the Borough of Irwin
when it cannot find a person within the Borough of Irwin who
satisfies the requirements of this section.
C. The Borough shall, by separate resolution, appoint the initial members
to the Board of Appeals, who shall serve on an annual basis. After the
initial appointment to the Board of Appeals, the Borough shall annually,
at its reorganization meeting, appoint members to said Board of
Appeals.
D. The Borough may, at any time, establish a joint board of appeals
through an intermunicipal agreement pursuant to 53 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 2301
to 2315 (relating to intergovernmental cooperation).
§ 110-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-7
1:61
and costs incurred by the Borough in enforcement of said violation. Each
day that a violation exists and continues shall be a separate violation.
§ 110-8. Effective date.
This chapter shall be effective June 1, 2004.
Chapter 114
CURFEW
§ 114-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 114-2. Purposes.
This is a curfew ordinance prescribing, in accordance with prevailing
community standards, regulations for the conduct of minors on streets at
night, for the protection of younger children in the Borough from each
other and from other persons on the streets during nighttime hours, for
the enforcement of parental control and responsibility for their children,
for the protection of the public from nocturnal mischief by minors and for
the reduction of the incident of juvenile criminal activity, all for the good of
minors, for the furtherance of family responsibility, and for the public good,
safety and welfare.
§ 114-3. Curfew; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any minor to be or remain in or upon any public
highway, park or other public place within the Borough, or in any enclosure
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
MINOR — Person under the age of 18 years.
PARENT — Any natural parent of a minor, as herein defined, or a
guardian or any adult person responsible for the care and custody of
a minor. When used in this chapter, "parent" shall mean one or both
parents.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public street, alley, sidewalk, park, playground,
public building or vacant lot in the Borough.
REMAIN — To stay behind, to tarry and to stay unnecessarily upon the
streets, including the congregating of groups (or of interacting minors)
totaling four or more persons in which any minor involved would not be
using the streets for emergencies or ordinary purposes such as mere
passage of going home.
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
§ 110-7 IRWIN CODE § 114-3
1:62
or vehicle which is on or in close proximity to any such public place
within the Borough, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. on the
following day. Exceptions to the above are the following:
§ 114-4. Parents not to permit violation.
It is hereby made unlawful for any parent, guardian or the person having
the legal care or custody of a minor to allow or permit such minor to violate
any of the provisions of this chapter without legal justification therefor.
§ 114-5. Procedure upon violation.
Any minor found upon the streets, alleys, parks or public places within the
Borough in violation of § 114-2 shall be taken into custody by the Borough
police or legally deputized individual, be delivered to his parent(s), guardian
or person having the legal custody of said minor, and be given a copy of
this chapter. A report shall be filed and kept in a book for that specific
purpose. If said parent, guardian or person having the legal custody of said
minor shall again allow him to be on the streets, alleys, parks or public
places in violation of § 114-2, said parent, guardian or person having the
legal custody of said minor so offending shall, upon the second offense, be
called along with the offender and be so advised once again as to the penalty
provisions contained in this chapter. Upon the third violation, said parent,
guardian or person will be cited for the violation.
§ 114-6. Procedure in case of repeated violations or other factors
interfering with enforcement.
Any minor who shall violate this chapter more than three times may, at
the discretion of the proper Borough officials, be reported to a society or
organization the purpose of which is to take charge of incorrigibles and
delinquents, and proceedings shall then be taken in the proper court for
the permanent welfare of such minor, and a like procedure may be taken in
cases where the arrest of the parent is not effective or where for any other
A. Minor accompanied by parent, guardian or other person having legal
care or custody of such minor.
B. Minor possessing a written statement dated that day and signed by
parent, guardian or other person having the legal care or custody of
such minor, which statement specifies the time, place, purpose and
necessity of the minor being in a public place contrary to this chapter.
C. Minor lawfully employed making it necessary to be on or in highways,
streets, parks, etc., as stated above and possessing a current letter
certifying the same and signed by employer, parent or guardian.
D. Minor on an emergency errand.
E. Minor traveling to and from church, school or municipal activity with
parental permission statement as in Subsection B above.
§ 114-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-6
1:63
reason the provisions of § 114-2 of this chapter cannot be made effective by
the imposition of fines and penalties.
§ 114-7. Police discretion in age determination.
The police officers of the Borough in taking minors into custody shall use
their discretion in determining age and, in doubtful cases, may require
positive proof of age. Until such proof is furnished, the officer's judgment
shall prevail.
§ 114-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and
costs and, in default of payment, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed
30 days.
Chapter 126
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
§ 126-1. Discharge of firearms prohibited.
Except in necessary defense of person and property and except as provided
in § 126-3 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to use, fire or
discharge any gun or other firearm within the Borough.
§ 126-2. Use of air rifles, bow and arrows, or similar devices
restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any air rifle, air pistol,
spring gun, spring pistol, B-B gun, bow and arrow, or similar device, or
any implement that is not a firearm but which impels a pellet of any kind
with a force that can reasonably be expected to cause bodily harm, at any
place within the Borough, except as provided in § 126-3 of this chapter and
except on a target range which is properly constructed to trap or stop the
projectile, as ascertained by the Chief of Police.
§ 126-3. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to:
A. Persons licensed to hunt in this commonwealth while actually engaged
in hunting where permitted under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
B. Members of any organization incorporated under laws of this
commonwealth engaged in target shooting upon the grounds or
property belonging to or under the control of such organization.
§ 114-6 IRWIN CODE § 126-3
1:64
§ 126-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and
costs and, in default of payment, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed
30 days.
Chapter 130
FIRE DEPARTMENT
C. Any law enforcement officers when used in the discharge of their
official duties.
§ 126-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-4
1:65

ARTICLE I
Third-Party Billing for Services
[Adopted 3-8-2000 by Ord. No. 832 (Ch. 1, Part 9, of the 1993
Code)]
§ 130-1. Authorization to bill.
The Irwin Fire Department of Irwin Borough is hereby authorized to bill
the appropriate insurance carriers for services rendered to third parties in
emergency situations whenever such services may be covered by liability or
hazard insurance.
§ 130-2. Schedule of Services and Fees.
Those services for which billing may occur and fees associated with the
same are set forth in the Schedule of Services and Fees attached hereto,
incorporated herein by reference, and marked Exhibit A.7
§ 130-3. Fees by resolution.
The Schedule of Services and Fees may be amended from time to time by
resolution of the Borough of Irwin Council.
§ 130-4. Coordination of billing through Fire Chief.
The billing of such services shall be coordinated through the Borough of
Irwin Fire Chief. All monies received as reimbursement for such services
shall be deposited into the general fund account of the Borough of Irwin
Volunteer Fire Department and utilized in a manner which is legal and
proper and in the best interests of promoting and maintaining the Borough
of Irwin Volunteer Fire Department.
7. Editor's Note: The complete Schedule of Services and Fees is on file in the Borough office.
§ 130-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-4
1:67

ARTICLE II
Volunteer Service Credit Program
[Adopted 1-6-2020 by Ord. No. 1-20208]
§ 130-5. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the
meanings given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
ACTIVE VOLUNTEER — A volunteer for a volunteer fire company or
nonprofit emergency medical service agency listed under § 130-6C who has
complied with, and is certified under, the Volunteer Service Credit Program.
EARNED INCOME TAX — A tax on earned income and net profits levied
under Chapter 3 of the Act of December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511),
known as "The Local Tax Enabling Act."9
ELIGIBILITY PERIOD — The time frame when volunteers may earn credit
under the Volunteer Service Credit Program.
EMERGENCY RESPONDER — A volunteer who responds to an emergency
call with one of the entities listed in § 130-6C.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE CALL — Any emergency call to which a volunteer
responds, including travel directly from and to a volunteer's home, place
of business or other place where he/she shall have been when the call was
received.
QUALIFIED REAL PROPERTY — A residential real property owned and
occupied as the domicile of an active volunteer.
VOLUNTEER — A member of a volunteer fire company or a nonprofit
emergency medical service agency.
§ 130-6. Volunteer Service Credit Program.
A. Establishment. The Borough of Irwin hereby establishes a Volunteer
Service Credit Program. The goal of the program is to encourage active
membership and service in the community's volunteer fire companies
and volunteer nonprofit emergency medical service agencies.
B. Program criteria. Council shall establish, by resolution, the annual
criteria that must be met to qualify for credits under the program based
on the following:
(1) The number of emergency response calls to which a volunteer
responds.
(2) The level of training and participation in formal training and drills
for a volunteer.
8. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. II, Volunteer Service Credit
Program, adopted 2-13-2019 by Ord. No. 978.
9. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 130-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-6
1:69
(3) The total amount of time expended by a volunteer on administrative
and other support services, including but not limited to:
(a) Fundraising;
(b) Providing facility or equipment maintenance;
(c) Financial bookkeeping.
(4) The involvement in the other events or projects that aid the
financial viability, emergency response or operational readiness of
a volunteer fire company or a nonprofit emergency medical
services agency.
(5) The total number of years the volunteer has served.
C. Eligible Entities. The Volunteer Service Credit Program is available to:
(1) Residents of the Borough of Irwin who are volunteers of the Irwin
Fire Department.
(2) Upon entry into a reciprocal agreement with North Huntingdon
Township (regarding North Huntingdon Township residents who
are volunteers of the Irwin Fire Department), residents of the
Borough of Irwin who are volunteers of the following North
Huntingdon Township Fire Departments: Circleville, Fairman-
Hahntown, Hartford Heights, Larimer, Shafton, Strawpump, and
Westmoreland City, and the volunteers of the North Huntingdon
EMS and Rescue. This Subsection C(2) shall not be effective unless
and until the Borough of Irwin and the Township of North
Huntingdon enter into a reciprocal agreement whereby Township
of North Huntingdon residents who are volunteers of the Irwin Fire
Department may participate in the Township of North Huntingdon
Volunteer Service Credit Program.
D. Eligibility period. A volunteer must meet the minimum criteria, set by
resolution under this section, during the eligibility period to be
considered an active volunteer and qualify for the tax credits
established under § 130-7.
(1) For 2019, the eligibility period under the Volunteer Service Credit
Program shall run from January 1, 2019, until December 31, 2019.
(2) For 2020, and each subsequent year thereafter, the eligibility
period shall run from January 1 until December 31.
E. Recordkeeping. The chief of each volunteer fire company or the
supervisor of the nonprofit emergency medical service agency listed
under § 130-6C shall keep specific records of each volunteer's activities
in a service log to establish credits under the Volunteer Service Credit
Program. Service logs shall be subject to review by Council, the State
Fire Commissioner and the State Auditor General. The chief, or
supervisor, shall annually transmit to the Borough of Irwin a notarized
§ 130-6 IRWIN CODE § 130-6
1:70
eligibility list of all volunteers that have met the minimum criteria for
the Volunteer Service Credit Program. The notarized eligibility list shall
be transmitted to the Borough of Irwin no later than the 31st of January
of each year. The chief or supervisor shall post the notarized eligibility
list in an accessible area of the volunteer agency's facilities.
F. Application. Volunteers that have met the minimum criteria of the
Volunteer Service Credit Program shall sign and submit an application
for certification to their chief or supervisor. The chief or supervisor shall
sign the application if the volunteer has met the minimum criteria of the
Volunteer Service Credit Program and forward it to the Borough
Manager, along with records identifying the volunteer's compliance
with the performance standards of the program criteria. Applications
shall not be accepted by the Borough after March 1 of each year.
G. Municipal review. The Borough Manager shall review the applications
for credit under the Volunteer Service Credit Program and shall crossreference
them with the notarized eligibility list. Council shall approve
all applicants that are on the notarized eligibility list and complied with
the requirements of the program criteria. All applicants approved by
Council of the Borough of Irwin shall be issued a tax credit certificate
by the Borough Manager.
H. Official Tax Credit Register. The Borough of Irwin shall keep an official
Tax Credit Register of all active volunteers that were issued tax credit
certificates. The Borough Manager shall issue updates, as needed, of
the official Tax Credit Register to the following:
(1) Council;
(2) Chief of the volunteer fire companies;
(3) Chief or supervisor of the nonprofit emergency medical services
agency; and
(4) Tax officer for the Borough of Irwin Tax Collection District.
I. Injured volunteers.
(1) An emergency responder that is injured during an emergency
response call may be eligible for future tax credits. The injury must
have occurred while responding to, participating in, or returning
from an emergency response call with one of the entities listed
under § 130-6C.
(2) An injured emergency responder shall provide documentation from
a licensed physician with the application required under § 130-6
stating that their injury prevents them from preforming duties to
qualify as an active volunteer. In such a case, the injured
emergency responder shall be deemed an active volunteer for that
tax year.
§ 130-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-6
1:71
§ 130-7. Earned income tax credit.
§ 130-8. Real property tax credit.
(3) An injured emergency responder shall annually submit the
application required under § 130-6, along with updated
documentation from a licensed physician stating that the injury still
exists and prevents them from qualifying as an active volunteer.
The injured emergency responder shall again be deemed an active
volunteer for that tax year. An injured emergency responder shall
only be deemed an active volunteer for a maximum of five
consecutive tax years.
A. Tax credit. Each active volunteer who has been certified under the
Borough of Irwin Volunteer Service Credit Program shall be eligible to
receive a tax credit of up to $250 of the earned income tax levied by the
Borough of Irwin. When an active volunteer's earned income tax
liability is less than the amount of the tax credit, the tax credit shall
equal the individual's tax liability.
B. Claim. An active volunteer with a tax credit certificate may file a claim
for the tax credit on their municipality's earned income tax liability
when filing a final return for the preceding calendar year with the tax
officer for the Borough of Irwin Tax Collection District.
C. Rejection of tax credit claim.
(1) The tax officer shall reject a claim for a tax credit if the taxpayer is
not on the official Tax Credit Register issued by the Borough
Manager.
(2) If the tax officer rejects the claim, the taxpayer shall be notified in
writing of the decision. The notice shall include the reasons for the
rejection and provide the method of appealing the decision
pursuant to § 130-9.
(3) Taxpayers shall have 30 days to appeal the decision of the tax
officer.
A. Tax credit. Each active volunteer who has been certified under the
Borough of Irwin Volunteer Service Credit Program shall be eligible to
receive a real property tax credit of 20% of the municipal tax liability on
qualified real property. If the tax is paid in the penalty period, the tax
credit shall only apply to the base tax year liability.
B. Claim.
(1) An active volunteer with a tax credit certificate may file a claim for
the tax credit on their qualified real property tax liability for the
municipality's real estate tax levy. The tax credit shall be
administered as a refund by the Borough's Treasurer. An active
volunteer shall file the following with the Borough Manager:
§ 130-6 IRWIN CODE § 130-8
1:72
§ 130-9. Appeals.
(a) A true and correct receipt from the municipal real estate tax
collector of the paid municipal real property taxes for the tax
year for which the claim is being filed. (The taxes on the
eligible property shall be paid in full and not be in arrears or on
a payment plan.)
(b) The tax credit certificate.
(c) Photo identification.
(d) Documentation that the tax paid was for qualified real property
as defined in this article.
(2) If the active volunteer provides all documents required under this
subsection, the Borough Treasurer shall issue a tax refund to the
active volunteer.
C. Rejection of the tax credit claim.
(1) The Borough Manager shall reject the claim for a municipal real
property tax credit if the taxpayer fails to provide the documents
required under Subsection (B)(1).
(2) If the Borough Manager rejects the claim, the taxpayer shall be
notified in writing of the decision. The notice shall include the
reasons for the rejection and provide the method of appealing the
decision pursuant to § 130-9.
(3) Taxpayers shall have 30 days to appeal the decision of the Borough
Manager.
A. Earned income tax credit appeals.
(1) Any taxpayer aggrieved by a decision under § 130-7 shall have a
right to appeal said decision.
(2) A taxpayer shall have 30 days to appeal a decision or rejection of
claim.
(3) All appeals of decisions under § 130-7 shall follow the provisions of
the Act of May 5, 1998, P.L. 301, No. 50, known as the "Local
Taxpayers Bill of Rights."10
B. Real property tax credit appeals.
(1) Any taxpayer aggrieved by a decision under § 130-8 shall have a
right to appeal said decision.
(2) A taxpayer shall have 30 days to appeal a decision or rejection of
claim.
10.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8421 et seq.
§ 130-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-9
1:73
(3) All appeals under § 130-8 shall follow the provision of 2 Pa.C.S.A.
Chapter 5, Subchapter B (relating to practice and procedure of
local agencies), and 2 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 7, Subchapter B (relating
to judicial review of local agency action), also known as the "Local
Agency Law."11
11.Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 551 et seq.
§ 130-9 IRWIN CODE § 130-9
1:74
Chapter 135
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 105.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 110.
Grading and excavation — See Ch. 140.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
230.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 130-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-9
1:75

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 135-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act12 of 1978, delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Council of the Borough of Irwin does hereby order
as follows.
§ 135-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 135-3. Applicability.
§ 135-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 135-5. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the Borough of Irwin unless a permit has
been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
B. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures.
12.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 135-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-5
1:77
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not
imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas or that land uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of Irwin
or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result
from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
§ 135-5 IRWIN CODE § 135-5
1:78
ARTICLE II
Administration
§ 135-6. Designation of the Floodplain Administrator.
The Zoning Officer within the Borough office is hereby appointed to
administer and enforce this chapter and is referred to herein as the
"Floodplain Administrator."
§ 135-7. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the Borough of Irwin.
§ 135-8. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended13); the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended14); the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended15); and the U.S. Clean
Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued
until this determination has been made.
C. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development/permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
history of repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss
issues can be addressed before the permit is issued.
D. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
E. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
13.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
14.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
15.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 135-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-8
1:79
§ 135-9. Application procedures and requirements.
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
F. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Council for whatever
action it considers necessary.
G. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain all records associated with
the requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to,
permitting, inspection and enforcement.
H. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of Title
34 Pa. Code and the 2006 IBC and the 2006 IRC, or latest revisions
thereof.
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the Borough of Irwin.
Such application shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location including address.
(5) Listing of other permits required.
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred, where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
§ 135-8 IRWIN CODE § 135-9
1:80
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage.
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement.
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant.
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used.
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and/or
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives and other
accessways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale, showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood; and
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2006 IBC or the 2006 IRC.
(4) The following data and documentation:
§ 135-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-9
1:81
(a) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood elevation.
(b) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(c) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within a special floodplain area (see § 135-18B),
when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the base flood elevation more
than one foot at any point.
(d) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood elevation. Such statement shall include a
description of the type and extent of floodproofing measures
which have been incorporated into the design of the structure
and/or the development.
(e) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 135-23F, Storage, and § 135-24, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 135-23F and 135-24 which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 135-24
during a base flood.
(f) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(g) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
(5) Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to
the municipality, based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 135-9 IRWIN CODE § 135-10
1:82
§ 135-10. Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
shall be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to the County
Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of
a permit. The recommendations of the conservation district shall be
considered by the Floodplain Administrator for possible incorporation into
the proposed plan.
§ 135-11. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., planning commission, municipal engineer,
etc.) for review and comment.
§ 135-12. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests
for any such change shall be in writing and shall be submitted by the
applicant to the Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
§ 135-13. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard,
which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit, the date of its
issuance, and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 135-14. Start of construction.
A. Work on the proposed construction and/or development shall begin
within 180 days after the date of issuance and shall be completed within
12 months after the date of issuance of the permit, or the permit shall
expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain
Administrator. Construction and/or development shall be considered to
have started with the preparation of land, land clearing, grading, filling,
excavation of basement, footings, piers or foundations, erection of
temporary forms, the installation of piling under proposed subsurface
footings, or the installation of sewer, gas and water pipes, or electrical
or other service lines from the street.
B. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant which sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the
Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request.
§ 135-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-15
1:83
§ 135-15. Enforcement.
§ 135-16. Appeals.
A. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time, not to exceed a period of 30 days, for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent, as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this State; and
(5) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order or direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall pay a fine
to the Borough of Irwin of not less than $25 nor more than $600 plus
costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions
are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any
violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue, and all such
persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered
or relocated in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by the
Council to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter may appeal to the Council. Such appeal must be filed, in
writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or action of the
Floodplain Administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Council shall set a time and place,
within not less than 10 days and not more than 30 days, for the purpose
§ 135-15 IRWIN CODE § 135-16
1:84
of considering the appeal. Notice of the time and place at which the
appeal will be considered shall be given to all parties.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Council may seek relief
therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this state,
including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.
§ 135-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-16
1:85

ARTICLE III
Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 135-17. Identification.
§ 135-18. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of the Borough of Irwin
classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs)
dated March 17, 2011, and issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), or the most recent revision thereof,
including all digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance
Study.
B. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments, are hereby adopted by the Borough of Irwin and
declared to be a part of this chapter.
A. Floodway area.
(1) Description.
(a) The area identified as "floodway" in the FIS which represents
the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land areas that
must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by more
than one foot at any point.
(b) This term shall also include floodway areas which have been
identified in other available studies or sources of information
for those special floodplain areas where no floodway has been
identified in the FIS.
(2) Special requirements.
(a) Any encroachment that would cause any increase in flood
heights shall be prohibited.
(b) No new construction or development shall be allowed unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
B. Special floodplain area.
(1) Description. The areas identified as Zones AE and A1-30 in the FIS
which are subject to inundation by the one-percent-annual-chance
flood event determined by detailed methods and have base flood
elevations (BFEs) shown.
§ 135-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-18
1:87
(2) Special requirements.
(a) No new construction or development shall be located within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of
any watercourse unless a permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
(b) In Special floodplain areas without a designated floodway, no
new development shall be permitted unless it can be
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of all past and
projected development will not increase the BFE by more than
one foot.
C. Approximate floodplain area.
(1) Description. The areas identified as Zone A in the FIS which are
subject to inundation by the one-percent-annual-chance flood event
determined using approximate methodologies. Because detailed
hydraulic analyses have not been performed, no BFEs or flood
depths are shown.
(2) Special requirements.
(a) No new construction or development shall be located within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of
any watercourse unless a permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
(b) When available, information from other federal, state and
other acceptable sources shall be used to determine the BFE as
well as a floodway area, if possible. When no other information
is available, the BFE shall be determined by using a point on
the boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest
the construction site in question.
(c) In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant
to determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of
demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the
technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted
technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall
be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the Borough of Irwin.
D. Shallow flooding area.
(1) Description. The areas identified as Zones AO and AH in the FIS.
These areas are subject to inundation by one-percent-annualchance
shallow flooding where average depths are between one
and three feet.
§ 135-18 IRWIN CODE § 135-18
1:88
§ 135-19. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Council
where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person
documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such change,
approval must be obtained from the FEMA. Additionally, as soon as
practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information
becomes available, a community shall notify the FEMA of the changes by
submitting technical or scientific data.
§ 135-20. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Borough of Irwin Planning
Commission and any party aggrieved by this decision or determination may
appeal to the Council. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
(2) Special requirements. Establish drainage paths to guide
floodwaters around and away from structures on slopes.
§ 135-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-20
1:89

ARTICLE IV
Technical Provisions
§ 135-21. General.
§ 135-22. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality and until all required permits or approvals have been
first obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, the FEMA and Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. Submit technical or scientific data to FEMA for a Letter of Map Revision
(LOMR) within six months of the completion of any new construction,
development or other activity resulting in changes in the BFE.
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
A. Residential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation in accordance with § 135-18C(2)(b)
of this chapter.
(3) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) at or above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified on the FIRM.
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2006 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
§ 135-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-22
1:91
2006 International Residential Code (IRC), or the most recent
revisions thereof, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 to
405, as amended) shall be utilized.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
flood elevation or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation in
accordance with § 135-18C(2)(b) of this chapter.
(3) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor elevated or completely floodproofed
above the highest adjacent grade to at least as high as the depth
number specified on the FIRM.
(4) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the WI or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as
amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent standard. All
plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be
accompanied by a statement, certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, which states that the proposed design and
methods of construction are in conformance with the abovereferenced
standards.
(5) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2006 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2006 International Residential Code (IRC), or the most recent
revisions thereof, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 to
405, as amended) shall be utilized.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements),
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage, in an area other than a basement,
§ 135-22 IRWIN CODE § 135-22
1:92
shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic
forces on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also
includes crawl spaces.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles or to the storage of
tools, material and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 100 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation or
movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the
entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing
hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
§ 135-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-22
1:93
§ 135-23. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points;
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only — sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted;
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring or settling;
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet, unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to and
approved by the Floodplain Administrator; and
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall ensure proper drainage along streets and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any
identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all state
and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it or
contamination from it during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No.
348, "Protecting Building Utilities from Flood Damages," and The
International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be utilized.
§ 135-22 IRWIN CODE § 135-23
1:94
D. Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems, shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or, in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal or plant life, and
not listed in § 135-24, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation and/or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain, without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of a marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
§ 135-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-23
1:95
§ 135-24. Development which may endanger human life.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) located at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine
or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 to 405), as
amended, and not limited to the following provisions, shall apply to the
above and other sections and subsections of this chapter to the extent
that they are more restrictive and/or supplement the requirements of
this chapter.
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2006, or the latest edition
thereof: Sections 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and
Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2006, or the latest
edition thereof: Sections R104, R105, R109, R323, Appendix
AE101, Appendix E and Appendix J.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act16 and
the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which will be used for the production or storage of
any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or will be used
for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550
gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances on the premises; or will involve the production,
storage or use of any amount of radioactive substances shall be subject
to the provisions of this section in addition to all other applicable
16.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 135-23 IRWIN CODE § 135-24
1:96
provisions. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
B. Within any floodway area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A above shall be prohibited.
C. Within any floodplain area, any new or substantially improved structure
of the kind described in Subsection A above shall be prohibited within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any
watercourse.
D. Where permitted within any floodplain area, any new or substantially
improved structure of the kind described in Subsection A above shall be
elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up to at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation, designed to prevent
pollution from the structure or activity during the course of a base flood
elevation. Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below
the regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
§ 135-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-24
1:97
§ 135-25. Special requirements for subdivisions.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in flood hazard areas
where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported by
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
conditional letter of map revision or letter of map revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 135-26. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations" (U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as amended March 1992), or with some
other equivalent watertight standard.
A. Within any FW (floodway area), manufactured homes shall be
prohibited.
B. Within approximate floodplain or special floodplain area, manufactured
homes shall be prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward
from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
C. Where permitted within any floodplain area, all manufactured homes
and any improvements thereto shall be:
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation.
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
D. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturers' installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2006 International
Residential Building Code or the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing, 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto, shall apply and
34 Pa. Code Chapters 401 to 405.
E. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2006 IBC, and the 2006 IRC, or the most recent revisions thereto, and
34 Pa. Code, as amended, where appropriate and/or applicable to units
where the manufacturers' standards for anchoring cannot be provided
or were not established for the units' proposed installation.
§ 135-24 IRWIN CODE § 135-27
1:98
§ 135-27. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Recreational vehicles in Zones A1-30, AH and AE must either:
A. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
B. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
C. Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in § 135-26.
§ 135-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-27
1:99

ARTICLE V
Activities Requiring Special Permits
§ 135-28. General.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, the following activities shall be
prohibited within any identified floodplain area unless a special permit has
been issued by the Borough of Irwin:
§ 135-29. Application requirements for special permits.
Applicants for special permits shall provide five copies of the following
items:
A. The commencement of any of the following activities or the
construction, enlargement or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
A. A written request including a completed permit application form.
B. A small scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site is
located.
C. A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch
being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(1) North arrow, scale and date;
(2) Topography based upon the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988, showing existing and proposed contours at
intervals of two feet;
(3) All property and lot lines, including dimensions and the size of the
site expressed in acres or square feet;
(4) The location of all existing streets, drives, other accessways, and
parking areas, with information concerning widths, pavement types
and construction, and elevations;
(5) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
buildings, structures and other public or private facilities,
§ 135-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-29
1:101
including railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural and
man-made features affecting, or affected by, the proposed activity
or development;
(6) The location of the floodplain boundary line, information and spot
elevations concerning the base flood elevation elevations, and
information concerning the flow of water, including direction and
velocities;
(7) The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities and any
other improvements; and
(8) Any other information which the municipality considers necessary
for adequate review of the application.
D. Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements,
clearly and legibly drawn at suitable scale, showing the following:
(1) Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings,
including floor plans, sections and exterior building elevations, as
appropriate;
(2) For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and, as required, the elevation of any other
floor;
(3) Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors associated
with the base flood elevation;
(4) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures;
(5) Cross-section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other
accessways, and parking areas, showing all rights-of-way and
pavement widths;
(6) Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives and vehicular
accessways, including existing and proposed grades; and
(7) Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems, and any other utilities and
facilities.
E. The following data and documentation:
(1) Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the
activity or development is proposed is an existing separate and
single parcel owned by the applicant or the client he represents;
(2) Certification from a registered professional engineer, architect or
landscape architect that the proposed construction has been
adequately designed to protect against damage from the base flood
elevation;
§ 135-29 IRWIN CODE § 135-29
1:102
§ 135-30. Application review procedures.
Upon receipt of an application for a special permit by the Borough of Irwin,
the following procedures shall apply in addition to those of Article II:
(3) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, landscape architect, or other qualified person, which
contains a complete and accurate description of the nature and
extent of pollution that might possibly occur from the development
during the course of a base flood elevation, including a statement
concerning the effects such pollution may have on human life;
(4) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the effects the proposed development will
have on base flood elevations and flows;
(5) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the kinds and amounts of any loose buoyant
materials or debris that may possibly exist or be located on the site
below the base flood elevation and the effects such materials and
debris may have on base flood elevations and flows;
(6) The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental
Protection's "Planning Module for Land Development";
(7) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the
requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection to
implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control;
(8) Any other applicable permits, such as, but not limited to, a permit
for any activity regulated by the Department of Environmental
Protection under Section 302 of Act 1978-166;17 and
(9) An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which the
site will be safely evacuated before or during the course of a base
flood.
A. Within three working days following receipt of the application, a
complete copy of the application and all accompanying documentation
shall be forwarded to the County Planning Commission by registered or
certified mail for its review and recommendations. Copies of the
application shall also be forwarded to the Borough of Irwin Planning
Commission and the Borough of Irwin Engineer for review and
comment.
B. If an application is received that is incomplete, the Borough of Irwin
shall notify the applicant in writing, stating in what respect the
application is deficient.
17.Editor's Note: Section 302 of the Flood Plain Management Act; see 32 P.S. § 679.302.
§ 135-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-30
1:103
§ 135-31. Special technical requirements.
C. If the Borough of Irwin decides to disapprove an application, it shall
notify the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval.
D. If the Borough of Irwin approves an application, it shall file written
notification, together with the application and all pertinent information,
with the Department of Community and Economic Development, by
registered or certified mail, within five working days after the date of
approval.
E. Before issuing the special permit, the Borough of Irwin shall allow the
Department of Community and Economic Development 30 days, after
receipt of the notification by the Department, to review the application
and decision made by the Borough of Irwin.
F. If the Borough of Irwin does not receive any communication from the
Department of Community and Economic Development during the
thirty-day review period, it may issue a special permit to the applicant.
G. If the Department of Community and Economic Development should
decide to disapprove an application, it shall notify the Borough of Irwin
and the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval, and the
Borough of Irwin shall not issue the special permit.
A. In addition to the requirements of Article IV of this chapter, the
following minimum requirements shall also apply to any proposed
development requiring a special permit. If there is any conflict between
any of the following requirements and those in Article IV of this chapter
or in any other code, ordinance or regulation, the more restrictive
provision shall apply.
B. No application for a special permit shall be approved unless it can be
determined that the structure or activity will be located, constructed
and maintained in a manner which will:
(1) Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and any
occupants of the structure. At a minimum, all new structures shall
be designed, located and constructed so that:
(a) The structure will survive inundation by waters of the base
flood elevation without any lateral movement or damage to
either the structure itself or to any of its equipment or contents
below the BFE.
(b) The lowest floor (including basement) will be elevated to at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
(c) The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an
indefinite period of time and be safely evacuated at any time
during the base flood elevation.
§ 135-30 IRWIN CODE § 135-31
1:104
(2) Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood
levels or flows or debris endangering life and property.
C. All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the Borough of Irwin and the Department of Community and
Economic Development.
§ 135-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-31
1:105

ARTICLE VI
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 135-32. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 135-33 shall apply.
§ 135-33. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any floodway area that would cause any increase in the elevation
of the base flood elevation.
B. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any special floodplain area that would, together with all other
existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more than one
foot at any point.
C. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any kind
to an existing structure to an extent or amount of 50% or more of its
market value shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
D. The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, and the 2006 IBC and the 2006 IRC.
E. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any kind
to an existing structure to an extent or amount of less than 50% of its
market value shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible.
F. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any kind
that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be undertaken only in
full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 135-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-33
1:107

ARTICLE VII
Variances
§ 135-34. General.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in an
exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner, the
Borough of Irwin may, upon request, grant relief from the strict application
of the requirements.
§ 135-35. Variance procedures and conditions.
A. Requests for variances shall be considered by the Borough of Irwin in
accordance with the procedures contained in § 135-9 and the following:
(1) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any floodway area that would cause any
increase in the BFE.
(2) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use or activity within any special floodplain area that would,
together with all other existing and anticipated development,
increase the BFE more than one foot at any point.
(3) Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the
other requirements pertaining specifically to development
regulated by special permit (Article V) or to development which
may endanger human life (§ 135-24).
(4) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(5) In granting any variance, the Borough of Irwin shall attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers
necessary in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare,
and to achieve the objectives of this chapter.
(6) Whenever a variance is granted, the Borough of Irwin shall notify
the applicant in writing that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(7) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Borough of Irwin shall
consider, at a minimum, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
§ 135-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-35
1:109
(c) That the granting of the variance will:
[1] Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense; nor
[2] Create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public,
or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
(8) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the Borough of Irwin. In addition, a report of all
variances granted during the year shall be included in the annual
report to the FEMA.
B. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent-annual-chance flood.
§ 135-35 IRWIN CODE § 135-35
1:110
ARTICLE VIII
Definitions
§ 135-36. General provision.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 135-37. Specific definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood").
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufacturing homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
§ 135-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-37
1:111
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse, and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed area,
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental storage,
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 135-37 IRWIN CODE § 135-37
1:112
in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of
a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the
structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements
of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent
or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting
public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after March 9, 1981, and includes any subsequent
improvements thereto.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
§ 135-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-37
1:113
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds
25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails, and new manufactured home parks and subdivisions
and substantial improvements to such existing parks, when such
development is located in all or a designated portion of a floodplain.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99 or AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within 180
days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either: the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds, not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
D.
§ 135-37 IRWIN CODE § 135-37
1:114
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred substantial damage or repetitive loss, regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999, applicable to new
construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the UCC adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction regulations. For coordination purposes, references to the
above are made specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.18
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4) or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure.
B.
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 135-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-37
1:115
Chapter 140
GRADING AND EXCAVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 105.
Construction codes — See Ch. 110.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 225.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
230.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 140-1. Statement of intent.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation to
undertake or cause to be undertaken the excavation, filling and/or grading
of any land within the Borough unless an approved permit has been
obtained from the Borough Building Permit Officer.
§ 140-2. Definitions. [Amended 5-12-1975 by Ord. No. 631]
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
EARTH MATERIAL — Any rock, natural soil or fill and/or any combination
thereof.
EXCAVATION — The mechanical removal of earth material.
FILLING — The deposition of earth material.
GRADING — Any excavating or filling or combination thereof.
PERSON — Any natural person, persons, partnership, association,
municipal authority, firm or corporation.
§ 140-3. Application procedures.
Application for such a permit shall be made in writing to the Building Permit
Officer on forms supplied by the Borough. Such application shall contain at
least the following:
A. The name and address of:
(1) The applicant.
(2) The owner of the land on which the work will be performed.
(3) The contractor performing the work.
B. An identification and description of the work to be covered by the
permit for which application is made.
§ 135-37 IRWIN CODE § 140-3
1:116
§ 140-4. Issuance of permit.
The Building Permit Officer shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work will be in conformance with all
applicable requirements and regulations.
§ 140-5. Permit changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the Building Permit Officer, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the Building Permit Officer.
§ 140-6. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Building Permit Officer shall issue a placard
which shall be displayed on the premises during the time the work is in
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit, the date of its
issuance, and be signed by the Building Permit Officer.
§ 140-7. Start of work and expiration of permit.
§ 140-8. Inspection and revocation.
During the permitted work period, the Building Permit Officer or other
authorized official may inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the permit
application and with all applicable municipal laws and ordinances. In the
event the Building Permit Officer discovers that the work does not comply
with the permit application or any applicable laws and ordinances, or that
there has been a false statement or misrepresentation by any applicant, the
Building Permit Officer shall revoke the permit and report such fact to the
Borough Council for whatever action it considers necessary.
C. A description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done, by
lot, block, tract, and house and street address, or similar description
which will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed work.
D. An estimate of the value of the proposed work.
E. Such other information as reasonably may be required by the Building
Permit Officer.
A. The proposed work shall begin within six months after the date of
issuance of the permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension
is granted, in writing, by the Building Permit Officer.
B. All work shall be completed within one year of the date of issuance of
the permit. If any work is to be performed beyond this period, a new
permit must be obtained under the conditions and requirements cited
in §§ 140-3 and 140-4 of this chapter.
§ 140-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-9
1:117
§ 140-9. Fees. [Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
Applications for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
Borough, based upon the estimated cost of the proposed work as
determined by the Building Permit Officer, at rates and in amounts as
established from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 140-10. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the Building Permit Officer's estimate of the cost
of the proposed work may appeal to the Council. Such appeal must be filed,
in writing, within 30 days after the determination by the Building Permit
Officer. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Council shall set a time and place,
not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days, for the purpose of hearing
the appeal. Notice of the time and place of the hearing of the appeal shall
be given to all parties, at which time they may appear and be heard. The
determination of the estimated cost by the Council shall be final in all cases.
§ 140-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-12-1975 by Ord. No.
631; 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
Chapter 144
HANDBILLS AND ADVERTISING MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 180. Obstructions on streets and sidewalks — See
Ch. 225, Art. III.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and
costs and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense.
B. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are hereby reserved,
including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this chapter.
The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or
noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the violation or
noncompliance or permit it to continue, and any such person shall be
required to correct or remedy such violation and noncompliance within
a reasonable time. Any excavation, filling and/or grading not in
compliance with this chapter may be declared by the Council to be a
public nuisance and abatable as such.
§ 140-9 IRWIN CODE § 144-1
1:118
§ 144-1. Restrictions on distribution of handbills and advertising
matter. [Amended 4-10-1978 by Ord. No. 676]
No person, partnership, firm or corporation shall distribute any newspaper,
circular, handbill or advertising matter of any kind whatever in the Borough
of Irwin by casting or scattering the same upon any of the streets,
sidewalks, alleys or public places in the Borough. Nothing herein shall
prevent any person from handing any noncommercial literature or other
printed matter, upon any of the streets, sidewalks or alleys in the Borough,
to any person willing to receive the same.
§ 144-2. Permit required for distribution. [Amended 5-12-1975 by
Ord. No. 611; 4-10-1978 by Ord. No. 676]
No person, partnership, firm or corporation shall distribute any newspaper,
circular, handbill or advertising matter of any kind whatever in the Borough
without first having applied to the Manager and obtained from him a permit
to do so, such permit to be valid for such length of time as shall be indicated
thereon and to be issued without payment of any fee. No distribution of any
newspapers, circulars, handbills or advertising matter shall be made by any
person, partnership, firm or corporation after the expiration of the permit
applicable thereto.
§ 144-3. Permit required for dispensing machines. [Added
4-10-1978 by Ord. No. 676]
No person, partnership, firm or corporation shall place vending machines
dispensing newspapers, circulars, handbills or advertising matter of any
kind whatever on the sidewalks of the Borough without first having applied
to the Borough Manager and having obtained from him a permit to do
so, such permit to be valid for such length of time as shall be indicated
thereon and to be issued without payment of any fee. No distribution of any
newspapers, circulars, handbills or advertising matter shall be made by any
person, partnership, firm or corporation after the expiration of the permit
applicable thereto.
§ 144-4. Hold harmless agreement. [Added 4-10-1978 by Ord. No.
676]
The person, partnership, firm or corporation wishing to place any vending
machines dispensing newspapers, circulars, handbills or advertising matter
on the sidewalks of the Borough must enter into an agreement with the
Borough indicating the desire to hold harmless, indemnify and defend the
Borough from any cause of action or claim whatsoever arising from the
placement, care, maintenance, operation and inspection of these vending
machines. Additionally, the person, partnership, firm or corporation must
agree to assume full and complete responsibility for the expense,
placement, care, maintenance, operation and periodic inspection of the
vending machines and be able to show proof of insurance coverage with a
reliable insurance company authorized to do business in the Commonwealth
§ 144-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-4
1:119
of Pennsylvania for liability in the minimum amounts of $100,000/$250,000
for personal injury and $25,000/$50,000 for property damage.
§ 144-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-12-1975 by Ord. No.
611; 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs
and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 150
INSURANCE
§ 144-4 IRWIN CODE § 144-5
1:120
ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Claims
[Adopted 3-14-2007 by Ord. No. 880]
§ 150-1. Designated official.
The Borough Secretary or such official as the Borough Councilpersons may
designate from time to time ("designated official") is hereby appointed as
the designated official who is authorized to carry out all responsibilities and
duties stated herein.
§ 150-2. General provisions.
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the "insuring
agent") doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a
claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within the
Borough of Irwin where the amount recoverable for the fire loss to the
structure under all applicable policies exceeds $7,500 unless the insuring
agent is furnished by the designated official with a Borough certificate
pursuant to Act 98 of 1992,19 as amended, and unless there is compliance
with Act 98 of 1992, as amended, and the provisions of this article.
§ 150-3. Procedures.
Where, pursuant to Act 98 of 1992, as amended, the designated official
issues a certificate indicating that there are no delinquent taxes,
assessments, penalties or user charges against real property, the insuring
agent may pay the claim of the named insured; provided, however, that if
the loss agreed upon by the named insured and the insuring agent equals or
exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire policies covering
the building restructure the following procedures must be followed
pursuant to Act 98 of 1992, as amended:
A. The insuring agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the
designated official of the Borough in the aggregate of $2,000 for each
$15,000 of a claim and for each fraction of that amount of a claim; this
subsection is to be applied such that if the claim is $15,000 or less, the
amount transferred to the Borough shall be $2,000.
B. If at the time of a proof of loss agreed to between the named insured
and the insuring agent the name insured has submitted a contractor's
signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the
building or other structure, the insuring agent shall transfer to the
Borough from the insurance proceeds the amount specified in the
estimate.
C. The transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all companies,
associations or exchanges insuring the building or other structure.
19.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.
§ 150-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-3
1:121
§ 150-4. Fees.
The Borough of Irwin may, by resolution, adopt procedures and regulations
to implement Act 98 of 1992, as amended, and this article and may, by
resolution, fix reasonable fees to be charged for municipal activities or
services provided pursuant to Act 98 of 1992, as amended, and this article,
including by not limited to issuance of certificates and bills, performance
D. After the transfer, the named insured may submit a contractor's signed
estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the building or
other structure, and the designated official shall return the amount of
the funds transferred to the Borough in excess of the estimate to the
named insured, if the Borough has not commenced to remove, repair or
secure the building or other structure.
E. Upon receipt of proceeds under this section, the Borough shall perform
the following:
(1) The designated official shall place the proceeds in a separate fund
to be used solely as security against the total costs of removing,
repairing or securing the building or structure which are incurred
by the Borough. Such costs shall include, without limitation, any
engineering, legal or administrative costs incurred by the Borough
in connection with such removal, repair or securing of the building
or any proceedings related thereto.
(2) It is the obligation of the insuring agent when transferring the
proceeds to provide the Borough with the name and address of the
named insured. Upon receipt of the transferred funds and the name
and address of the named insured, the designated official shall
contact the named insured, certify that the proceeds have been
received by the Borough, and notify the named insured that the
procedures under this subsection shall be followed.
(3) When repair, removal or securing of the building or other structure
has been completed in accordance with all applicable regulations
and orders of the Borough, and the required proof of such
completion received by the designated official, and if the Borough
has not incurred any costs for repair, removal or securing of the
building or other structure, the fund shall be returned to the named
insured. If the Borough has incurred costs for repair, removal or
securing of the building or other structure, the costs shall be paid
from the fund, and if excess funds remain, the Borough shall
transfer the remaining funds to the named insured.
(4) To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by the
Borough pursuant to this section and not returned to the named
insured, such interest shall belong to the Borough. To the extent
that proceeds are returned to the named insured, interest earned
on such proceeds shall be distributed to the named insured at the
time that the proceeds are returned.
§ 150-3 IRWIN CODE § 150-4
1:122
of inspections and opening separate fund accounts. Said fees shall be the
responsibility of the named insured.
§ 150-5. Enforcement remedies.
A. Any person who has violated or knowingly permitted the violation of the
provisions of this article shall, upon being fund liable therefor in a civil
enforcement proceeding commenced by the Borough, pay a fine of not
more than $1,000 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's
fees incurred by the Borough. No judgment shall commence or be
imposed, levied or be payable until the date of the determination of a
violation by the Magisterial District Judge.
B. If the violator neither pays the fine and court costs, nor timely appeals
the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment.
C. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney's fees collected for
violations of this article shall be paid over to the Borough.
§ 150-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-5
1:123
Chapter 154
JUNK DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 169.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 180.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 154-1. Definitions and interpretations. [Amended 4-10-1967 by
Ord. No. 4-1967]
§ 154-2. License required. [Amended 4-10-1967 by Ord. No. 4-1967;
5-12-1975 by Ord. No. 619; 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNK — Any discarded material or article such as is not ordinarily
disposed of as rubbish or refuse, and shall include, but not be limited
to, scrap metal and scrapped motor vehicles or the storage of any
nonoperating motor vehicles and shall not include any garbage or other
organic waste or any paper, rubbish, rags or other flammable article or
material.
JUNK DEALER — Any person who shall engage in the business of
selling, buying and dealing in junk to any degree, whether a major
portion of his business or not.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm or corporation.
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. No person shall engage in business as a junk dealer in the Borough
without first having obtained a license from the Manager, for which
license the fee shall be in an amount as established from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council for each and every calendar year,
such fee to be for the use of the Borough. Such license shall be renewed
annually on or before the first day of January of each year, provided, in
any case where a junk dealer's business shall be established in the
Borough on or after the first day of January in any year, the license fee
payable by such junk dealer for the remainder of such year shall be at a
prorated yearly rate.
B. On and after April 10, 1967, no new license shall be granted to engage
in business as a junk dealer in the Borough except as a renewal or
transfer license as granted under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 150-5 IRWIN CODE § 154-3
1:124
§ 154-3. Issuance of license. [Amended 5-12-1975 by Ord. No. 619]
The license provided for in § 154-2 of this chapter shall be issued by the
Manager after application shall have been made therefor by the owner
desiring to be licensed. Such license shall state the name of the person to
whom such license is issued and the premises from which such business
is to be conducted. Such license shall be posted conspicuously upon the
premises licensed thereunder. The name of the licensed junk dealer and
the number of the license under which he operates shall be placed in
a conspicuous place on the outside of every vehicle used for business
purposes by such dealer.
§ 154-4. Place of business only as licensed; itinerants prohibited.
No person licensed under this chapter shall by virtue of one license keep
more than one place of business within the Borough for the purpose of
buying, selling or dealing in junk. Nor shall any such person engage in
business as a junk dealer in any place other than the place designated upon
his license. Nor shall any such person, or any other person, operate upon
any of the streets of the Borough, whether from a vehicle or upon foot, as a
scavenger or an itinerant buyer or seller of junk.
§ 154-5. Transfer of license; fee. [Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No.
791]
No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable from one person
to another person except when the ownership of a licensed premises shall
change. In any such case, the new owner shall apply for a transfer of such
license to him and shall pay a transfer fee in an amount as established from
time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 154-6. Record of purchases.
Every junk dealer shall provide and shall constantly keep a book in which
shall be legibly written down in the English language, at the time of the
receipt or purchase of any junk, a description of every article or material
purchased or received by him, the date and hour of such purchase or
receipt, and the person from whom such article or material was purchased
or received. Such book and all junk purchased, received or handled by
any junk dealer shall at all times be subject to inspection by the Police
Department of the Borough, Chief of the Fire Department, and Health
Officer of the Borough.
§ 154-7. Junk retained as received for 48 hours.
Every junk dealer licensed under this chapter shall keep and retain upon
the licensed premises for a period of 48 hours after the purchase or receipt
thereof all junk received or purchased by him, and he shall not disturb or
reduce the same or alter the original form, shape or condition until such
period of 48 hours shall have elapsed. This section shall not apply to the
§ 154-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-7
1:125
return of junk to the person from whom received where received only for
temporary storage.
§ 154-8. Maintenance of premises. [Amended 5-12-1975 by Ord. No.
619]
Every junk dealer licensed under this chapter shall constantly maintain the
licensed premises in the manner prescribed by this section, as follows:
A. Such premises shall at all times be maintained so as not to constitute a
nuisance or a menace to the health of the community or of residents
nearby or a place for the breeding of rodents and vermin.
B. No garbage or other organic waste and no paper, rubbish, rags or other
flammable articles or materials shall be stored in such premises; nor
shall there be any burning of any abandoned, wrecked or inoperable
vehicle on the licensed premises.
C. All gasoline, oil or other inflammable substances shall be drained from
any junked, wrecked or abandoned vehicles, and the same shall be
disposed of in a safe and sanitary manner, but in no event shall any
person pour or dispose of such substance through any sewer, public or
private.
D. The manner of storage and arrangement of junk and the drainage
facilities of the premises shall be such as to prevent the accumulation of
stagnant water upon the premises and to facilitate access for firefighting
purposes.
E. No operations shall be performed on a licensed premises on Sunday
which shall involve scrapping, junking, disassembling or otherwise
causing loud offensive sounds.
F. No abandoned, wrecked or inoperable vehicle shall be parked, stored or
left standing in the front of any building facing a public street or
highway; provided, further, that all such aforesaid vehicles shall be
parked, stored or left standing at least 20 feet from all property lines of
the premises upon which such business is conducted and licensed; and
provided, further, that no such vehicles shall be permitted to be stored
or stacked one upon the other.
G. No license shall be granted to any person having been convicted of any
crime involving larceny, burglary or any crime involving receiving of
stolen goods or the dealing therein or of the delivery of stolen property
in any way, or breaches of the peace.
H. All junkyards shall be enclosed by a fence of type and style to be
determined by Council or by evergreen plantings, or both.
§ 154-7 IRWIN CODE § 154-9
1:126
§ 154-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-10-1967 by Ord. No.
4-1967; 5-12-1975 by Ord. No. 619; 5-12-1975 by Ord. No. 623;
7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs
and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 158
LITTERING
§ 158-1. Littering prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to litter any sidewalk, street, alley, public
property, park or playgrounds within the Borough by casting, depositing
or dropping thereon any garbage, refuse, rubbish or discarded material or
substance whatever, regardless of the amount or quantity thereof, except in
properly designated receptacles.
§ 158-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No.
791]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs
and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 165
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abatement of nuisances — See Ch. 169, Art. I. Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 165-1. Purpose.
It is the intent, purpose and scope of this chapter to ensure that the life,
health, welfare and public safety of the inhabitants of the Borough are not
jeopardized by noises or sounds of such a volume or of such a nature as to
cause annoyance to the inhabitants of the Borough thereby disturbing the
peace of those inhabitants of the Borough.
§ 154-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-2
1:127
§ 165-2. Offensive and loud sounds and noises declared unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, produce or cause any sound
or noise by his own conduct or action or by his/her operation of any piece
of equipment, machinery, vehicle or other noise or sound-making device or
instrument of such a high volume or of such a nature, or make such sound
or noise during the hours between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as to cause
annoyance to the inhabitants of the Borough.
§ 165-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
KNOWINGLY — Having general knowledge of or reason to know or a belief
or grounds for belief which warrants further inspection of the character,
nature and level of the sound or noise which would cause annoyance to
inhabitants of the Borough.
OFFENSIVE OR LOUD NOISE OR SOUND — The audible reaction or result
caused by the conduct or action of a person, persons, machines, equipment,
vehicles or any other thing, animal or device which causes a stimulation
of the auditory receptors which annoys or disturbs an inhabitant of the
Borough.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm or corporation.20
§ 165-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No.
791]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs
and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 165-5. Declaration of public nuisance.
Each and every time where a person makes, produces or causes any sound
or noise by his own conduct or action or by his/her operation of any piece
of equipment, machinery, vehicle or other noise or sound-making device or
instrument, at such a high volume, of such a nature, or makes such a sound
or noise during the hours between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as to cause
annoyance to the inhabitants of the Borough, the same shall be declared a
public nuisance.
§ 165-6. Abatement of nuisance.
Any person responsible for creating or causing such an annoying noise
or sound, and upon a complaint being received by the Borough Police
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 165-2 IRWIN CODE § 165-6
1:128
Department, shall abate, suspend, alter or remove the annoying sound
or noise promptly upon notice being received by the Borough Police
Department.
§ 165-7. Failure to abate nuisance upon receipt of notice.
If any person fails to abate the annoying sound or noise immediately after
receiving proper notice from the Police Department, the said Police
Department shall submit a report to the Borough Council.
§ 165-8. Action to be taken by Council.
§ 165-9. Action taken by Borough Solicitor.
Upon a specific finding by resolution by the Borough of the existence of a
public nuisance at a particular place, the Borough Solicitor shall, within 48
hours of service of said resolution and order of abatement upon persons
responsible for the public nuisance, commence legal proceedings by the
filing of an equitable action seeking the following relief:
§ 165-10. Cost of abatement.
A. Whenever a public nuisance exists in the Borough as herein defined, the
Borough Council shall, by resolution, declare:
(1) Such public nuisance exists, setting forth the legal description or
street address of the place where the public nuisance occurred.
(2) The name of the person causing the described public nuisance.
(3) The finding or facts which support the declaration of a public
nuisance.
B. Upon enactment of the resolution declaring the existence of a public
nuisance as aforesaid, the Borough Council shall order the person to
abate such public nuisance within 24 hours of service of such order of
abatement.
A. A declaratory judgment that the noise or sound caused by the defendant
is annoying to the public.
B. A declaratory judgment that the noise or sound described by the
Borough Council is a public nuisance under this chapter and such
resolution.
C. A mandatory injunction ordering abatement of said public nuisance.
D. All such other relief as the Court may deem just and proper.
A. The cost of abatement, upon judgment for the Borough in legal
proceedings commenced by the Borough Solicitor pursuant to this
chapter, shall include investigative costs, court costs, reasonable
attorney's fees arising out of the preparation for and trial of the cause
§ 165-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-10
1:129
Chapter 169
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 95.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 105.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 110.
Junk dealers — See Ch. 154.
Noise — See Ch. 165.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
and appeals therefrom, and other costs allowed on appeal, printing
costs of trial and appellate briefs, and all other papers filed in such
proceedings.
B. Upon judgment for the Borough, costs of abatement are hereby made a
special assessment against the parcel of land upon which such public
nuisance is maintained. Upon its determination in an equity action,
such shall, by separate legal proceeding, be made a lien against such
property and a personal obligation against any person, persons, firm,
association, partnership, corporation or other entity and shall be
collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary
municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties
and the procedure and sale in the case of delinquency as provided for
ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable at the levy, collection and
enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to such special
assessment.
§ 165-10 IRWIN CODE § 165-10
1:130
ARTICLE I
Abatement of Public Nuisances; Recovery of Costs
[Adopted 8-9-1965 by Ord. No. 9-1965 (Ch. 10, Part 4, of the 1993
Code)]
§ 169-1. Declaration of public nuisance; order to abate. [Amended
7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
Whenever a building, structure, excavation, premises, business, pursuit,
matter or thing, or the sewerage, drainage or ventilation thereof, in the
opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer and/or the Borough Engineer,
either in whole or in part is in a condition or in effect dangerous to life or
health, such officer may declare the same, to the extent necessary, to be a
public nuisance and dangerous to life and health, and may order the same to
be removed, abated, suspended, altered or otherwise improved or purified,
and shall cause said order, before its execution, to be served as the Borough
Council of Irwin shall direct on the owner, agent, occupant or tenant thereof
or some of them, if said parties or any of them are in such Borough and can
be found. If the party so served shall, before its execution is commenced,
apply to said Borough Council to have said order or its execution stayed
or modified, the said Borough Council may temporarily suspend or modify
said order and give to such party, as the case in the opinion of the Council
may require, a reasonable and fair opportunity to be heard before said
Borough Council and to present proofs and facts against said declaration
and the execution of said order or in favor of its modification. The Council
shall enter upon its minutes such facts and proofs as it may receive and
its proceedings on such hearing and thereafter may rescind, modify or
reaffirm its said declaration and order and require execution of said original
or of a new modified order to be made in such form and effect as it may
finally determine. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no
person shall cause any motor vehicle, registered or unregistered, licensed
or unlicensed, inspected or uninspected, to be parked for any reason
whatsoever upon the lawn or yard area of any dwelling or building,
including, but not limited to, residential areas, commercial establishments,
businesses or other. Any person who shall violate this section, upon
conviction thereof, shall be sentenced as provided in § 169-4 of this article.
In addition to the prohibitions heretofore stated, it shall be unlawful for
any person to park, store or otherwise keep any unregistered, unlicensed,
uninspected or wrecked motor vehicle upon any public right-of-way or
upon any visible private property for a period in excess of 20 days. Any
person who shall violate this section, upon conviction, shall be sentenced as
provided in § 169-4 of this article.
§ 169-2. Authority of Borough in default of owner. [Amended
7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
In the event an order from the Borough Council of Irwin is not carried
out, and the nuisance as described is not abated, such person as the
Council shall direct, or his agents or workmen, may enter upon the premises
whereon the nuisance exists for the purpose of abating the same.
§ 169-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-3
1:131
§ 169-3. Recovery of costs and expenses from owner.
The costs and expenses, plus 10%, of the removal of nuisances shall be
recoverable from the owner of the premises from which the nuisance shall
be removed or from any person causing or maintaining the same. The
amount of the cost and expenses, plus 10% thereof, shall be a lien upon the
premises which has caused the nuisance or from which the nuisance shall
be removed from the time of the commencement of the work, which date
shall be fixed by certificate of the Mayor filed with the Borough Secretary.
Such lien may be filed and proceeded in as provided by law in the case of
municipal liens.
§ 169-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-12-1975 by Ord. No.
620; 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs
and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 169-3 IRWIN CODE § 169-4
1:132
ARTICLE II
Junked Vehicles
[Adopted 4-10-1967 by Ord. No. 3-1967; amended in its entirety
7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791 (Ch. 10, Part 2, of the 1993 Code)]
§ 169-5. Definitions.
§ 169-6. Motor vehicle nuisances prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, owner or lessee to maintain a motor
vehicle nuisance upon the open private grounds of such person, owner or
lessee within the Borough. A motor vehicle nuisance shall include any motor
vehicle which is unable to move under its own power and has any of the
following physical defects:
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
LESSEE — Owner, for the purpose of this article, when the lessor holds
the lessee responsible for maintenance and repairs.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any type of mechanical device propelled by a
motor in which persons or property may be transported upon public
streets or highways, and including trailers or semitrailers pulled
thereby.
NUISANCE — Any condition, structure or improvement which shall
constitute a danger or potential danger to the health, safety or welfare
of the citizens of the Borough.
OWNER — The actual owner, agent or custodian of the property on
which motor vehicles are stored, whether individual or partnership,
association or corporation.
PERSON — A natural person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, or other legal entity.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural; the plural shall
include the singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
A. Broken windshields, mirrors or other glass with sharp edges.
B. One or more flat or open tires or tubes which could permit vermin
harborage.
C. Missing doors, windows, hood, trunk or other body parts which could
permit animal harborage.
D. Any body parts with sharp edges, including holes resulting from rust.
E. Missing tires resulting in unsafe suspension of the motor vehicle.
§ 169-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-6
1:133
§ 169-7. Permits for storage of motor vehicle nuisances.
F. Upholstery which is torn or open which could permit animal and/or
vermin harborage.
G. Broken headlamps or taillamps with sharp edges.
H. Disassembled chassis parts apart from the motor vehicle stored in a
disorderly fashion or loose in or on the vehicle.
I. Protruding sharp objects from the chassis.
J. Broken vehicle frame suspended from the ground in an unstable
manner.
K. Leaking or damaged oil pan or gas tank which could cause fire or
explosion.
L. Exposed battery containing acid.
M. Inoperable locking mechanism for doors or trunk.
N. Open or damaged floor boards, including trunk and fire wall.
O. Damaged bumpers pulled away from the perimeter of vehicle.
P. Broken grill with protruding edges.
Q. Loose or damaged metal trim and clips.
R. Broken communication equipment antennas.
S. Suspended on unstable supports.
T. Such other defects which could threaten the health, safety and welfare
of the citizens of the Borough.
A. Any person, owner or lessee who has one or more motor vehicle
nuisances, as defined in § 169-6 above, may store such vehicle(s) in the
Borough only in strict compliance with the regulations provided herein.
Such person, owner or lessee must, first, apply for a permit for either
temporary or permanent storage and pay a fee to the Borough in an
amount as established, from time to time, by resolution of Borough
Council. The motor vehicle nuisance(s) must be stored within a garage
or other enclosed building or outside within a opaque fence at least six
feet high which is locked at all times when unattended.
B. With the special approval of the Borough Council, motor vehicle
nuisances may also be stored outside in an area enclosed by a chain link
fence at least six feet high, screened by shrubbery around the
perimeter to the height of the fence, with an unobstructed gate capable
of admitting fire or emergency equipment. Such gate shall remain
locked at all times when unattended. In addition, all gas and oil or other
flammable liquid shall be removed from the motor vehicle, and it shall
§ 169-6 IRWIN CODE § 169-7
1:134
§ 169-8. Inspection of premises; notice to comply.
§ 169-9. Authority to remedy noncompliance.
If the owner of grounds on which motor vehicles are stored does not comply
with the notice to abate the nuisance within the time limit prescribed, the
Borough shall have the authority to take measures to correct the conditions
and collect the cost of such corrections plus 10% of all costs. The Borough,
in such event and pursuant to its statutory or otherwise authorized police
powers, shall have the right and power to enter upon the offending premises
to accomplish the foregoing.
§ 169-10. Hearing.
be kept free of vermin infestation while being stored. The total area of
storage of motor vehicle nuisances may not exceed 200 square feet.
C. Nothing herein shall be construed to permit the storage of motor
vehicle nuisances contrary to the provisions of Chapter 260, Zoning.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer or other designated official is hereby
empowered to inspect private property on which motor vehicles are
stored to determine if there is compliance with the provisions of this
article. If noncompliance with the provisions of this article constitutes a
nuisance, or if any condition, structure or improvement poses a threat
to the health, safety or welfare of the public, he shall issue a written
notice to be served by registered or certified mail upon the owner of
said premises or, if the owner's whereabouts or identity be unknown, by
posting the notice conspicuously upon the offending premises.
B. Said notice shall specify the condition or structure or improvement
complained of and shall require the owner to commence to remove or
otherwise rectify the condition or structure or improvement as set forth
therein within 10 days of mailing or posting of said notice, and
thereafter to fully comply with the requirements of the notice within a
reasonable time.
A. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Code Enforcement Officer
or other designated official may request and shall then be granted a
hearing before the Borough Council, providing he files with the
Borough Council, within 10 days after notice of the Code Enforcement
Officer's or other designated official's decision, a written petition
requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the
grounds therefor. The hearing shall commence not later than 30 days
after the date on which the petition was filed unless postponed for
sufficient cause.
B. After such hearing, the Borough Council shall sustain, modify or
overrule the action of the Code Enforcement Officer or other
designated official.
§ 169-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-11
1:135
§ 169-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to undergo
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 169-12. Remedies not mutually exclusive.
The remedies provided herein for the enforcement of this article or any
remedy provided by law shall not be deemed mutually exclusive; rather
they may be employed simultaneously or consecutively, at the option of the
Borough Council.
§ 169-11 IRWIN CODE § 169-12
1:136
Chapter 175
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreation Board — See Ch. 44.
§ 169-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-12
1:137

ARTICLE I
Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 5-10-1977 by Ord. No. 667 (Ch. 16, Part 1, of the 1993
Code)]
§ 175-1. Purpose.
It is the intent, purpose and scope of this article to ensure the preservation
of the parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, ball fields and conservation
areas within the Borough for the perpetual enjoyment of the residents of
the Borough, to regulate activities within these areas and to prevent any
nuisances to the residents of the Borough in the use of such playground
or recreation facilities, or in the enjoyment of private property adjacent to
such areas.
§ 175-2. Operating policy. [Amended 3-9-1994 by Ord. No. 794;
12-13-2000 by Ord. No. 836; 12-13-2000 by Ord. No. 837]
A. Hours of operation.
(1) All Borough of Irwin parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, ball
fields and conservation areas shall be open daily to the public from
official sunrise to 10:00 p.m.
(2) During those hours after official sunset, the parks, playgrounds,
recreation areas, ball field and conservation areas shall be
illuminated by artificial lighting, which will be turned on shortly
before sunset and which will be turned off at 10:00 p.m., at which
time the parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, ball fields and
conservation areas will be officially closed to the public.
(3) Any section or part of the parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, ball
fields and conservation areas may be declared closed to the public
at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at
regular or stated intervals. During such periods of time, it shall be
unlawful to enter upon or occupy areas or portions thereof contrary
to posted regulations.
(4) The hours of operation for the Little Knights Kingdom shall be
limited to "dawn to dusk." Any person, group or organization
utilizing the Little Knights Kingdom at any times before dawn or
after dusk shall be subject to the penalty provision as set forth in
§ 175-7. There shall be signs posted at the Little Knights Kingdom
designating the hours of operation being from "dawn to dusk."
B. Use of facilities. Facilities and areas in Borough parks, playgrounds,
recreation areas, ball fields and conservation areas shall be used only
for the purposes designated or implicit in their character.
(1) Borough amphitheater. It shall be unlawful for any person, group or
organization to use the Borough Amphitheater for any purpose
§ 175-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-2
1:139
unless that person, group or organization has first obtained written
authorization and approval from the Borough Council, which will
be date and subject matter specific as to the proposed use thereof.
Accordingly, use of the Borough Amphitheater is hereby restricted
to "authorized personnel only," and appropriate signs designating
the same shall be posted upon and within the Amphitheater. Any
person, group or organization who violates these provisions shall
be subject to the same penalties as set forth in § 175-7.
C. Persons entitled to use facilities. The parks, playgrounds, recreation
areas, ball fields and conservation areas within the Borough shall be
used only by the residents of the Borough and their guests.
D. Permits.
(1) Applications for a park permit shall be filed with the Borough
Manager not less than 20 days nor more than 180 days before the
date on which it is proposed to conduct any such activity. Such
application shall state:
(a) The name of the person or organization wishing to conduct
such activity.
(b) If the activity is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or
by an organization, the name, address and telephone number
of the headquarters of the organization and of the authorized
and responsible head of such organization.
(c) The name, address and telephone number of the person who
will be the chairman of such activity and who will be
responsible for its conduct.
(d) The name, address and telephone number of the person or
organization to whom the permit is desired to be issued.
(e) The date when such activity is to be conducted.
(f) The park or portion thereof for which such permit is desired.
(g) An estimate of the anticipated attendance.
(h) The hour when such activity will start and terminate.
(2) The Borough Manager shall grant and issue such park permit if:
(a) The proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of
the park.
(b) The proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere
with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare,
safety and recreation.
§ 175-2 IRWIN CODE § 175-2
1:140
§ 175-3. Preservation of property.
No person, except those authorized by the Borough and conducting
Borough business, shall, in parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, ball fields
and conservation areas:
(c) The facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at
the day and hour required in the application.
(d) The conduct of such activity will not substantially interrupt the
safe and orderly movement of traffic.
(e) The conduct of such activity will not require the diversion of so
great a number of police officers of the Borough to properly
police such activity and the areas contiguous thereto as to
prevent normal police protection to the Borough.
(f) The conduct of such activity is not reasonably likely to cause
injury to persons or property, incite violence, crime or
disorderly conduct.
(g) Such activity is not to be held for the sole purpose of
advertising any product, goods or event and is not designed to
be held purely for private profit.
(3) Each park permit shall state the following:
(a) Date of such activity.
(b) Park or portion thereof to be used.
(c) Hour when such activity will start and terminate.
(4) When permits are required.
(a) A permit shall be required to reserve any portion of a park,
playground, recreation area, ball field or conservation area,
and the issuance of a permit shall entitle the permittee to
exclusive use of the area described in said permit.
(b) Any activity which may otherwise be in violation of this article
shall be lawful if a permit therefor is obtained as herein
provided; however, alcoholic beverages or intoxicants of any
kind shall not be permitted by permit to be sold or dispensed in
the parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, ball fields and
conservation areas within the Borough.
A. Injure, deface, disturb, befoul nor in any manner destroy or cause to be
destroyed any part of any park, playground, recreation area, ball field
or conservation area owned by the Borough, nor any building, sign,
structure, equipment, utility or other property found therein.
B. Remove, injure or destroy any tree, flower, shrub, plant or growing
thing.
§ 175-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-3
1:141
§ 175-4. Regulations concerning use of parks, playgrounds,
recreation areas, ball fields and conservation areas.
C. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters
of any fountain, pool or stream any substance, matter or thing, liquid or
solid, which may result in the pollution of said waters; nor dump,
deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, paper boxes, cans, dirt,
rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse or trash anywhere within the park,
playground, recreation area, ball field or conservation area owned by
the Borough; but rather to make use of proper receptacles where these
are provided, and where receptacles are not provided, all such
materials shall be carried away from the park, playground, recreation
area, ball field or conservation area by the person responsible for their
presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere.
D. Each person, firm or corporation using the parks, playgrounds,
recreation areas, ball fields or conservation areas shall clean up all
debris, extinguish all fires when such fires are permitted, and leave the
premises in good order and the facilities in a neat and sanitary
condition.
A. All parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, ball fields, and conservation
areas shall be operated and maintained under the supervision of the
Recreation Board of the Borough and the Borough Manager.
B. Duties of the Borough Manager. The Borough Manager shall see to the
operation and maintenance of the parks, playgrounds, recreation areas,
ball fields and conservation areas, and he shall perform his duties
subject to the supervision of the Recreation Board of the Borough. The
Recreation Board of the Borough shall have authority to and shall from
time to time promulgate rules and regulations which the Recreation
Board of the Borough may deem appropriate to regulate the use of the
parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, ball fields and conservation areas
within the Borough.
C. Approval of rules and regulations by Council. All rules and regulations
promulgated by the Recreation Board of the Borough shall be approved
or disapproved by resolution at the next regularly scheduled Borough
Council meeting following promulgation of the same by the Recreation
Board.
D. Violation of rules and regulations promulgated by the Recreation Board
of the Borough. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any rule or
regulation governing use of or conduct in any park, playground,
recreation area, ball field or conservation area.
E. Posting of rules and regulations. Any rules and regulations promulgated
by the Borough Recreation Board and approved by Borough Council
shall by posted in a conspicuous place in each of the parks,
playgrounds, recreation areas, ball fields and conservation areas.
§ 175-3 IRWIN CODE § 175-4
1:142
§ 175-5. Acts prohibited.
F. Powers to expel.
(1) The Borough Recreation Board and the Borough Manager and any
personnel designated by the Borough Recreation Board or the
Borough Council shall administer the provisions of this article,
including promulgation of rules and regulations relative thereto.
The Borough Manager and/or Borough Recreation Board or any
member thereof or any personnel designated by them shall have
the authority to expel individuals or groups of individuals from the
parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, ball fields and conservation
areas and shall order any individual or group of individuals from
any parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, ball fields and
conservation areas:21
(a) When acts or conduct of individuals or groups of individuals is
determined to be in violation of this article or the rules and
regulations promulgated hereunder.
(b) When acts or conduct of individuals or groups of individuals is
determined not to be in the best interests of the parks,
playgrounds, recreation areas, ball fields, and conservation
areas.
(c) When the acts or conduct of individuals or groups of
individuals is determined to be disruptive to the surrounding
neighborhood.
(2) Nothing herein set forth is intended to limit the power of the
Borough police to enforce ordinances as provided for by law; and
further, nothing contained herein is intended to permit any
individual to exercise any powers of the Borough Police
Department.
A. Fires and fireworks. Fires may not be built or allowed anywhere in the
park, playgrounds, recreation areas, ball fields or conservation areas
except in stoves, fireplaces or designated areas provided for that
purpose. Permits must be secured for any fireworks at any time and
fires to be maintained after closing time.
B. Animals. It shall be unlawful for owners of domesticated animals to
permit same within the parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, ball fields
or conservation areas. Permits may be obtained for the exhibition of
animals in designated areas. It shall be unlawful to bring any dangerous
animal into any park, playground, recreation area, ball field or
conservation area. No horses shall be allowed in the parks,
playgrounds, recreation areas, ball fields or conservation areas.
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 175-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-5
1:143
C. Gambling. Gambling is prohibited in parks, playgrounds, recreation
areas, ball fields and conservation areas, with the exception that
nonprofit entities utilizing a Borough public space may apply for a
permit issued by Borough Council allowing specific acts of small games
of chance. All acts of small games of chance must be operated pursuant
to and in observance of state law, rules and regulations concerning the
same. Said nonprofit must hold a duly issued and valid small games of
chance license. Said application must include the applicant' s name,
address, phone number, a copy of their small games of chance license, a
copy of their bylaws and articles of incorporation, the date, place and
time of the event wherein the small games of chance will be operated
(pursuant to a Borough pernit for the general use of the public space),
and the types of small games of chance being operated. [Amended
5-8-2019 by Ord. No. 981]
D. Signs. It shall be unlawful to post, paste, fasten, paint, write, draw,
carve, tack or affix any placard, bill, notice, sign, advertisement, or any
inscription whatsoever upon any structure, tree, fence, thing or
enclosure within the parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, ball fields
and conservation areas, except that: [Amended 8-13-2014 by Ord.
No. 925; 5-8-2019 by Ord. No. 981]
(1) The Borough may place information signs within such areas.
(2) A nonprofit entity utilizing a Borough park, playground, recreation
area, ball field and/or conservation area may temporarily affix signs
at said facility, only upon application to and the issuance of a permit
by Borough Council. Said application must include the name,
address, telephone number, bylaws and articles of incorporation of
the applicant, the date of the proposed display of the sign(s), the
size and intended location of the sign(s), and the event or use of the
property that is associated with the sign. Said signs may only be
displayed during the entity's use of the property (the signs must be
placed, and must similarly be removed, no more than 24 hours
before and then after the use of the property). The signs must be
temporarily affixed and may not cause any damage to the property
and improvements thereon. The Borough will determine whether
the signs may be affixed by the applicant or by the Borough. The
signs must be positioned for on-site display and cannot be utilized
for off-site advertising. The signs may not be internally illuminated
or be changeable-copy signs, but may be illuminated by external
light. The signs may not be offensive and must be suitable for
display to persons of all ages, race, religion, creed and ethnicity.
E. Amusement for gain. No amusement for gain or for which a charge is
made can be conducted in a park, playground, recreation area, ball field
or conservation area without first obtaining a permit therefor as herein
provided, and such amusement shall be conducted in accordance with
any rules and regulations which the Recreation Board of the Borough
may deem appropriate for such amusement.
§ 175-5 IRWIN CODE § 175-5
1:144
§ 175-6. Individuals, organizations and athletic organizations.
Any individuals, organizations, athletic organizations or schools requesting
use of the parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, ball fields and conservation
areas shall submit in writing any request for such use with a schedule of
all their activities to the Borough Manager by January 31 of each year so
that Borough Council may schedule the usage of the parks, playgrounds,
recreation areas, ball fields and conservation areas.
§ 175-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No.
791]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs
and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
F. Personal conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person in any park,
playground, recreation area, ball field or conservation area to:
(1) Disturb the peace or use profane or obscene language.
(2) Endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act.
(3) Commit any assault, battery or engage in fighting.
(4) Carry, possess or drink any alcoholic beverage including beer.
(5) Violate any rule for the use of the parks, playgrounds, recreation
areas, ball fields or conservation areas approved by the Borough.
(6) Prevent any person from using the park, playgrounds, recreation
areas, ball fields, or conservation areas or any of its facilities, or
interfere with such use in compliance with this article and the rules
applicable to such use.
(7) Act in an unlawful, disorderly or disruptive manner or against the
best interest of the areas or other people.
(8) Fail to obey an order given pursuant to § 175-4F of this article.
G. Motor vehicles. It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle,
including, but not limited to, automobiles, motorcycles, minibikes, trail
bikes, snowmobiles, go-carts and other motorized recreational vehicles
in any park, playground, recreation area, ball field or conservation area
except where facilities exist therefor.
H. Parking. It shall be unlawful to park in the parks, playgrounds,
recreation areas, ball fields and conservation areas except where such
parking is expressly permitted.
§ 175-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-7
1:145

ARTICLE II
Tobacco-Free Zones
[Adopted 10-13-2010 by Ord. No. 896]
§ 175-8. Designated areas. [Amended 11-13-2019 by Ord. No. 986]
The areas of parks and playgrounds where children are present, such as
picnic areas, sports and playing fields, parking lots, concert venues, and
Little Knights Kingdom, in the Borough of Irwin are hereby designated
tobacco-free, and the use of any tobacco product or electronic cigarette,
in any form, shall be prohibited hereafter. The term "tobacco product" is
inclusive of:
§ 175-9. Signs.
Appropriate signage will be posted designating tobacco-free areas.
§ 175-10. Notification of community.
The community will be notified of this article.
§ 175-11. Ejection for violators.
Violators will be immediately ejected from such designated tobacco-free
areas.
§ 175-12. Approval of Mayor.
The Mayor shall approve the enactment of this article.
§ 175-13. Effective date.
This article shall become effective on November 15, 2010.
A. Any product containing, made, or derived from tobacco or nicotine that
is intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed,
absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other
means, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, little cigars,
chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff; and
B. Any electronic device that delivers nicotine or other substances to the
person inhaling from the device, including, but not limited to, an
electronic cigarette, cigar, pipe, or hookah.
C. Notwithstanding any portion of Subsections A and B to the contrary,
"tobacco product" includes any component, part, or accessory of a
tobacco product, whether or not sold separately. "Tobacco product"
does not include any product that has been approved by the United
States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco-cessation
product or for other therapeutic purposes where such product is
marketed and sold for such an approved purpose.
§ 175-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-13
1:147
Chapter 180
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 175-13 IRWIN CODE § 175-13
1:148
ARTICLE I
Door-to-Door Solicitation
[Adopted 2-11-1985 by Ord. No. 731 (Ch. 13, Part 1B, of the 1993
Code)]
§ 180-1. Registration and identification card required.
No person, association, partnership, firm or corporation shall, either
directly or indirectly, sell or peddle goods, wares, merchandise, magazines,
periodicals, books, flowers, produce or other personal property by
canvassing or soliciting; by taking orders, either by sample or otherwise,
on a temporary basis; or solicit or canvass for contributions on a temporary
basis in the Borough of Irwin without first having registered with the
Borough Manager of the Borough of Irwin and having obtained an
identification card from the Borough of Irwin.
§ 180-2. Application.
§ 180-3. Issuance of license or permit.
The Borough Manager of the Borough of Irwin, upon receiving an
application for a permit to canvass or solicit within the Borough of Irwin,
A. Any person desiring to engage in canvassing and soliciting shall submit
a written application to the Borough Manager of the Borough of Irwin
on a form to be furnished by the Borough of Irwin, accompanied by two
photographs (two inches by three inches minimum) of himself taken
within six months prior to the date of application.
B. The applicant shall state in such written application his name, age, sex,
home address, business address, name and address of employer, if any;
what he desires to canvass and solicit for; the length of time he wishes
to engage in this work; the make and type of vehicle, if any, he will use,
its registration number, the driver registration number, certificate of
automobile liability coverage, and whether he has ever been convicted
of a felony, misdemeanor or crime of any kind.
C. In addition thereto, the application shall contain the signature of the
employer as well as that of the applicant and shall contain therein the
stipulation and agreement on the part of the employer, in consideration
of the issuance of such license or permit, to become liable for any and
all acts of such canvasser or solicitor while within the Borough of Irwin
in violation of law or otherwise. Such employer liability shall be
construed to have no application to bona fide charitable organizations
registered with the Department of State, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
D. The identification card will be valid for the period so requested by the
applicant, but in no event shall the period extend beyond the period of
three months. Such card may not be transferred from one person to
another.
§ 180-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-3
1:149
shall promptly request the Chief of Police to review the application and to
thoroughly investigate the applicant. In the event that such investigation
indicates that the applicant has been convicted of any felony, misdemeanor
or crime of any kind involving moral turpitude, the Chief of Police shall
inform the Borough Manager, who shall have the power and authority to
refuse to issue such license or permit. In any instance where the Chief
of Police should deem it necessary or advisable to secure and check the
fingerprints of any such applicant, refusal of such applicant to voluntarily
furnish such fingerprints shall constitute in and of itself sufficient and valid
grounds for refusal to issue such license. The Borough Manager of the
Borough of Irwin will issue to the applicant an identification card (to which
one of the applicant's photographs will be affixed) within 10 days from the
date of filing the application.
§ 180-4. Compliance.
Every person to whom an identification card has been issued shall in the
conduct of his activity comply with the following standards of conduct:
A. He shall carry his identification card at all times and exhibit it upon
request to any police officer, ordinance officer of the Borough of Irwin
or to any other person on whom he shall call or with whom he shall talk.
B. He shall not permit any person to have possession of the identification
card and shall immediately report its loss to the Borough of Irwin Police
Department. He shall not cause or permit his identification card to be
altered or defaced in any way.
C. He shall not enter or attempt to enter any dwelling without the
invitation or permission of the occupant and shall immediately leave the
premises upon request of the occupant.
D. He shall engage in canvassing and soliciting from house to house
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday, legal holidays being excepted therefrom. Such activities at
any other time being hereby expressly declared unlawful.
E. He shall not sell any goods, wares, merchandise, magazines,
periodicals, books, flowers, produce or other personal property not
mentioned in his license.
F. He shall not sell his wares upon any street, alley, sidewalks or municipal
park or playground in the Borough of Irwin.
G. When operating from a vehicle, he shall not stop or park such vehicle
upon any street or alley in the Borough of Irwin for longer than
necessary in order to sell therefrom to persons residing in the
immediate vicinity.
H. He shall not park any vehicle upon any street or alley in the Borough of
Irwin for purposes of sorting, rearranging or cleaning any of his goods,
wares or merchandise or of disposing of any carton, wrapping material
§ 180-3 IRWIN CODE § 180-4
1:150
§ 180-5. Revocation of identification card.
Any identification card may be revoked by the Borough Manager of the
Borough of Irwin if the holder fails to comply with the standards of conduct
contained in § 180-4 of this article, or any of them, or ascertainment by the
Chief of Police or Borough Manager of the Borough of Irwin that the holder
has made false statements in his application.
§ 180-6. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to boys or girls under the age of 18 years
who shall take orders for and deliver newspapers, greeting cards, candy,
cookies, hoagies and the like, or who represent Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts or
the Norwin School District or similar organizations.
§ 180-7. Application fees. [Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
or of any stock or wares or foodstuffs which have become unsalable
through handling, age or otherwise.
I. He shall not engage in any business activity prohibited in the Borough
of Irwin by general ordinances, regulations, rules, statutes and codes
enacted by the Borough of Irwin, County of Westmoreland or
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
J. He shall not be guilty of any false pretense or misrepresentation, and
particularly, he shall not represent his identification to be an
endorsement of himself, or his goods or services, or of the goods or
services of his employer.
K. He shall immediately surrender his identification card to the Borough
Manager of the Borough of Irwin upon revocation thereof.
A. A fee, in an amount established from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council, shall be charged for canvassing and soliciting in the
Borough of Irwin, unless exempted hereinafter, and shall be paid to the
Borough Manager.
B. No license fee shall be charged under this section for:
(1) Farmers selling their own produce;
(2) Sale of goods, wares and merchandise donated by owners thereof,
the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any charitable or
philanthropic purpose;
(3) To any manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread and bakery
products, meat or meat products or milk or milk products;
(4) Any person who works for an organization soliciting or canvassing
contributions which has filed a registration statement with the
Department of State of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as
§ 180-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-7
1:151
§ 180-8. Suspension and revocation of license; appeal.
The Borough Manager of the Borough of Irwin is hereby authorized to
suspend or revoke any license issued under this article for violation of
any of the provisions of this article or for giving false information upon
any application for a license hereunder. Appeals from any suspension or
revocation may be made to the Borough of Irwin Council at any time within
10 days after such suspension or revocation. No part of a license fee shall
be refunded to any person whose license has been suspended or revoked.
§ 180-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No.
731]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not more
than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment, to imprisonment for not
more than 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
required by the Solicitation of Funds for Charitable Purposes Act,
10 P.S. § 162.1 et seq.; and22
(5) Any person who works without compensation selling goods, wares
or merchandise for the sole benefit of any nonprofit corporation
registered with the Department of State of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
C. Any person dealing in one or more of the above-mentioned exempted
categories and dealing with other goods, wares or merchandise not so
exempted shall be subject to the payment of the license fee fixed by this
section for his activities in connection with the sale of goods, wares and
merchandise not in such exempted categories.
D. Every license issued under the provisions of this article shall be issued
on an individual basis to persons engaging in such business; every
individual shall obtain a separate license, issued to him in his name, and
the license fee hereby imposed shall be applicable to every such
individual license.
E. Any person dealing in one or more of the above-mentioned exempted
categories must still file an application in accordance with the
procedure outlined hereinabove and observe the stated standards.
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 180-7 IRWIN CODE § 180-9
1:152
ARTICLE II
Transient and Nonpermanent Vendors at Fixed Location
[Adopted 5-11-1987 by Ord. No. 744 (Ch. 13, Part 1A, of the 1993
Code)]
§ 180-10. Registration and identification card required.23
No person, association, partnership, firm or corporation shall, either
directly or indirectly, sell goods, wares, merchandise, magazines,
periodicals, books, food or foodstuffs, flowers, or other personal property
on a transient or temporary basis from a fixed location without first having
registered with the Borough Manager and obtaining an identification card
from the Borough.
§ 180-11. Written application required.
A. Any person desiring to engage in the transient retail or wholesale
selling of any such items of personal property set forth above in
§ 180-10 of this article shall submit a written application to the Borough
Manager on a form to be furnished by the Borough, accompanied by
two photographs (two inches by three inches minimum) of himself or
herself taken within six months prior to the date of the application.
B. The applicant shall state in such written application his or her name,
age, sex, home address, business address; name and address of
employer, if any; what he or she desires to sell; the length of time he or
she wishes to engage in this work; the make and type of vehicle, if any,
he or she will use in transporting the merchandise to the fixed location,
its registration number, the driver registration number, certificate of
automobile liability coverage, and whether he or she has ever been
convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or a crime of any kind.
C. In addition thereto, the application shall contain the signatures of the
applicant and applicant's employer (if applicable) and shall contain
therein the stipulation and agreement on the part of the employer, in
consideration of the issuance of such license or permit, to become liable
for any and all acts of such vendor while within the Borough of Irwin in
violation of law or otherwise.
D. The applicant shall also submit a written statement from the owner and
tenant of the premises where the applicant shall be engaging in the
transient retail or wholesale vending, wherein the owner and tenant
shall signify their consent and approval of the temporary occupancy by
the applicant vendor.
E. An identification card will not be issued to any person who has been
convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or a crime of any kind involving
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
This ordinance revised "Borough Secretary" to "Borough Manager" throughout this
article.
§ 180-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-11
1:153
§ 180-12. Refusal to issue license.
Promptly upon receiving any application for a permit to vend within the
Borough of Irwin, the Chief of Police shall cause such application and
applicant to be thoroughly investigated by the Police Department of the
Borough of Irwin. In the event that such investigation should indicate that
the granting of such permit would or might be injurious to the public
interest or to the public health, safety or morals, the Chief of Police shall
have, and is hereby given, the power and authority to report such matters
to the Borough Manager, who shall have the power and authority to refuse
to issue said license or permit. In any instance where the Chief of Police
shall deem it necessary or advisable to secure and check the fingerprints
of any such applicant, refusal of such applicant to voluntarily furnish such
fingerprints shall constitute, in and of itself, sufficient and valid grounds
for refusal to issue such license. The Borough Manager will issue to the
applicant an identification card (to which one of the applicant's photographs
will be affixed) within 10 days from the date of filing of the application.
§ 180-13. Compliance with standards of conduct.
Every person to whom an identification card has been issued shall, in the
conduct of his activity, comply with the standards of conduct as follows:
moral turpitude, and such person shall not be allowed to engage in
transient retail or wholesale selling in the Borough of Irwin.
F. An identification card will be valid for the balance of the calendar year
in which it is issued. Such card may not be transferred from one person
to another and shall be considered a personal permit or license.
A. He or she shall carry his identification card at all times and exhibit it
upon request to any police officer, ordinance officer of the Borough, or
to any other person on whom he or she shall call or with whom he or she
shall talk.
B. He or she shall not permit any person to have possession of his or her
identification card and shall immediately report its loss to the Borough
Police Department and to the Borough Manager. He shall not cause or
permit his identification card to be altered or defaced in any way.
C. He or she shall not attempt to sell any merchandise outside the confines
of the owner/tenant's property for which the permit is issued.
D. He or she shall engage in his or her selling between the hours of 9:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on
Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays; such activity at any other time
being hereby expressly declared unlawful.
E. He or she shall not be guilty of any false pretense or misrepresentation,
and particularly he or she shall not represent his or her identification to
be an endorsement of himself/herself, or his/her goods or services, or of
the goods or services of their employer.
§ 180-11 IRWIN CODE § 180-13
1:154
§ 180-14. Revocation of identification card.
Any identification card may be revoked by the Borough Manager if the
holder fails to comply with the standards of conduct contained in § 180-13
of this article or any of them, or ascertainment by the Borough Manager
that the holder had made a false statement in his application.
§ 180-15. Registration fee. [Amended 7-13-1987 by Ord. No. 746;
7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
Every person engaged in vending within the Borough of Irwin as herein
provided shall pay a fee in an amount as established, from time to time, by
resolution of the Borough Council for the cost of the issuance of a permit,
plus an additional amount as established, from time to time, by resolution
of the Borough Council per day in advance for each and every day in which
the said activity is continued.
§ 180-16. Violations and penalties. Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No.
791
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs
and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
F. He or she shall immediately surrender his or her identification card to
the Borough of Irwin Manager upon revocation thereof.
§ 180-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-16
1:155
Chapter 184
(RESERVED)
Chapter 190
PUBLIC PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation regulations — See Ch.
175, Art. I.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 225.
§ 180-16 IRWIN CODE § 180-16
1:156
ARTICLE I
Tampering Prohibited
[Adopted 9-14-1959 by Ord. No. 374 (Ch. 6, Part 4, of the 1993
Code)]
§ 190-1. Tampering with certain property prohibited. [Amended
5-12-1975 by Ord. No. 610; 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
No person or persons shall destroy or injure in any way whatsoever or cause
any foreign substance or petroleum product to drain or spill on any Borough
roadway, alley or right-of-way, or tamper with or deface any public property
of the Borough of Irwin or any grass, walk, lamp, ornamental work, building,
streetlight, water or gas stop box on or in any of the streets, alleys, parks or
other public grounds of the Borough.
§ 190-2. Interference with stakes and markers prohibited.
No person or persons shall in any manner interfere with or meddle with
or pull, drive, change, alter or destroy any stake, post, monument or other
evidence of any elevation, grade, line, location, corner or angle in the
Borough made, placed or set, or hereafter made, placed or set, or caused
to be done by the authorities of the Borough in the survey of any street,
alley or public ground in the Borough to evidence the elevation, line, grade,
location, corner or angle of any street, alley, sidewalk, curb, gutter, sewer
or other public work, matter or thing.
§ 190-3. Interference with warning lights, signs and barricades
prohibited.
No person shall willfully or maliciously destroy or remove or deface or
obliterate or cover up any lamp, warning sign or barricade erected by the
authorities of the Borough or by any person, firm or corporation doing work
by permission of the Borough on any of the streets, alleys or sidewalks of
the Borough as a warning of danger.
§ 190-4. Removal of material from public property prohibited.
No person or persons shall take any earth, stone or other material from any
of the streets, alleys, parks or other public grounds of the Borough.
§ 190-5. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to normal activities in connection with the
construction, maintenance and repair of streets, alleys, sidewalks and
public grounds and the structures and fixtures located thereon, nor to
incidental results of work thereon or therein under permit from or by
authority of the Borough.
§ 190-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-6
1:157
§ 190-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-12-1975 by Ord. No.
610; 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs
and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 190-6 IRWIN CODE § 190-6
1:158
Chapter 192
QUALITY OF LIFE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 88.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 95.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 110.
Grading and excavation — See Ch. 140.
Handbills and advertising materials — See
Ch. 144.
Littering — See Ch. 158.
Nuisances — See Ch. 169.
Solid waste — See Ch. 212.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 225.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 248.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 192-1. Purpose.
The lack of maintenance of properties, littering, improper storage of trash
and rubbish, storage of inoperable/nonregistered vehicles, vendor
operations without permits and accumulation of snow and ice are costly
problems that cause blight and negatively impact the public health, safety,
and general welfare of the Borough residents and their guests and
contribute to the deterioration of property values and general disorder
in the Borough. These problems degrade the physical appearance of the
Borough, which reduces business and tax revenue, inhibiting economic
development. The quality of life and community pride of the citizens of
Irwin are negatively impacted by the occurrences and existence of these
activities. Recognizing these are community problems, the purpose of this
chapter is to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the Borough
by helping to create a clean environment for the citizens of Irwin.
§ 192-2. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all existing and future
properties and structures.
§ 192-3. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this chapter shall be
defined as follows, unless context clearly indicates otherwise:
ADULT — Any person 18 years of age or older.
DEBRIS — Any material upon the premises that is a residue of structural
demolition or any other material that is not neatly stored, stacked or piled in
such a manner so as not to create a nuisance or become a harboring place
or food supply for insects and rodents.
DUMPING — Includes, but is not limited to, the depositing of litter,
depositing durable goods (refrigerators, washers, dryers, etc.), small
§ 190-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-3
1:159
appliances, furniture, carpets, tires, vehicles, vehicle parts and automotive
products and other such municipal waste, hazardous waste, residual waste
and construction or demolition debris on public or private property, except
as authorized.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms, including a kitchen or kitchenette
and sanitary facilities in a dwelling structure, designed as a unit for
occupancy.
GARBAGE — The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
INDOOR FURNITURE — Any and all pieces of furniture which are made for
only inside use, including, but not limited to, upholstered chairs and sofas,
etc.
LANDLORD — Any person who grants a lease or otherwise permits the
use of his real estate or portion thereof for a consideration, monetary or
otherwise.
LITTER — Includes, but is not limited to, all waste material, garbage, trash,
i.e., waste paper, tobacco products, wrappers, food or beverage containers,
newspapers, etc., municipal waste, human waste, domestic animal waste,
furniture, appliances, or motor vehicle seats, vehicle parts, automotive
products, shopping carts, construction or demolition material, recyclable
material, dirt, mud and yard waste that has been abandoned or improperly
discarded, deposited or disposed.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Includes any type of mechanical device, capable or
at one time capable of being propelled by a motor, in which persons or
property may be transported upon public streets or highways, and including
trailers or semitrailers pulled thereby.
OCCUPANT — Any person who lives in or has possession of, or holds
an occupancy interest in a dwelling unit, or any person residing in or
frequenting the premises of the dwelling unit with the actual or implied
permission of the owner or lessee.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Any condition or premises which is unsafe or
unsanitary.
PUBLIC OFFICER — Any police officer, the Public Works Director, the Public
Works Superintendent, authorized inspector, or public official designated by
the Mayor and/or Borough Council to enforce the Borough ordinances.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Includes material which would otherwise
become municipal waste, which can be collected, separated or processed,
and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or
products. Such materials may include, but not be limited to, aluminum cans,
ferrous and bimetal cans, glass containers, plastic bottles and containers,
and paper.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The total width of any land used, reserved or dedicated
as a street, alley, driveway, sidewalk or utility easement, including curb and
gutter areas.
§ 192-3 IRWIN CODE § 192-3
1:160
TENANT — That person (or persons) who has the use of real estate of
a landlord and is responsible for the giving of any type of consideration
therefor, but excluding those who are tenants for a period of less than 30
days.
WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial, lunchroom or office waste, and
other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous
material resulting from operation of residential, municipal, commercial,
or institutional establishments or from community activities and which is
not classified as residual waste or hazardous waste as defined herein. The
term does include animal waste, including without limitation all feces, from
domesticated animals, including dogs. The term does not include sourceseparated
recyclable materials.
§ 192-4. Quality-of-life violations.
The following shall be considered quality-of-life violations. Any violation of
any standard provided herein shall constitute a quality of life violation.
A. Accumulation of rubbish, garbage, junk or litter.
(1) All exterior property and premises, and the interior of every
structure, shall be kept free from any accumulation of waste, trash,
litter, rubbish, debris or garbage.
(2) It is prohibited to store or place any/all items designed for interior
use, appliances or furniture, including, but not limited to, ranges,
refrigerators, air conditioners, ovens, washers, dryers,
microwaves, TVs, computers or electronic components,
dishwashers, mattresses, recliners, sofas, interior chairs, interior
tables, or any other items of indoor furniture on the exterior of any
property for the purpose of sale or any other reason, except for the
temporary purposes of keeping the item on the exterior of the
property for a period of less than 24 hours for the purpose of
maintaining or repairing the item, removing the item from the real
property, or pursuant to Irwin Code §§ 260-15E and 260-61.
(3) Refrigerators and similar equipment, including, but not limited to,
washers, dryers, dishwashers and ranges not in operation shall not
be discarded, stored or abandoned on any premises without first
removing the doors. To that extent that the item is outdoors, it may
not be outdoors for longer than 24 hours, as provided in
§ 192-4A(2) herein.
B. Storing of hazardous material. It shall be unlawful for any person,
business or entity to store combustible, flammable, explosive or other
hazardous materials, including, but not limited to, paints, volatile oils
and cleaning fluids or combustible rubbish, including, but not limited
to, wastepaper, boxes or rags, unless the storage of said materials is in
compliance with the applicable fire and/or building codes and at least
10 feet away from the public right-of-way.
§ 192-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-4
1:161
C. Storing of recyclables. Storage of recyclables is only permitted in
approved containers which must be kept clean and sanitary at all times.
D. Storage containers for waste or trash. All containers that store waste or
trash shall be in compliance with Irwin Code § 212-3. Any violation of
Irwin Code § 212-3 shall be considered a violation of this part and may
also be enforced and ticketed as such.
E. Littering, scattering rubbish or dumping.
(1) No person shall throw, dump, place, sweep or dispose of any litter,
waste, trash, garbage, tobacco product or rubbish upon any public
sidewalk, alley, street, bridge, public passageway, public parking
area, right-of-way or any public property.
(2) The improper disposal of rubbish or garbage or dumping or the
disposing of rubbish or garbage on vacant, unoccupied, or other
property is prohibited.
(3) Any violation of Irwin Code Chapter 158 and/or § 248-10 shall be
considered a violation of this chapter and may also be enforced and
ticketed as such.
F. Motor vehicles. It shall be prohibited to keep a nuisance vehicle as
defined in Borough of Irwin Code § 169-6. Any violation of Irwin Code
Chapter 169, Article II, shall be considered a violation of this chapter
and may also be enforced and ticketed as such.
G. Placement or littering by private advertising matter.
(1) No person shall throw, place, sweep or dispose of private
advertising material upon any public sidewalk, alley, street, bridge,
public passageway, public parking area, right-of-way or any public
property.
(2) No person, group, organization or entity will hang, place or
advertise on any public property in any manner.
(3) No person, group, organization or entity will hang, place or
advertise on any property that they do not have any ownership
rights to without written approval of said owner.
(4) Any violation of Irwin Code Chapter 144 shall be considered a
violation of this part and may also be enforced and ticketed as such.
H. Animal maintenance and waste/feces cleanup. Violations of the Irwin
Code Chapter 88, Article III, shall be considered a violation of this part
and may also be enforced and ticketed as such.
I. Insects or vermin. Infestation of insects or vermin shall not be allowed
to continue, and the owner or occupant of any infested property shall
report same to the Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough and take
§ 192-4 IRWIN CODE § 192-4
1:162
appropriate steps to abate said infestation without unnecessary delay.
Failing to do so is a violation.
J. High weeds, grass, plant growth or standing water. All premises and
exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds, grass or plant
growth in excess of seven inches, and water shall not be allowed to
stand or accumulate in a manner that would attract insects or vermin.
All such plant growth shall otherwise be in compliance with Irwin Code
§ 95-1, and any violation thereof shall be considered a violation of this
part and may also be enforced and ticketed as such.
K. Snow, ice and vegetation removal from sidewalks. Every owner, tenant,
occupant, lessee, property agent or any other person who is responsible
for any property within the Borough, is required to remove any snow or
ice from their sidewalk pursuant to Borough of Irwin Code Chapter
141,24 and any violation thereof shall be considered a violation of this
part and may also be enforced and ticketed as such. Snow and ice shall
not be deposited on or within two feet of a fire hydrant or other fire
control or suppression device.
L. Swimming pools.
(1) Swimming pools shall be maintained in good repair at all times.
They shall also be kept clean, safe, sanitary, and covered when not
in regular use.
(2) All pools shall be in compliance with Irwin Code § 260-28, and any
violation thereof shall be considered a violation of this part and
may also be enforced and ticketed as such.
M. Registration of tenants. It shall be unlawful for a landlord to allow adult
tenants or occupants to reside within the Borough of Irwin without
registering them with the Borough Manager, pursuant to § 195-3. Any
violation of Chapter 195, Article I, shall be considered a violation of this
chapter and may also be enforced and ticketed as such.
N. Permits and approvals.
(1) It shall be unlawful for an owner, tenant, contractor or any other
person to perform work to a building or structure without a permit,
where permits are required.
(2) Illegal signs/billboards. No person or business shall construct and
display a sign/advertisement without the appropriate approval and
permit from the Borough of Irwin, pursuant to Irwin Code Chapter
260, Article XVI. Any violation of Irwin Code Chapter 260, Article
XVI, shall be considered a violation of this part and may also be
enforced and ticketed as such.
24.Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. VII, Removal of Snow, Ice and
Vegetation.
§ 192-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-4
1:163
§ 192-5. Authority for issuance of violation tickets and citations.
Upon finding a quality of life violation, any public officer, including, without
limitation, the Code Enforcement Officer, Public Works Superintendent,
Public Works Director and police officers of the Borough of Irwin, or as
otherwise appointed by the Mayor and/or Borough Council of the Borough
of Irwin, may issue quality of life violation tickets and/or citations to the
owner, tenant, landlord, and/or occupant of the property at issue or to the
individual known to have violated this chapter.
§ 192-6. Service of ticket.
A violation ticket may be served upon a violator by handing it to the violator
or his/her agent, by handing it to an adult member of the household or
other person in charge of the residence, by leaving or affixing the notice
or violation ticket conspicuously on the property where the violation exists,
by handing it at any office or usual place of business of the violator, or to
the person for the time being in charge thereof, or by mailing the violation
ticket by certified restricted delivery mail to the violator's address.
(3) Excavation, filling and grading. It shall be unlawful for an owner,
tenant, contractor or any other person to excavate, fill and/or grade
any land unless an appropriate permit has been issued by the
Borough Building Permit Officer. Any violation of Irwin Code
Chapter 140 shall be considered a violation of this part and may
also be enforced and ticketed as such.
O. Property maintenance.
(1) Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including detached
garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound,
in good repair, and in compliance with the Borough's Property
Maintenance Code.
(2) Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position
to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the
property. These numbers shall contrast with their background.
Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters.
Numbers shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) in height with a
minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm).
(3) Any violation of the Borough's Property Maintenance Code,
adopted pursuant to Ordinance No. 864 and codified in Irwin Code
§ 110-1L, shall be considered a violation of this part and may also
be enforced and ticketed as such.
P. Trees. All trees growing upon or along any street, alley or sidewalk, or
inside the property line of any lot fronting on any street or alley, shall
not have any growth within 14 feet above any streets and alleys and 10
feet above any sidewalks.
§ 192-4 IRWIN CODE § 192-7
1:164
§ 192-7. Separate offense.
Each day a violation continues or is permitted to continue may constitute
a separate offense for which a separate violation ticket may be issued and
fine imposed.
§ 192-8. Abatement of violation.
§ 192-9. Fines and penalties.
Any person who violates this chapter shall pay a fine as set forth herein for
each offense plus all direct and indirect costs incurred by the Borough for
the cleanup and abatement of the violation.
A. Any person or business violating this chapter is hereby directed to,
upon issuance of a quality of life ticket, correct the violation in question.
Public officers, the Code Enforcement Officer, Public Works
Superintendent, and the Public Works Director are authorized and
empowered to cause a violation to be corrected.
B. The Borough of Irwin reserves the right to abate the violation in
question at the expense of the owner if the violation is not abated by the
property owner within five business days. Should the violation, at the
discretion of the public officer(s), present imminent danger and/or pose
a health hazard and/or risk, the Borough reserves the right to perform
the abatement immediately. The Borough will perform this work at a
rate of $60 per hour, per man. The Borough reserves the right to charge
an additional 20% on all material purchases to cover all miscellaneous
expenses, such as administrative costs and wear and tear on
equipment. If the Borough has abated the violation, the cost thereof
may be charged to the owner of the property, tenant, landlord, or
offending party. A bill/invoice will be generated to the violator for
payment separate from the quality of life ticket. This section shall not
limit the Borough's right or ability to abate as provided for in any other
provision of the Borough of Irwin Code or pursuant to state law.
C. Contractor cleanup. The Borough reserves the right to direct a
contractor to perform the abatement of the violation once five business
days pass from the date of issuance of the quality of life ticket. Should
the violation present imminent danger and/or pose a health hazard and/
or risk, the Borough reserves the right to direct the contractor to
perform the abatement immediately. The contractor will submit a bill
for his work to the Borough of Irwin, and the Borough will forward
these costs to the violator. The Borough reserves the right to add a
processing fee of $10 in addition to the cost of the contractor.
A. Violation ticket fines. For a violation of this chapter, violation tickets
shall be issued in the successive amounts of $50 for a first offense, $75
for a second offense, $100 for a third offense, and $150 for a fourth
offense. For the purpose of determining whether an offense is a
successive offense permitting increased fines as provided herein, the
§ 192-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-9
1:165
§ 192-10. Appeal.
offense must be the same and must be committed within 30 days of
the prior offense. Example: If a violation occurs on January 1 and the
same violation is observed again on January 29, the January 29 offense
shall be considered a second offense subject to a $75 ticket. The same
offense is observed on March 5. The March 5 offense is considered a
first offense subject to a $50 ticket.
B. Violation ticket penalties. If the person in receipt of a violation ticket
does not pay the fine or appeal the ticket within 15 days of the issuance
of a violation ticket, the person will be subject to a penalty of $10.
C. Failure to respond. If a person fails to make payment or appeal the
ticket within 15 days of the issuance of a violation ticket, they shall be
subject to a summary offense citation for failure to pay.
D. Repeated violations. Upon issuance of four tickets for the same
violation, or the issuance of eight tickets for differing violations in
relation to the same property in one year, the Public Officer can issue a
summary offense citation for the subsequent offenses.
E. Citation fines. Any person, firm or corporation who shall fail, neglect or
refuse to comply with any of the terms or provisions of this chapter, or
of any regulation or requirement pursuant hereto and authorized
hereby, or pursuant to this chapter is a summary offense citation, shall,
upon conviction, be ordered to pay a fine of not less than $300 nor more
than $1,000 on each offense or be imprisoned no more than 90 days, or
both.
A. A person in receipt of a violation ticket may appeal to the Borough
Council by filing an appeal request in writing, on a form to be provided
by the Borough and located at the Borough Office, within 15 calendar
days of the date of the issuance of a violation ticket, stating the reasons
for appeal, and accompanied by the appropriate fine amount.
B. If abatement or other costs were associated with the violation, these
will be posted, along with the appeal.
C. The appeal will be heard by Borough Council at the same date and time
as the next scheduled public meeting following the filing of the appeal.
The violator may address the Borough Council at this public meeting
prior to the Borough Council voting on the appeal. By majority vote of
the Borough Council, the appeal may be upheld or denied or the
violation ticket and/or any associated costs, fines or penalty amounts
may be modified. Borough Council will issue written notice of the
decision, along with any refunds applicable, within 10 days of the
hearing.
§ 192-9 IRWIN CODE § 192-11
1:166
§ 192-11. Collections and liens.
At the discretion of the Borough, all tickets and costs of abatement for
which payment is not received within 45 days of issuance may be turned
over by the Borough to a collections agency for receipt. The Borough may
place liens on properties wherein a nuisance was removed and abated,
pursuant to 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 192-12. Nonexclusive remedies.
The penalty and collection provisions of this chapter shall be independent,
not mutually exclusive, separate remedies, all of which shall be available to
the Borough as may be deemed appropriate for carrying out the purposes
of this chapter. The remedies and procedures provided in this chapter for
violation hereof are not intended to supplant or replace to any degree the
remedies and procedures available to the Borough in the case of a violation
of any other Borough of Irwin Code or ordinance, whether or not such
other code or ordinance is referenced in this chapter and whether or not an
ongoing violation of such other code or ordinance is cited as the underlying
ground for a finding of a violation of this chapter.
§ 192-13. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by a court
of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, that decision shall not affect the
validity of this chapter as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so
declared to be invalid.
§ 192-14. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective on January 1, 2018.
Chapter 195
RENTAL PROPERTY
§ 192-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-14
1:167

ARTICLE I
Real Estate Registration Lists
[Adopted 8-10-2011 by Ord. No. 904]
§ 195-1. Purpose. [Amended 6-13-2018 by Ord. No. 967]
This chapter is adopted to protect the health, safety and welfare of Borough
residents and to prevent the loss of life, limb and property from failure of
rental dwelling units to comply with applicable building and safety codes.
§ 195-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LANDLORD — Any person, lessor, firm, corporation, partnership or
association who or which leases or by some other legal means provides
usage of real property to other persons, firms, corporations, partnerships or
associations.
NOTICE — Information provided to the Borough of Irwin as required by
this article. The information is to be provided in writing on forms provided
by the Borough of Irwin. In the event the forms are not provided by the
Borough of Irwin, any written notice with the required information would
be acceptable.
TENANT — Any adult 18 years or older occupying any landlord rental unit
pursuant to a written and/or oral lease and obligated to pay a landlord
an agreed amount of rental payments.[Amended 6-13-2018 by Ord. No.
967]
§ 195-3. Application. [Amended 6-13-2018 by Ord. No. 967]
A. All landlords who own real property within the Borough of Irwin and
who lease a portion or all of same to residential tenants shall fill out a
tenant registration application form, as provided by the Borough, which
identifies the following information:
(1) The landlord's name, address, and telephone number.
(2) The address of the rental unit (including the room number, suite
number, apartment number, dwelling unit number, or other such
number), and name(s) and telephone number(s) of all tenants over
the age of 18. If the dwelling unit is occupied by any persons under
the age of 18, the number of said minor persons shall be identified.
(3) If there is a property manager, the property manager's name,
address, and telephone number.
(4) The term or length of the tenancy and/or lease.
§ 195-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-3
1:169
§ 195-4. Fees. [Amended 6-13-2018 by Ord. No. 967]
§ 195-5. Registration process. [Amended 6-13-2018 by Ord. No.
967]
B. The above information and form shall be provided to the Borough 10
days prior to the renting, leasing, subleasing or occupancy of any
property in the Borough for a period of time in excess of 30 days.
C. The forwarding address of the tenant shall be provided by the landlord
to the Borough within 10 days of the tenant's vacating of the rental unit.
A. All landlords who own real property within the Borough of Irwin shall
pay a tenant registration fee to the Borough of Irwin in sum of $30 per
residential rental unit contained in each building and/or real estate
owned by said landlord, at the time of filing the application required
herein. The application form and fee shall be due and payable 10 days
prior to the date in which a tenant first occupies the landlord's rental
unit. There shall be a new application and registration if a tenant
relocates to a different unit owned and/or operated by landlord,
regardless of whether the unit is in the same building or structure.
B. For all rental units let out by landlords and occupied by tenants as of
the effective date of this article, the application form required by this
Chapter 195, along with the appropriate fee, shall be filed with the
Borough within 60 days of the effective date of this article.
C. Prior to the inspection required under this Chapter 195, the applicant
shall pay an inspection fee in the amount of $50 for an initial inspection
and $25 for each additional inspection required. Subsequent
inspections will be required where the initial inspection reveals a
condition not in compliance with the Borough of Irwin Code, requiring
remediation by the applicant. Following remediation, an additional
inspection shall be conducted to confirm the defect has been cured.
A. The Borough Manager shall cause the information contained in the
application to be available for inspection by the Borough Volunteer Fire
Department, Police Department, and Emergency Management
Services, for the purpose of improving emergency responses and the
health, safety, and welfare of the residential rental unit tenants.
B. Upon the filing of the application form under this Chapter 195, the
residential rental unit shall be inspected by the Building Inspector,
Zoning Officer or other Borough employee or officer as designated by
Borough Council for compliance with the provisions of the Building
Codes and/or its constituent codes found in Chapters 110 and 75 of the
Borough of Irwin Code (including but not limited to the Fire Prevention
Code, the Property Maintenance Code, the Plumbing Code and the
Electrical Code) then enacted in the Borough. The Building Inspector
shall note all violations and shall leave with the owner, landlord,
manager or agent for an owner a copy of any notice of violation. The
§ 195-3 IRWIN CODE § 195-5
1:170
§ 195-6. Enforcement. [Amended 6-13-2018 by Ord. No. 967]
Should any person not comply with the terms and provisions of this Chapter
195, the Borough Manager shall provide notice of the violation to the
landlord or person in control of the residential rental unit not in compliance
with this chapter. If this violation is not corrected within 10 days, the
Borough may take any and all action and institute any and all proceedings
and seek relief in any court of the commonwealth if the Borough shall deem
such action necessary to abate any violation of this Chapter 195.
§ 195-7. Violations and penalties.
Any landlord owning real estate within the Borough of Irwin who fails or
refuses to abide by the provisions of this article may be penalized as follows:
Building Inspector shall forward any notice of violation to the Manager
for the Borough's file.
C. Pennsylvania statutes govern. All matters regulated by the
Pennsylvania Construction Code Act or by any other laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or by regulations of departments or
agencies of the commonwealth promulgated by authority of law, as the
case may be, shall control all inspections where the requirements
thereof are the same as, or in excess of, the provisions of the Borough
Building Code and its constituent codes; however, when the
requirements of the Borough Building Code and its constituent codes
exceed the requirements of the commonwealth's regulations, the
Borough Building Code and its constituent codes shall apply.
D. Inspection mandatory. Any person who applies as an owner or as an
agent for an owner for the registration of the residential rental unit
pursuant to this Chapter 195 shall permit the Zoning Officer to inspect
the dwelling unit or rooming unit for the purpose of ensuring
compliance with this Chapter 195 and the Borough of Irwin Code.
E. Refusal to permit lawful inspection. A person registering a tenant under
this Chapter 195 violates this chapter if, after application, such person
refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the dwelling unit or rooming
unit, unless such person withdraws such application in writing.
F. Expiration of registration. Each registration shall expire when the
tenant vacates the residential rental unit or five years after the date of
registration, whichever occurs first. Upon expiration of the tenant
registration, the owner of the premises shall be required to obtain a
renewal of the registration by arranging for a new inspection of the
premises and by paying the rental permit fee then in place.
A. Prosecution as a summary offense with, upon conviction of the first
offense, a fine not in excess of $100 plus court costs. Each day that the
article is violated shall constitute a separate punishable offense.
§ 195-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-7
1:171
B. Upon conviction of a second offense, a fine not in excess of $600 plus
court costs and attorney's fees. Each day that the article is violated
shall constitute a separate punishable offense.
§ 195-7 IRWIN CODE § 195-7
1:172
Chapter 200
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks installations and
excavations — See Ch. 225, Arts. IV and VI.
§ 195-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-7
1:173

ARTICLE I
Sewer Rental Rates
[Adopted 12-12-1960 by Ord. No. 12-1960 (Ch. 18, Part 2, of the
1993 Code)]
§ 200-1. Sewer rates. [Amended 3-23-1970 by Ord. No. 9-1970;
3-11-1974 by Ord. No. 1-1974; 5-28-1980 by Ord. No. 692; 8-9-1982
by Ord. No. 708; 1-18-1990 by Ord. No. 771; 7-7-1993 by Ord. No.
791; 12-10-1997 by Ord. No. 818; 12-13-2000 by Ord. No. 835;
2-13-2002 by Ord. No. 843; 12-10-2003 by Ord. No. 857]
A. There is hereby established and imposed a sewer charge as
recommended by the Borough Council consulting engineers, payable as
hereinafter set forth, as follows:
(1) Monthly charge and penalty rate. All bills for sewage service,
exclusive of sewage treatment, shall be calculated at a rate of
$20.30 per month per EDU for a total quarterly amount of $60.90
per quarter per EDU. [Amended 1-3-2006 by Ord. No. 870;
2-14-2007 by Ord. No. 879; 12-12-2007 by Ord. No. 883;
12-9-2009 by Ord. No. 891; 12-8-2010 by Ord. No. 899;
12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 910; 12-10-2014 by Ord. No. 930;
12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 962; 12-19-2019 by Ord. No. 987]
(2) An equivalent dwelling unit (EDU) shall mean one of the following,
which shall have separate kitchen facilities and/or bathroom
facilities and/or commode and/or lavatory and/or shower and/or
laundry facilities and/or such other water-using facilities normally
discharged into the sewage disposal system:
(a) One single house.
(b) Each house of multiple or row of houses.
(c) Each apartment in an apartment complex.
(d) Each trailer (house or travel).
(e) Each 50,000 gallons or less of water used per year in the case
of motels, hotels and/or all other customers having a single
water meter.
(f) Each 50,000 gallons or less of water used per year in the case
of commercial, industrial and/or similar sewage service
customer accounts.
(3) With respect to Subsection A(2)(e) and (f), all such customers shall
pay the equivalent of one EDU for the first 50,000 gallons or less of
water used per year, and in the event of usage in excess of 50,000
gallons, shall pay, in addition to the charge for the first EDU, an
amount equal to the mathematical fraction to be determined by
assigning the gallons in excess of 50,000 as the numerator and
§ 200-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-1
1:175
50,000 as the denominator, which said fraction shall be multiplied
times the rate per EDU. Water usage will be determined from
usage data available from the Municipal Authority of Westmoreland
County.
B. Bill for sewer service. Bills for said sewer service shall be rendered in a
manner and in a form to be prescribed by the Borough. All bills for
sewer service shall be rendered to the record property owner of the
premises to which the sewer service is furnished, and such record
property owner shall in all cases be liable for payment of such bills.
C. Rules and regulations. The Borough Council shall have charge and
management of the sewer system and shall issue such rules and
regulations governing the use, operation and maintenance of said
sewer system as it shall deem necessary.
D. Sewer system fund. The Borough shall collect and receive all sewer
rates and charges prescribed by this article. All such money shall be
deposited to the credit of a special fund, to be designated the "Sewer
System Fund," pursuant to the terms of the aforesaid agreement of
lease, which shall be a separate and distinct fund of the Borough of
Irwin.
E. Sewer rental payment. All bills for sewer rentals and charges shall be
due when rendered and shall be subject to a penalty of 10% per annum
of the gross amount of the bill if the bill is not paid by the due date of
the bill. The record property owner requesting service will be billed
quarterly for sewer service rental or charge and, where applicable,
from the usage data available from the Municipal Authority of
Westmoreland County.
(1) Sewer service to any property may be discontinued after five days'
notice or failure of the record property owner or user to pay the bill
for such services within 30 days of the due date thereof.
(2) Registration of water on two or more meters at one premises, and
used by one consumer, may be combined and billed to said user as
though registered on one meter, if the Borough Council so elects.
(3) In the event any person, firm or corporation discharging sanitary
sewage, industrial waste, water or other liquids into the Borough's
public sanitary sewage system, either directly or indirectly, obtains
part or all of the water used by him from other sources than the
Municipal Authority of Westmoreland County, such user of other
water shall, at no expense to the Borough, install and maintain
water meters satisfactory to the Borough Council for measuring all
water usage other than that obtained from the Municipal Authority
of Westmoreland County, and the quantity of water used to
determine the sewage service charge (where applicable) as above
set forth shall be the sum of quantity measured by all such meters
plus the quantity of water obtained from the Municipal Authority of
Westmoreland County.
§ 200-1 IRWIN CODE § 200-1
1:176
(4) In the event it be established to the satisfaction of the Borough
Council that a portion of the water measured by the above-named
water meter or meters does not and cannot enter the public
sanitary sewage system, and in the event the total water used by
said person, firm or corporation exceeds 100,000 gallons per
quarter, then the Borough Council may determine, in such manner
and by such method as it may deem practical, the percentage of the
metered water entering the sanitary system, or the Borough
Council may require or permit installation of additional meters in
such a manner as to determine either the quantity of water
excluded from the sewage system or the quantity of water, sewage
or industrial waste actually entering the sewage system exclusive
of stormwater runoff. The sewage service charge shall be based
upon the quantity of water eliminated, measured or computed by
the Borough Council to be actually entering the sewage system,
exclusive of stormwater runoff, subject to the charge provisions as
set up hereinabove.
(5) Persons, industries or corporations requesting consideration for
reduction in the sewage system charge because of water not
entering the public sanitary sewage system shall make written
application to the Borough Council for such consideration, giving
the name of the firm, industry or business, address, Borough
account number and supporting data fully describing other sources
of water, if any, as well as disposition of water alleged not to be
entering the sewage system. The application shall be accompanied
by a sketch to approximate scale showing the plan of the property,
water distribution system, sewer layout, existing meters and
proposed meters in the scheme to determine the quantity of flow
entering or not entering the sewage system. The cost of furnishing,
installing and maintaining any meters other than those utilized to
measure water purchased from the Municipal Authority of
Westmoreland County shall be borne by the applicant. The type,
size, location, arrangement and maintenance of such meters shall
be subject to the approval of Borough Council.
(6) Nothing in the foregoing subsection shall preclude the right of the
Borough Council entering into contracts with neighboring
municipalities for the treatment of their sewage under a schedule
of charges differing from those above set forth.
(7) Surcharges.
(a) The Borough reserves the right to impose such surcharges as it
deems necessary for the discharge to the sanitary sewage
system of waste having a strength in excess of the following
and/or as set forth under ordinances:
pH — 5.50 to 9.00
BOD — 250 parts per million
§ 200-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-1
1:177
§ 200-2. Billing for sewer service.
Bills for said sewer service shall be rendered in a manner and in the form to
be prescribed by the Borough. All bills for sewer service shall be rendered
to the owner of the premises to which the sewer service is furnished, and
such owner shall in all cases be liable for payment of such bills.
§ 200-3. Rules and regulations.
The Borough Council shall have charge and management of the sewer
system and shall issue such rules and regulations governing the use,
operation and maintenance of said sewer system as it shall deem necessary.
§ 200-4. Sewer System Fund. [Amended 12-10-1997 by Ord. No.
818]
The Borough shall collect and receive all sewer rates and charges
prescribed by this article. All such moneys shall be deposited to the credit
of a special fund, to be designated the "Sewer System Fund."
Suspended solids — 250 parts per million
(b) The amount, methods of sampling and determination of
surcharge, and related characteristics of such surcharge, shall
be set by Borough Council by amendment to this article.
(8) The authorized representative shall make and enforce such rules
and regulations subject to approval of the Borough Council for the
safe, economical and efficient management, control and protection
of the Borough's public sewage system, for the construction and
use of all other connections thereto, and for the regulation,
collection, rebating and refunding of such sewage system charges
as may be needed or necessary from time to time.
§ 200-1 IRWIN CODE § 200-4
1:178
ARTICLE II
Sewer Connections
[Adopted 12-12-1960 by Ord. No. 15-1960 (Ch. 18, Part 1, of the
1993 Code)]
§ 200-5. Definitions; word usage. [Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No.
791]
As used in this article, "shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive; and the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated in this section:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Irwin, Pennsylvania.
BUILDING DRAIN or HOUSE DRAIN — The part of the lowest horizontal
piping of a drainage system which receives the sewage or discharge from
soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and
conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face
of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER or HOUSE SEWER — The extension from the building
drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of
food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
INSPECTOR — The person appointed by the Borough Council to inspect
sewage works, including both public and semipublic sewers, and including
also inspection of building sewers and all other connections between
occupied homes and other buildings and the public sewers.
OCCUPIED BUILDING — Any structure erected and intended for
continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or
animals, and from which structure, sanitary sewage and industrial wastes,
or either thereof, is or may be discharged.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation
or group.
PREMISES ACCESSIBLE TO THE SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM — Any
real estate which adjoins, abuts or is adjacent to the public sanitary
sewerage system or any real estate which might be connected to that
system by construction of a private sewer of not more than 150 feet in
length.
PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER — A sanitary sewer which has been constructed
or is owned by the Borough or has been constructed by private parties and
has been accepted by the Borough of Irwin as a sanitary sewer.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have
equal rights and which is controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which
stormwaters, surface waters, and groundwaters are not intentionally
admitted.
§ 200-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-5
1:179
SEWAGE — A combination of water-carried wastes from residences,
business and commercial buildings, apartments, institutions and industrial
establishments together with such groundwater, surface water, or
stormwater as may be present.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage or other waste liquids.
SEWER SYSTEM — All separate sanitary sewers, all combined sewers,
all sewage pumping stations, all sewage treatment works, and all other
facilities provided and owned by the Borough for the collection,
transportation and treatment of sanitary sewage and industrial wastes, with
their appurtenances and any additions, extensions or improvements thereto
that may be made by the Borough Council. It shall also include sewers
within or outside the Borough limits which serve two or more persons
and discharge into the Borough sanitary sewerage system, even though
those sewers may not have been constructed by Borough funds. It does
not include separate storm sewers or culverts which have been constructed
for the sole purpose of carrying stormwater and surface water runoff, the
discharge from which is not and does not become tributary to the Borough's
sewage treatment facilities.
STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN — A sewer which carries stormwaters
and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted
industrial wastes.
§ 200-6. Connection required where sewer accessible.
§ 200-7. Abandonment of sewage receptacles.
When connection has been made with the public sanitary sewer, the owner
or owners of such property shall forthwith abandon any and all privies,
privy vaults, cesspools and septic tanks then existing on said premises and
shall use them no longer. Any and all connections or connection with the
occupied building which has been served shall be broken or destroyed in
such a manner that sanitary sewage can no longer enter therein.
A. Within 90 days after the passage of this article, the owner or owners of
all occupied buildings located on premises now accessible to the public
sanitary sewer shall connect, or cause to be connected, the said
building or buildings with the sanitary sewer to which the property is
accessible in the manner hereinafter provided.
B. Hereinafter, as public sanitary sewers are provided in areas of the
Borough, the owners of all occupied buildings accessible to such public
sanitary sewers so laid and provided shall, within 90 days, connect or
cause to be connected the said occupied buildings with the sanitary
sewer to which the property is accessible in the manner hereinafter
provided.
§ 200-5 IRWIN CODE § 200-8
1:180
§ 200-8. Connection of receptacle to sewer prohibited.
From and after the passage of this article it shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation to connect any privy, privy vault, cesspool, septic tank
or any other type of disposal receptacle or structure to any public sanitary
sewer in the Borough.
§ 200-9. Receptacle use prohibited where sewer accessible.
From and after the passage of this article it shall be unlawful in areas where
public sanitary sewers have been provided and where the owner or owners
of premises have connected with the public sanitary sewer, or are by this
article duty-bound so to do, to connect the occupied buildings with a privy,
privy vault, cesspool, septic tank or any other type of disposal receptacle or
structure.
§ 200-10. Specifications for connections. [Amended 7-9-1979 by
Ord. No. 687; 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
A. In all cases where a sanitary sewer connection is made from an
occupied building to the sanitary sewer system, either cast iron, ductile
iron, vitrified clay, asbestos-cement (transite), ABS (acrylonitrilebutadiene-
styrene) or PVC (polyvinyl chloride) pipe of the kind and
quality hereinafter specified, of at least four-inch inside diameter, shall
be used, and the house sewer shall be laid to an even grade and straight
alignment to the public sanitary sewer. Where the ground is of sufficient
solidity for a proper foundation, vitrified clay, asbestos-cement, ABS or
PVC pipe may be used. On filled ground, cast or ductile iron pipe shall
be used.
B. Pipe to be used shall meet the following specifications and minimum
strength classification or wall thickness, as applicable:
Type Specifications
Minimum Strength
Classification
Vitrified clay ASTM C-700 Extra strength
Vitrified clay ASTM C-425 Extra strength
Asbestos-cement ASTM C-644 Class 2400
Asbestos-cement ASTM D-1869 Class 2400
ABS ASTM D-2751 SDR 23.5
PVC ASTM D-3034 SDR 35
Ductile iron ANSI 12.50 Class 50
Ductile iron ANSI 12.51 Class 50
Ductile iron ANSI 12.11 Class 50
Cast iron ASTM A-74 Extra heavy
Cast iron ASTM C-564 Extra heavy
§ 200-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-10
1:181
§ 200-11. Installation and maintenance of building sewers.
[Amended 11-13-1961 by Ord. No. 8-1961; 7-7-1993 by Ord. No.
791]
C. All pipe shall be laid with full and even bearing and all joints are to be
completely tight. Joint ends shall be of neoprene rubber or plastisol in
accordance with the above-noted specification or be of the chemically
welded type, where applicable. All joints must receive prior approval by
the Borough before construction may commence.
D. Where pipes of different material are to be joined or where a section of
pipe is cut to make connection with another pipe, the connection shall
be made by means of a flexible coupling (Fernco or equal) and two
stainless steel bands. Plain cement joints or slip-seal joints are
prohibited.
E. The bottom of all trenches shall be undercut a minimum of six inches
below the invert grade of the proposed pipe. Where, in the opinion of
the Borough's representative, the bottom of the trench is unsuitable for
foundation subgrade, such material shall be removed to a depth
satisfactory to the Borough's representative. The undercut area shall
then be filled with sand, granulated slag or pea gravel conforming to
the requirements for "small" concrete aggregate. The bedding material
shall further be placed along the sides and above the pipe a minimum of
12 inches. The material shall be adequately and compactly tamped in
place, taking care not to heave, misalign, crack or otherwise injure the
pipe or joints. All work is to be done in a workmanlike manner.
A. The property owners shall install the building sewers at their own
expense from the building drain to the wye connection supplied in the
public sewer. Maintenance and repair of the building sewer is the
responsibility of the property owner from the occupied building to the
wye in the public sewer. Connections to public sewers in rights-of-way
shall, in all respects, meet the same specifications as when the sewer is
in a public street. The property owner shall make application to the
Borough for permission to connect to the public sewer on forms
supplied by the Borough.
B. Unless written permission is obtained from an authorized Borough
representative, separate connection will be required for each individual
occupied building, whether constructed as a detached unit or as one of
a pair or row, but a single connection will be permitted to serve a
school, factory, apartment house or other permanent multiple-unit
structure whose individual apartments or units may not be subject to
separate ownership.
C. A single connection will be permitted to serve a double house in which
the internal plumbing waste system is common to both units or is not
readily separable. In such case, a tap-in application shall state and
show, by an eight-and-one-half-inch by eleven-inch sketch, the specific
conditions of the house to be tapped-in. The Borough assumes no
§ 200-10 IRWIN CODE § 200-11
1:182
§ 200-12. Basement seepage or groundwater not to discharge to
sewer system.
No basement seepage or groundwater drainage or any other
uncontaminated source of water shall be discharged to the sanitary
sewerage system, and all applicants desiring connection to the sewerage
system shall certify that no groundwater or seepage drains are or shall
be connected to their system. After connection to the sewer is made, the
applicant shall maintain his house system in such a manner that no such
seepage or drainage enters his sanitary sewage system.
§ 200-13. Downspouts, roof drainage, surface or areaway drainage
not to discharge to sewer system. [Amended 5-12-1975 by Ord. No.
616]
No downspouts, roof drainage or surface or areaway drainage shall be
connected into the sanitary sewerage system, and before attachment to the
sewer system, the property owner or applicant for service shall remove such
connections and adequately and properly plug his system to prevent the
entrance of any downspout, roof, surface or areaway drainage.
§ 200-14. Fresh-air vents.
Each user of the system before connections are made thereon shall provide
in his house sewer system, just outside the building wall, a trap with a freshair
vent in the house side in accordance with the standards approved by the
Borough.
§ 200-15. Cross-connections.
No cross-connections shall be made between the sanitary sewerage system
and the potable water system whereby vacuums or backsiphonage could
permit sanitary wastes to enter the potable water system. No crossconnection
shall be made between the sanitary sewerage system and storm
drains or storm sewers.
obligation or responsibility caused by or resulting from such a single
connection.
D. No connection less than four inches in diameter will be permitted to the
main sewer lines, and the construction of the property owner's
connection shall be in accordance with the general requirements of
sewers, except that a grade of not less than 1/8 inch per foot shall be
allowed. The applicant will also be required to conform to all other
requirements of the Borough as regards charges for sewage
transportation, collection, etc., as outlined under the Borough's rules
and regulations and as necessary to establish, to meet the
management, overhead, operation and fixed charges to retire the
capital cost of the system. House sewers shall be installed by
competent, skilled pipelayers in accordance with approved standards,
plans and specifications of the Borough.
§ 200-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-16
1:183
§ 200-16. Harmful waste and industrial waste discharge to sewers
restricted. [Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
A. No person shall connect or cause to be connected with any of the public
sewers in the Borough, directly or indirectly, any substance detrimental
to the sewers or to the operation of the Borough sewerage system as
more explicitly listed in the following subsections:
(1) The Borough reserves the right to refuse connection to its public
sanitary sewerage system or to compel discontinuance of the use of
such system for deleterious industrial wastes or to require
pretreatment of such wastes in order to prevent harmful or adverse
effect upon the system. The design, construction and operation of
such pretreatment facilities shall be subject to the approval of the
Borough Council.
(2) In general, any industrial waste will be considered harmful to the
public sanitary sewerage system that may cause any of the
following damaging effects:
(a) Chemical reaction either directly or indirectly with the
materials of construction of the public sewerage system in
such a manner as to impair the strength or durability of the
sewer structures.
(b) Mechanical action that will destroy the sewer structures.
(c) Restriction of the hydraulic capacity of the sewer structures.
(d) Restriction of the normal inspection or maintenance of the
sewer structures.
(e) Danger to public health and safety.
(f) Obnoxious conditions inimical to public interest.
(3) When required by the Borough Council, any person discharging to
the public sanitary sewerage system industrial wastes or industrial
wastes and sanitary sewage together in excess of 100,000 gallons
per quarter shall install a suitable manhole or manholes on his
connecting sewer or sewers to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the combined flow of wastes from his premises.
Such manhole or manholes shall be accessible and safely located
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Borough Council. The manhole or manholes shall be installed by
the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be
safe and accessible to the Borough Council or its authorized
representatives at all times. The construction and maintenance of
such manholes shall be mandatory for the producers of normal
industrial wastes.
(4) The discharge of excessive amounts of unpolluted water or waste to
a separate sanitary sewer is expressly prohibited. However, such
§ 200-16 IRWIN CODE § 200-16
1:184
discharges to combined sewers or storm sewers will be permitted
wherever such sewers are of adequate capacity. The Borough
Council reserves the right to define the amount it deems excessive
in each particular instance.
(5) The discharge of garbage to the public sanitary sewerage system is
expressly prohibited unless said garbage is first properly shredded.
(6) Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge any
industrial waste having any of the following characteristics to the
public sanitary sewerage system:
(a) Wastes containing liquids, solids or gases which by reason of
their nature or quality may cause fire, explosion or be in any
other way injurious to persons, the structures of the sewerage
system or its operation.
(b) Wastes having a temperature in excess of 150° F. or less than
32° F.
(c) Wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than nine, or
having any corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazards to structures, equipment or personnel of the public
sanitary sewerage system. Where the Borough Council deems
it advisable, it may require any person discharging industrial
wastes to install and maintain, in an approved manner, a
suitable device to continuously measure and record the pH of
the wastes so discharged.
(d) Wastes containing any noxious or malodorous gas or substance
which either singly or by interaction with sewage or other
wastes is, in the opinion of the Borough Council, likely to
create a public nuisance or hazard to life, or prevent entry into
sewers for their maintenance and repair.
(e) Wastes containing ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings,
metals, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, hair, chemical
or paint residues, greases, lime slurry or viscous material of
such character or in such quantity that, in the opinion of the
Borough Council, they may cause an obstruction to the flow in
sewers or otherwise interfere with the proper operation of the
public sanitary sewerage system. Attention is called to the fact
that the maximum permissible concentration will vary
throughout the system, depending upon the size of the
particular receiving sewer and the flows therein.
(f) Wastes containing insoluble, nonflocculent substances having
a specific gravity in excess of 2.65.
(g) Wastes containing soluble substances in such concentrations
as to cause the specific gravity of the waste to be greater than
1.1.
§ 200-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-16
1:185
(h) Wastes containing any of the following substances in solution
in concentrations exceeding those shown in the following
table:
Substance
Maximum Permissible
Concentration
(ppm)
Phenolic compounds as
C6H5OH
1
Cyanides as CN 1
Cyanates as CNO 10
Iron as Fe 15
Trivalent chromium as Cr 3
Hexavalent chromium as
Cr
0.5
Nickel as Ni 3
Copper as Cu 2
Lead as Pb 2
Tin as Sn 2
Zinc as Zn 2
Cadmium as Cd 2
(i) Wastes containing more than 100 parts per million (ppm) by
weight of fat, oil or grease.
(j) Wastes containing more than 10 parts per million of any of the
following gases: hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, nitrous oxide,
or any of the halogens.
(k) Wastes containing gases or vapors, either free or occluded, in
concentrations toxic or dangerous to humans or animals.
(l) Any waste containing toxic substances in quantities sufficient
to interfere with the biochemical processes of the sewage
treatment works or that will pass through the sewage
treatment works and exceed the state or interstate
requirements for the WWMA treatment plan.
(m) Any toxic radioactive isotopes without a special permit.
B. No statement contained in this section shall be construed as prohibiting
any special agreement or arrangement between the Borough and any
person whereby any industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be admitted to the public sanitary sewerage system either before
or after pretreatment by the producer of such industrial waste.
§ 200-16 IRWIN CODE § 200-16
1:186
C. Grease traps and interceptors. The purpose of this subsection is to
reduce the amounts of fats, oils and grease (collectively "grease")
entering the Borough of Irwin separate sanitary sewer system. This
subsection provides for the regulation of food-processing and service
establishments that contribute grease to the separate sanitary sewer
system, through inspections, sampling, and the enforcement of these
requirements. The requirements of this subsection shall be applied to,
but not limited to, all food facilities within the Borough that discharge
wastewater into the separate sanitary sewer system. [Added
5-10-2017 by Ord. No. 950]
(1) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
FOOD FACILITY — Any food establishment in any building, room
or place or any portion thereof or appurtenance thereto, where
human food or drink is mixed, cooked, made or otherwise prepared,
offered for sale, sold, served or given with or without charge to
patrons, customers or guests, whether said food is consumed on
site or off site, including, without limitations, any and all
restaurants, taverns, social clubs, soup kitchens, and bars, with the
exception of the mixing, cooking, or other preparation of food in a
residential dwelling unit for consumption by the residents or their
guests.
GREASE INTERCEPTOR — An interceptor whose flow rate exceeds
35 gpm and which is located underground outside the building.
GREASE TRAP — An interceptor whose flow rate is 35 gallons
per minute (gpm) or less and which is located inside the building.
Grease traps shall be rated for a minimum of 22.5 gpm.
(2) Plumbing in good repair. Every building or room occupied or used
as a food facility shall be well drained. All soil pipes, waste pipes,
drains and other plumbing fixtures shall be of adequate size to
enable a passage of any waste intended to pass through it to the
separate sanitary sewer system. All drains, sewers, waste and oil
pipes, traps and water in gas pipes shall, at all times, be kept in
good repair in order so that no gases or odor shall escape
therefrom and so that the same shall not leak, and all vent pipes
shall be kept in good order and repair and free from obstruction.
(3) Fats, oils and grease limitation. No food facility may discharge into
the separate sanitary sewer system any waste containing more
than 100 milligrams per liter by weight of fat, oil or grease. Any
single discharge in excess of this limitation shall be a single
violation of this subsection. More than one violation may occur in a
single day, depending upon the amount and frequency of the grease
discharge. The Borough may compel discontinuance of the use of
the separate sanitary sewer system, or require pretreatment and/or
equalization facilities, grease traps and/or interceptors, for any
discharges in excess of the within limitation. The design and
§ 200-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-16
1:187
construction of any required improvements will be made at the sole
expense of the food facility.
(4) Installation of grease interceptors and traps.
(a) Every food facility, whether new or existing, shall install or
cause to be installed a grease interceptor or grease trap. The
type of installation shall be determined by the total fixture
flow-through rate of potential grease-laden fixtures
discharging through the building sewage lines as determined
by the Borough or its designated representative. For flowthrough
rates 35 gallons per minute or less, an internal grease
trap may be installed in certain existing structures used as
food facilities. For flow-through rates exceeding 35 gallons per
minute, as well as all new structures or changes in use
concerning a food facility, an external, underground grease
interceptor must be installed. In any case, the grease trap or
grease interceptor shall be designed to and shall actually
accomplish the limitation of grease as required by this
subsection.
(b) Said grease trap or grease interceptor shall be installed at an
appropriate location along the sewer connection line between
the food facility and the entry of the line into the main separate
sanitary sewer system. An inspection site tee shall be installed
between the interceptor discharge and shall connect to the
separate sanitary sewer system.
(c) No solid waste devices, such as waste grinders, disposals,
potato peelers, etc., shall discharge through the grease trap or
grease interceptor. Only potentially grease-laden fixtures may
discharge through the trap or interceptor.
(d) In any existing food facility where there is a change of use or
change of ownership, the property owner shall be required to
provide updated information on the ownership and use to the
Borough. In such case, the current grease trap or grease
interceptor on the property shall be inspected to ensure that it
meets the requirements of this subsection. To the extent that it
may be necessary to meet ordinance compliance, the property
owner may be required to modify the existing or install a new
grease trap or grease interceptor as may be appropriate and in
accordance with § 200-16C(2) above.
(e) All grease traps or grease interceptors shall meet and shall be
installed in accordance with all applicable laws, including, but
not limited to, the Uniform Construction Code.
(5) Maintenance of grease traps and interceptors.
(a) All grease traps and grease interceptors shall be maintained
and kept in good working order at all times. The grease traps
§ 200-16 IRWIN CODE § 200-16
1:188
and grease interceptor shall limit the amount of grease
discharged into the sewer system to levels not exceeding those
permitted by Irwin Borough. Grease discharges shall not
exceed 100 parts per million downstream of the grease
interceptor or grease trap.
(b) It shall be the duty and responsibility of any property owner,
lessee or agent of any food-processing facility to clean and, at a
minimum annually, inspect the grease interceptor or grease
trap. Such efforts shall be accomplished with a duly qualified
business or company. A written record shall be kept of all
inspections and grease removal. The inspection report shall, at
a minimum, list the company name, company representative,
address and phone number of the company, the method and
frequency of cleaning schedule and the date of cleaning/
inspection. Such records shall be presented to the Borough
upon request. A more frequent cleaning/inspection schedule
shall be performed at the property when it is determined by the
Borough that the food facility is discharging excessive amounts
of grease to the sewer system.
(6) Costs. Following the installation of the grease trap and/or grease
interceptor, and/or any other required improvements, the food
facility shall authorize the Borough to test a sample of the
wastewater downstream the grease trap and/or grease interceptor,
to ensure compliance with this § 200-16C. The cost to test the
sample shall be paid by the food facility. Payment shall be made to
the Borough of Irwin at the time of sampling, in the amount of
105% of the cost of the testing to the Borough, which shall be used
to pay the testing facility and cover administrative fees in the
securing and transporting of the sample and the reviewing of the
results. A fee schedule and/or invoice shall be provided to the food
processing facility if so demanded. The food facility shall be
provided with a copy of the test results.
(7) Penalties. Whosoever violates any of the provisions of this
§ 200-16C shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine
of up to $1,000. Each day that a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense. Each discharge in excess of the
limitation in § 200-16C(3) shall be deemed a separate offense.
(8) Right of entry. In the discharge of their duties, the Code
Enforcement Officer or authorized representative shall have the
authority to enter, at any reasonable hour, any food facility in the
jurisdiction to enforce the provisions herein.
(9) Modifications. The requirements of this § 200-16C may be modified
upon written request of the operator of a food facility, if such
modification meets the requirements and intent of this section. No
modification will be permitting from the requirement of
§ 200-16C(2) and (3).
§ 200-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-17
1:189
§ 200-17. Inspections.
The inspector and other duly authorized employees of the Borough, bearing
proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter upon all
properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, sampling, testing and
retesting in accordance with provisions of this article.
§ 200-18. Schedule of fees for tap-in. [Amended 5-6-1967 by Ord.
No. 13-1967; 2-19-1968 by Ord. No. 2-1968; 5-12-1975 by Ord. No.
616; 7-9-1979 by Ord. No. 686; 3-7-1988 by Ord. No. 754; 8-25-1989
by Ord. No. 768; 10-9-1989 by Ord. No. 769; 4-13-1992 by Ord. No.
782; 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791; 7-10-1996 by Ord. No. 804]
A. No person shall make or cause to be made any connection of his
property with any public sanitary sewer until he has fulfilled all of the
following conditions:
(1) He shall obtain written permission from the Borough of Irwin
Authority to connect to the public sewer system.
(2) He shall make application to the Manager for a permit to connect to
the public sewer system and shall submit to the Manager the
written permission obtained from the Borough of Irwin Authority at
the time of such application.
(3) He shall pay a tap or connection charge in the amount as
established in Subsection C hereof.
(4) No work shall commence before the issuance of a connection
permit by the Manager.
(5) He shall have given the Director of Public Works at least 24 hours'
notice of the time when such connection shall be made in order that
the Director of Public Works can be present to supervise and
inspect the work of connection.
(6) At the time of inspection, the owner of property shall allow and
permit the full and complete inspection of all sanitary and drainage
arrangements and facilities in his building and in and about all
parts of his property.
B. All work contemplated by this article shall be under the direct
supervision and inspection of the Sewer Inspector appointed by the
Borough, and no building sewer line shall be covered over or in any
manner concealed until after it is inspected, tested and approved by
said Sewer Inspector.
C. Schedule of fees for tap-in.
(1) The following schedule of fees shall be applicable to be paid into
the Borough treasury for all properties where a public sanitary
sewer tap-in must be performed:
§ 200-17 IRWIN CODE § 200-18
1:190
(a) An individual, person, partnership or any other entity that
requires one tap-in for a single-family dwelling in the Borough
must pay a tap-in fee or connection charge of $1,000 per EDU
to the Borough at its office and principal place of business at
424 Main Street, Irwin, Pennsylvania 15642.
(b) Properties where there is multiple use from a single tap-in or
the service of multiple units from a single tap-in, the tap-in or
connection charge shall be $1,000 for the first EDU and an
additional $1,000 for each additional EDU in excess of one,
which must be paid to the Borough at its office and principal
place of business at 424 Main Street, Irwin, Pennsylvania
15642.
(c) Any commercial and/or industrial and/or manufacturing facility
shall pay a tap-in or connection charge of $1,000 per EDU to
the Borough at its principal place of business at 424 Main
Street, Irwin, Pennsylvania 15642.
(2) This charge is based upon one equivalent dwelling unit (EDU),
which EDU is equal to 50,000 gallons per year. Any water usage in
excess of 50,000 gallons per year, or part thereof, shall pay an
additional $1,000 per EDU.
D. Liability for payment of tapping fees.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this article is to amend the existing tap-in
fee ordinance as it applies to subsequent tap-ins for all areas
served by or hereinafter served by the sewer lines of the Borough
and to establish a comprehensive policy of liability for tapping fees.
(2) Liability for payment of tapping fees. All bills for tapping fees shall
be due and owing upon connection by any owner of real estate of
any sanitary facilities on said real estate to a public sanitary sewer.
(a) Building or structure razed or destroyed. Subject to the
provisions of Subsection D(2)(b) herein, in the event that an
owner of real estate had connected sanitary facilities to a
public sanitary sewer and the building or structure containing
the sanitary facilities is razed or destroyed, the owner thereof,
in reestablishing service, shall be entitled to receive a credit
equal to the number of equivalent dwelling units (EDUs) for
which a tapping fee was previously paid, provided that the
owner had in fact paid the applicable tapping fees in full which
were due at the time of the initial connection, that the owner
pay a reinspection fee and that the sanitary facilities are
reestablished within one year of the date on which the building
or structure was razed or destroyed. Credits for tapping fees
shall be made on a tap-for-tap basis consistent with Subsection
D(2)(b) hereof. In determining credits herein, tapping fees
previously paid for any particular number of EDUs shall be
credited as full payment for tapping fees for a corresponding
§ 200-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-18
1:191
§ 200-19. Notice to connect; time limit.
Hereafter, when sanitary sewers have become available to any property
and the property owner or owners have failed to connect or cause to be
connected his or their property to the sanitary sewer, the Borough may give
or cause to be given written notice to the said owner or owners to connect
or cause to be connected his, her or their property to the sanitary sewer
within 60 days from the date thereof, and failure to comply with the said
notice shall subject the property owner or owners to the penalties of this
article.
§ 200-20. Borough may make connection upon failure of property
owner.
If the owner or owners of any occupied building or buildings shall neglect
or refuse to comply with the provisions of this article, the Borough of Irwin
may serve a written notice upon said owner or owners or upon the tenants
or party in possession of the premises if said owner or owners cannot be
found on the said premises, requiring said owner or owners to comply with
the provisions of this article in every respect within 60 days after the service
number of EDUs subsequently established. An owner shall not
be entitled to a refund of tapping fees for any subsequent
reduction in the number of EDUs.
(b) Change in use; razed or destroyed building or structure. In the
event that a building or structure is razed or destroyed and the
owner thereof desires to construct a new building(s) or
structure(s) upon said real estate, the owner shall first be
required to obtain all applicable permits from the Borough,
including, but not limited to, building, occupancy and/or zoning
permits before reestablishing connections with the public
sanitary sewer system. Prior to reestablishing such
connections and service, the owner shall also be required to
obtain a sewer permit from the Borough at a cost of $50. In
reviewing the application for a sewer permit, if the Borough
determines that the proposed use of the building or structure
will result in additional EDUs on the real estate, the owner
shall be entitled to receive a tapping fee credit as provided in
Subsection D(2)(a), but the owner shall be liable to pay
additional tapping fees for the additional EDUs pursuant to the
fees established in § 200-26 and the fee resolution schedule.
The owner shall also be required to pay a fifty-dollar
reinspection fee.
(c) Application. The provisions of Subsection D(2)(b) shall govern
all situations in which the owner of real estate desires to
change, in whole or in part, the use of an existing building or
structure or desires to construct additional buildings or
structures upon such real estate.
§ 200-18 IRWIN CODE § 200-20
1:192
of such notice, and if said owner or owners shall neglect or refuse to comply
with said notice, the Borough may perform or cause to be performed such
work and labor and furnish or cause to be furnished such material as may
be necessary to comply with the provision of this article at the cost and
expense of such owner or owners, together with 10% additional thereof,
and all charges and expenses incident thereto, which sum shall be collected
from said owner or owners for the use of the Borough as debts are by law
collectable; or the said Borough may, by its proper officer, file a municipal
claim or lien therefor against said premises as provided by the Acts of
Assembly in such cases made and provided.
§ 200-21. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-12-1975 by Ord. No.
616; 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment, to imprisonment
for a term not to exceed 30 days. Every day that a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 200-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-21
1:193

ARTICLE III
Connections Outside Borough Limits
[Adopted 12-17-1969 by Ord. No. 7-1969 (Ch. 18, Part 4, of the 1993
Code)]
§ 200-22. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Includes both singular and plural and shall apply to any natural
person, partnership, firm, association or corporation.
§ 200-23. Permit required for tap-in.
It shall be unlawful for any person to tap into the sanitary sewer system of
the Borough without first securing a permit as hereinafter provided.
§ 200-24. Application to tap into sewer system. [Amended
5-12-1975 by Ord. No. 627; 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
A. Any person desiring to tap into the sanitary sewer system of the
Borough from and for property situated outside the geographic limits
and boundaries of the Borough shall make written application to the
Borough Manager for a permit to do so. Such application shall be made
upon blanks to be furnished by the Borough Manager, shall set forth the
name of the applicant, the location of the property, the use to be made
of the property, the number and type of plumbing fixtures to be
connected, and the type and estimated quantity of sewage to be
discharged.
B. No permit for a trunk or interceptor line shall be issued until the
applicant shall execute forms which shall contain a waiver, conveyance
and release to the Borough, providing that the trunk or interceptor line
connected to the sanitary sewer system shall thereafter become the
sole property of the Borough of Irwin. The waiver, conveyance and
release to the Borough shall include all trunk or interceptor lines
connected therewith and shall include all rights-of-way in areas
traversed by the trunk or interceptor lines, including areas in the
streets, alleys or through private property or utility rights-of-way, or in
any manner whatsoever.
C. No permit shall be issued or any connection made to the sewer system
until approved by the Borough Engineer, subject to the following
restrictions:
(1) The trunk or interceptor line connected shall be constructed in
accordance with specifications promulgated by the office of the
Borough Engineer.
(2) The plan for the area must provide adequate rights-of-way for
connections of sewer lines to adjacent parcels of real estate where
§ 200-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-24
1:195
§ 200-25. Submission of application for permit. [Amended 7-7-1993
by Ord. No. 791]
All applications for a permit to tap into the sanitary sewer system shall be
submitted to the Borough Engineer for approval or disapproval. It shall be
the duty of the Borough Engineer to reject the application if the wastes to be
discharged into the sanitary sewer system do not conform to the standards
promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
and by the Borough Council.
the adjacent real estate can be served by sewer lines through
the plan. The plan must conform in all respects to all plans for
sewage disposal systems made by the Borough as required by the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act.25
(3) Adequate provision is made in the plan for extension of sewer lines
within the plan, so that all parcels of the plan can be connected
with the trunk or interceptor line or lines.
(4) Adequate manholes or other control devices are provided for the
efficient operation of the sewer lines in the plan.
D. After acceptance of the trunk or interceptor line by the Borough
Engineer and the issuance of the aforesaid permit, the Borough shall
assume responsibility for the maintenance of the trunk or interceptor
line, but shall not assume responsibility or ownership of lateral lines
connected to the trunk or interceptor line from individual structures.
The Borough shall, after acceptance of the sewage line and issuance of
a permit, have exclusive control of the additional tap-ins to such trunk
or interceptor line. All discharge of sewage and tap-ins shall be subject
to the provisions of the ordinances of the Borough of Irwin pertaining
thereto.
E. The provisions of this article providing for the ownership and
maintenance of trunk or interceptor lines shall apply to all connections
to the sanitary sewer system of the Borough, whether such lines are
located in the Borough or in other municipal areas, and regardless of
the source of funds used for the construction of the trunk or interceptor
sewer line.
F. Any application for a tap-in permit shall be considered as an application
for a trunk or interceptor sewer line where the anticipated discharge
into the sewer system from the structure or structures to be served by
such line shall be greater than the normal flow of sewage expected from
a single-family dwelling house having no more than eight outlets for
discharge into the sewer lateral line.
25.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 200-24 IRWIN CODE § 200-26
1:196
§ 200-26. Permit fee. [Amended 8-29-1972 by Ord. No. 12-1972;
5-12-1975 by Ord. No. 627; 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
Before any permit shall be issued for and from properties situate outside the
geographic limits and boundaries of the Borough, the applicant shall pay to
the Borough Manager a permit fee in an amount as established from time to
time by resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 200-27. Compliance with street excavation regulations.
In all cases where the tap into the Borough sanitary sewer system shall
necessitate excavation in a street of the Borough, the applicant shall comply
with the provisions of all prior ordinances adopted by the Borough Council
referring to the sanitary sewer system which regulate the making of
openings and excavations in the streets of the Borough.
§ 200-28. Work to be done at applicant's expense.
All work in connection with tapping into the sanitary sewer system,
including the excavation, protection, sewer connection, refilling, backfilling
and repaving, shall be done by the applicant at his own expense, subject to
the supervision and approval of the Borough Engineer.
§ 200-29. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-12-1975 by Ord. No.
627; 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment, to imprisonment
for a term not to exceed 30 days. Every day that a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 200-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-29
1:197

ARTICLE IV
Treatment Charge
[Adopted 1-3-1978 by Ord. No. 673 (Ch. 18, Part 3, of the 1993
Code)]
§ 200-30. Imposition of treatment charge. [Amended 2-25-1981 by
Ord. No. 696; 12-10-1997 by Ord. No. 818; 2-13-2002 by Ord. No.
843]
There is hereby established and imposed a sewer treatment charge in
addition to the rentals or charges imposed under authority of Article I of
this chapter, payable as hereinafter set forth, as follows:
A. Monthly charge and penalty rate. All bills for sewage transportation
and treatment, exclusive of the monthly charge for sewer rental, shall
be calculated at a rate of $30.96 per month per EDU for a total
quarterly amount of $92.88 per EDU. [Amended 1-3-2006 by Ord.
No. 871; 3-10-2010 by Ord. No. 892; 1-3-2012 by Ord. No. 908;
12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 912; 12-9-2015 by Ord. No. 937;
11-9-2016 by Ord. No. 943; 12-19-2019 by Ord. No. 987]
B. An equivalent dwelling unit (EDU) shall mean one of the following,
which shall have separate kitchen facilities and/or bathroom facilities
and/or commode and/or lavatory and/or shower and/or laundry facilities
and/or such other water-using facilities normally discharged into the
sewage disposal system:
(1) One single house.
(2) Each house of multiple or row houses.
(3) Each apartment in an apartment complex.
(4) Each trailer (house or travel).
(5) Each 50,000 gallons or less of water used per year in the case of
motels, hotels and/or all other customers having a single water
meter.
(6) Each 50,000 gallons or less of water used per year in the case of
commercial, industrial and/or similar sewage customer accounts.
C. With respect to Subsection B(5) and (6) above, all such customers shall
pay the equivalent of one EDU for the first 50,000 gallons or less of
water used per year, and in the event of usage in excess of 50,000
gallons, shall pay, in addition to the charge for the first EDU, an amount
equal to the mathematical fraction to be determined by assigning the
gallons in excess of 50,000 as the numerator and 50,000 as the
denominator, which said fraction shall be multiplied times the rate per
EDU.
§ 200-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-31
1:199
§ 200-31. Billing.
Bills for said sewer treatment charge shall be rendered in a manner and in
the form to be prescribed by the Borough. All bills for sewage treatment
charges shall be rendered to the owner of the premises to which the sewer
service is furnished, and such owner shall, in all cases, be liable for payment
of such bills.
§ 200-32. Payment. [Amended 8-9-1982 by Ord. No. 709]
§ 200-33. Other sources of water; water not discharged into system.
A. All bills for sewage treatment service shall be due when rendered and
shall be subject to a penalty of 10% if the bill for each billing quarter is
not paid in full within 30 days after the date of the bill for each billing
quarter. The owner receiving service will be billed quarterly for the
sewage treatment charges or monthly in accordance with the billing
practices established by the Borough from usage data available from
the Municipal Authority of Westmoreland County. In the event such a
bill becomes delinquent for more than a thirty-day period, the owner
receiving service will again be billed as to the delinquency, and a copy
of the bill shall be sent to the occupant of the premises in question.
B. Sewer service to any property may be discontinued after five days'
notice for failure of the property owner to pay the bill for such services
within 30 days after the due date thereof.
A. In the event any person, firm or corporation discharging sanitary
sewage, industrial waste, water or other liquids into the Borough's
public sanitary sewerage system, either directly or indirectly, obtains a
part or all of the water used by him from other sources than the
Municipal Authority of Westmoreland County, such user of other water
shall, at no expense to the Borough, install and maintain water meters
satisfactory to the Borough Council for measuring all water usage other
than that obtained from the Municipal Authority of Westmoreland
County, and the quantity of water used to determine the sewerage
service charge as above set forth shall be the sum of the quantity
measured by all such meters plus the quantity of water obtained from
the Municipal Authority of Westmoreland County.
B. In the event it be established to the satisfaction of the Borough Council
that a portion of the water measured by the above-named water meter
or meters does not and cannot enter the public sanitary sewerage
system, and in the event that the total water used by said person, firm,
or corporation exceeds 100,000 gallons per quarter, then the Borough
Council may determine, in such manner and by such method as it may
deem practical, the percentage of the metered water entering the
sanitary system, or the Borough Council may require or permit
installation of additional meters in such manner as to determine either
the quantity of water excluded from the sewerage system or the
quantity of water, sewage or industrial waste actually entering the
§ 200-31 IRWIN CODE § 200-33
1:200
§ 200-34. Payments to Authority.
The Borough Manager and the Borough Treasurer are hereby authorized
to remit to Western Westmoreland Municipal Authority, or its successor,
the amounts imposed upon the Borough for payment of treatment charges
imposed under authority of the service agreement or the amendments
thereto.
sewerage system, exclusive of stormwater runoff. The sewerage service
charge shall be based upon the quantity of water estimated, measured
or computed by the Borough Council to be actually entering the
sewerage system, exclusive of stormwater runoff, subject to the charge
provision set up in § 200-30 of this article.
C. Persons, industries or corporations requesting consideration for a
reduction in the sewage treatment charges because of water not
entering the public sanitary sewerage system shall make written
application to the Borough Council for such consideration, giving the
name of the firm, industry or business; address; Borough account
number; and supporting data fully describing other sources of water, if
any, as well as disposition of water alleged not to be entering the
sewerage system. The application shall be accompanied by a sketch of
approximate scale showing the plan of the property, water distribution
system, sewer layout, existing meters, and proposed meters in the
scheme to determine the quantity of flow entering or not entering the
sewerage system. The cost of furnishing, installing and maintaining any
meters other than those utilized to measure water purchased from the
Municipal Authority of Westmoreland County shall be borne by the
applicant. The type, size, location, arrangement and maintenance of
such meters shall be subject to the approval of the Borough Council.
§ 200-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-34
1:201

ARTICLE V
Certificates of Compliance Required for Real Estate Transactions
[Adopted 5-10-2006 by Ord. No. 873]
§ 200-35. Certificate of compliance. [Amended 12-13-2017 by Ord.
No. 962; 3-11-2020 by Ord. No. 2-2020]
It shall be unlawful for any owner of real property in the Borough of Irwin on
which a building is or should be connected to the Borough of Irwin sanitary
sewer system to sell, convey, assign or transfer, or obtain or refinance
a mortgage, home equity line of credit or other loan thereon, any real
property, by deed, agreement of sale, article of agreement or otherwise, to
any person not already an owner thereof, without first securing a certificate
of compliance issued by the Borough of Irwin with respect to the real
property being transferred, certifying compliance with all laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations of the Borough of Irwin and the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania relative to the tapping into, discharging into or connection
with the Borough of Irwin sanitary sewer system. The Borough shall
determine compliance by physically inspecting said real property, including,
without limitation, the televising of all sewer connections, lines, laterals,
and other sanitary sewage facilities. A certificate of compliance shall not be
required where the existing property owner is obtaining financing, whether
a new or refinanced mortgage, home equity line of credit or other loan
on the subject property, and a certificate of compliance was issued for the
subject property within the previous 36 months.
§ 200-36. Application for certificate.
An application for a certificate of compliance shall be made to the Borough
of Irwin Secretary/Manager and/or the Borough's Code Enforcement Officer
with a copy to the Borough Secretary/Manager or it or their designee on
forms furnished by the Borough, and it shall be accompanied by a fee in
such amount as is set by the Council for the Borough of Irwin from time to
time by resolution. The fee will be for the application and initial inspection.
Should any additional inspections be required, an additional fee shall also
be required and shall also be set by the Irwin Borough Council by way of
resolution.
§ 200-37. Issuance of certificate of compliance.
Upon receipt of a properly completed application for certificate of
compliance, the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee shall, within
10 calendar days, physically inspect the real property and determine its
compliance with all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations applicable and,
if determining compliance, shall issue a certificate of compliance within 48
hours.
§ 200-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-38
1:203
§ 200-38. Noncompliance and remedial action.
If it is determined that the real property is not within compliance, the
property owner shall receive an itemized list of each violation and an
explanation detailing the required remedial action that must be taken to
bring the property into compliance within 30 days of receipt of said list of
violations. Upon notification by the real property owner that the remedial
action has been completed, the inspector shall reinspect the property within
three working days and, if the property is in compliance, a certificate
of compliance shall be issued within 48 hours. If upon reinspection it is
determined that the property is not in compliance, the foregoing procedures
shall be followed until compliance is found and all required fees have been
paid.
§ 200-39. Appeal.
Any person or persons aggrieved by a determination of noncompliance may,
within 15 days of receipt of notice of the same, file a written appeal to the
Borough of Irwin Council. The appeal shall be in writing and set forth in
reasonable detail what exception is taken and the reasons for it and the
proposed remedy. Upon receipt of an appeal and payment of the required
filing fee of $50, the Borough of Irwin Council shall schedule a hearing
within 30 calendar days of receipt and shall conduct a public hearing in the
manner prescribed by ordinances for hearings by said body.
§ 200-40. Fees; violations and penalties. [Amended 12-13-2017 by
Ord. No. 962]
Any property owner/applicant shall pay a fee of $225 for inspection herein
referred to and pay a fee of $20 for the certification of compliance. These
rates may be changed from time to time by way of resolution in the
Borough's Annual Fee Schedule. Any person violating any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $200 plus costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine
and costs, to undergo imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days.
Each day that the violation continues shall be a sole and separate offense.
§ 200-38 IRWIN CODE § 200-40
1:204
ARTICLE VI
Testing to Eliminate Infiltration of Surface Water and Groundwater
to Sanitary Sewer System
[Adopted 5-10-2006 by Ord. No. 874]
§ 200-41. New construction.
§ 200-42. Existing buildings.
§ 200-43. Repair and/or replacement of defective, broken, blocked
and/or leaking lines and elimination of illegal connections.
A. Inspect all building laterals before backfilling trench, including inside
plumbing for connections of french drains, sump pumps, and basement
floor drains.
B. Inspect outside drains for proper connection of area drains, french
drains, driveway drains, and roof leaders into storm sewers and
downspouts.
C. Reinspect all new construction, using any and all appropriate means,
including but not limited to low-pressure air testing, smoke testing, dye
testing, dye flooding, and internal TV video inspection of both inside
plumbing (house side of trap) and the building lateral to the Borough of
Irwin's main line.
D. Reinspection to be done either prior to issuance of a building occupancy
permit by the Borough of Irwin or at the time of a no-lien letter request
(issued before a property closing).
A. Inspect all residential, commercial and industrial buildings at time of a
no-lien request for a property transfer or refinancing, regardless of
when an inspection was last performed.
B. Inspect inside plumbing for any illegal connections, including french
drains, sump pumps, and floor drains. Property owner or real estate
agent must be present to sign a release form.
C. Inspect outside area drains, driveway drains, and roof leaders and/or
downspouts for illegal connection into the sanitary sewer system.
D. Inspections shall be performed using any and all appropriate means,
including but not limited to low-pressure air testing, smoke testing, dye
testing, dye flooding, and internal TV video inspection of both inside
plumbing (house side of trap) and the building lateral to the Borough of
Irwin's main line.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to repair and/or
replace any building lateral to current Borough standards which has
been found to be defective, broken, blocked and/or leaking lines.
§ 200-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-43
1:205
§ 200-44. Implementation.
B. In the event that either no property line inspection stack or building
trap/cleanout inspection stack exists, the property owner shall install
same, thus permitting the Borough of Irwin's personnel to complete any
and all inspections and testing.
C. It shall be the property owner's responsibility to immediately
disconnect, within 30 days of discovery, any illegal connection of
surface water, groundwater or stormwater into the sanitary sewer
system.
D. Failure to comply with any ordinance, rules and regulations presently
existing or hereinafter enacted shall constitute a violation of the
Borough of Irwin ordinances, rules and regulations above referred to
regarding sewer service and any other Borough of Irwin ordinance and
so enforceable under said applicable ordinance.
A. This article shall become effective upon adoption by the Borough of
Irwin Council members.
B. The Borough of Irwin shall be given notice 15 working days prior to the
date of property closing or issuance of the occupancy permit.
C. General rules and regulations pertaining hereto may be adopted
herewith or at a later date.
§ 200-43 IRWIN CODE § 200-44
1:206
Chapter 204
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 200-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-44
1:207

ARTICLE I
Obscene Acts and Materials
[Adopted 3-28-1977 by Ord. No. 665 (Ch. 6, Part 1, of the 1993
Code)]
§ 204-1. Declaration of purpose.
The Borough finds that a sensitive, key relationship of human existence,
central to family life, community welfare and the development of human
personality, is debased and distorted by crass commercial exploitation of
sex and that the regulation of crass commercial exploitation of sex is
necessary for the safety, morals and general welfare of the Borough.
§ 204-2. Sale or exhibition of obscene matter or obscene motionpicture
films declared unlawful.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to knowingly
sell or exhibit for monetary or other valuable consideration any obscene
matter or any obscene motion-picture film in any place within the Borough.
§ 204-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXHIBIT — To offer or expose to view, present for inspection, display,
to place on show, to cause or allow to be seen, to present as a public
entertainment for valuable consideration.
KNOWINGLY — Having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief
or ground for belief which warrants further inspection of the character and
content of any material described herein which is reasonably susceptible of
examination.
MATTER — A motion-picture film as herein defined, book, magazine,
pamphlet, newspaper, story paper, paper, comic book, writing, drawing,
photograph, figure or image or any written or printed matter of an obscene
nature.
MOTION-PICTURE FILM — Includes any:
OBSCENE MATTER — Any matter which:
A. Film or plate negative.
B. Film or plate positive.
C. Film designed to be projected on a screen for exhibition.
Films, glass slides, or transparencies either in negative or positive form
designed for exhibition by projection on a screen.
D.
Videotape or any other medium used to electronically reproduce images
on a screen.
E.
§ 204-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-3
1:209
OBSCENE MOTION-PICTURE FILM — Any motion-picture film which:
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or
other entity.
PLACE — Includes but is not limited to any building, structure or space
or any separate part or portion thereof, whether permanent or not, or the
ground itself.
SELL — To pass title or right of possession from a seller to a buyer for
valuable consideration and shall include, but is not limited to, any lease or
rental arrangement or other transaction wherein or whereby any valuable
consideration is received for the use of, or transfer of possession of, obscene
matter or an obscene motion-picture film.
§ 204-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No.
791]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs
and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
The average person, applying contemporary community standards,
would find, when considered as a whole, appeals to the prurient
interest.
A.
Depicts or describes patently offensive representations or descriptions
of:
(1) Ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated.
Masturbation, excretory functions, or exhibition of the genitals or
genital area.
(2)
B.
Nothing herein contained is intended to include or describe any matter
which, when taken as a whole, possesses serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.
C.
The average person, applying contemporary community standards,
would find, when considered as a whole, appeals to the prurient
interest.
A.
Depicts or describes patently offensive representations or descriptions
of:
(1) Ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated.
Masturbation, excretory functions, or exhibition of the genitals or
genital area.
(2)
B.
Nothing herein contained is intended to include or describe any motionpicture
film which, when taken as a whole, possesses serious literary,
artistic, political or scientific value.
C.
§ 204-3 IRWIN CODE § 204-5
1:210
§ 204-5. Declaration of public nuisance.
§ 204-6. Abatement of nuisances by owners.
The owner, owners, tenants, lessees, occupants, and/or any other person
in charge of, or in control of, any place within the limits of the Borough
upon which a public nuisance, as hereinabove defined, exists shall jointly
and severally be responsible for the abatement of the nuisance and shall,
upon notification by the Borough as herein provided, promptly abate such
nuisance. Provided, however, that the failure to abate the nuisance shall
not subject the owner, owners, tenants, lessees, occupants and any other
person in charge of or in control of any place where the nuisance exists to
any fine, forfeiture or penalty until such time as a judicial determination of
the obscenity of the obscene matter or obscene motion-picture film is made
in any action commenced pursuant to § 204-7 of this article.
§ 204-7. Action to be taken by Council.
A. Each and every place in the Borough where the sale or exhibition of
obscene matter or obscene motion-picture films occurs is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance.
B. The sale or exhibition of obscene matter or obscene motion-picture
films is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
C. Any obscene matter and any obscene motion-picture film sold or
exhibited in the Borough is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
A. Whenever a public nuisance exists in the Borough as herein defined, the
Borough shall, by resolution, declare:
(1) Such public nuisance exists, setting forth the legal description or
street address of the place which constitutes the public nuisance.
(2) The evidentiary facts considered by the Borough Council in
determining that a public nuisance exists as herein described,
including:
(a) When said declaration of public nuisance is based upon the
exhibition of an obscene motion-picture film or films, a
recitation of the particular sexual conduct and acts which the
Borough Council finds patently offensive and the basis for
finding that such film is publicly held for exhibition at the place
declared to be a public nuisance.
(b) When said declaration of public nuisance is based upon the
sale of obscene matter, a recitation of the particular
publications or types of publications considered by the
Borough Council and which the Borough Council finds to be
obscene, as described in § 204-3 of this article, and the basis
for finding that such publications are sold at such place.
§ 204-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-7
1:211
§ 204-8. Action to be taken by Borough Solicitor.
Upon a specific finding by resolution of the Borough of the existence of a
public nuisance at a particular place, the Borough Solicitor shall, within 48
hours of service of said resolution and order of abatement upon the persons
hereinabove described, commence legal proceedings by the filing of a civil
action seeking the following relief:
§ 204-9. Cost of abatement.
B. Upon enactment of the resolution declaring the existence of a public
nuisance as aforesaid, the Borough Council shall order the owner,
owners, tenants, lessees and/or other persons in charge of the place
where the public nuisance exists to abate such public nuisance within
24 hours of service of such order of abatement as hereinafter provided.
C. A true and correct copy of the resolution as aforesaid and the order of
abatement shall be personally served upon the owner, owners, tenants,
lessees, occupants and/or persons in charge of the place where such
public nuisance exists within 48 hours of the passage of such resolution
by the Borough Council. If service as hereinabove described cannot be
effectuated within 48 hours as aforesaid, it shall be sufficient notice
hereunder to post the premises where such public nuisance exists by
affixing a true and correct copy of said resolution and order of
abatement to a conspicuous part of the place.
A. A declaratory judgment that the matter or motion-picture film named or
described by the Borough Council is obscene as defined in § 204-3 of
this article.
B. A declaratory judgment that the place named by the Borough Council is
a public nuisance under this article and such resolution.
C. A declaratory judgment that the obscene matter or obscene motionpicture
film named or described by the Borough Council is a public
nuisance.
D. A mandatory injunction ordering abatement of said public nuisance.
E. All such other relief as the court may deem just and proper.
A. The cost of abatement upon judgment for the Borough in legal
proceedings commenced by the Borough Solicitor pursuant to this
article shall include investigative costs, court costs, reasonable
attorney's fees arising out of the preparation for and trial of the case
and appeals therefrom, and other costs allowed on appeal, and printing
costs of trial and appellate briefs and all other papers filed in such
proceeding.
B. Upon judgment for the Borough, costs of abatement are hereby made a
special assessment against the parcel of land upon which such public
nuisance is maintained and a personal obligation against any person,
§ 204-7 IRWIN CODE § 204-9
1:212
persons, firm, association, partnership, corporation or other entity
having a duty to abate such nuisance. Upon its determination in a civil
action, such costs of abatement shall, by separate legal proceeding, be
made a lien against such property and a personal obligation against any
person, persons, firm, association, partnership, corporation or other
entity having a duty to abate such nuisance, and shall be collected at
the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes
are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same
procedure and sale in the case of delinquency as provided for ordinary
municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and
enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to such special
assessment.
§ 204-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-9
1:213

ARTICLE II
Massage Parlors
[Adopted 10-18-1977 by Ord. No. 669 (Ch. 6, Part 2, of the 1993
Code)]
§ 204-10. Declaration of purpose.
The Borough Council finds that a sensitive key relationship of human
existence, central to family life, community welfare and the development
of human personality, is debased and distorted by crass commercial
exploitation of sex when a massage parlor is used for the purpose of
lewdness, assignation, illicit sexual conduct or prostitution, and that the
regulation of said crass commercial exploitation of sex is necessary for the
safety, morals and general welfare of the Borough.
§ 204-11. Massage parlors used for purposes of lewdness,
assignation, illicit sexual conduct or prostitution declared unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly establish, own, lease,
manage, operate or work in a massage parlor which is used for the purposes
of lewdness, assignation, illicit sexual conduct or prostitution within the
Borough.
§ 204-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ILLICIT SEXUAL CONDUCT — 1) Masturbation; 2) sexual intercourse,
whether genital-genital, oral-genital, oral-anal, or anal-genital; 3) any erotic
fondling or touching of the covered or uncovered genitals, buttocks, pubic
area, or any part thereof, the breasts of the female, whether the conduct
described in (1) through (3) is engaged in alone or between members of the
same or opposite sex.
KNOWINGLY — Having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief
or ground for belief which warrants further inspection of the character
and content of any fact described herein which is reasonably susceptible of
examination.
LEWDNESS — Behavior, conduct or activity which falls within one of the
following characterizations:
MASSAGE — Any method of treating the superficial soft parts of the human
body for remedial, hygienic or other purposes, consisting of rubbing,
stroking, kneading, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating with the
Masturbation administered for the purposes of sexual arousal or
gratification.
A.
B. Stimulation of the genital organs.
C. Sexual-oriented massage.
§ 204-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-12
1:215
hands or any instrument, or by the application of air, liquid or vapor baths
of any kind whatever.
MASSAGE PARLOR — Any building, structure or place or any portion
thereof located within the Borough and regardless of whether the place
is called a "sensitivity center," "bathhouse" or any other name where the
purpose of said place is to administer massages for the purpose of providing
sexual arousal or sexual gratification to its customers, clients or members,
with or without the payment of a fee.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or
other legal entity.
PLACE — Includes, but is not limited to, any building, structure or space,
or any separate part or portion thereof, whether permanent or not, or the
ground itself.
PROSTITUTION — Engaging in sexual or deviate sexual intercourse for
compensation.
§ 204-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No.
791]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs
and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 204-14. Declaration of public nuisance.
Each and every place in the Borough where a massage parlor is used for
the purposes of lewdness, assignation, illicit sexual conduct or prostitution
or upon which acts of lewdness, assignation, illicit sexual conduct or
prostitution are held or occur is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
§ 204-15. Abatement of nuisance by owners.
The owner, owners, tenants, lessees, occupants and/or any person in charge
of, or in control of, any place within the limits of the Borough upon which
a public nuisance as defined in § 204-14 of this article exists shall jointly
and severally be responsible for the abatement of the nuisance and shall,
upon notification by the Borough as provided in § 204-16 of this article,
promptly abate such nuisance. Provided, however, that the failure to abate
the nuisance shall not subject the owner, owners, tenants, lessees,
occupants and any other person in charge of or in control of any place
where the nuisance exists to any fine, forfeiture or penalty until such time as
a judicial determination of the lewdness, assignation, illicit sexual conduct
or prostitution is made in any action commenced pursuant to § 204-16 of
this article.
§ 204-16. Action to be taken by Council.
§ 204-12 IRWIN CODE § 204-16
1:216
§ 204-17. Action to be taken by Borough Solicitor.
Upon a specific finding by resolution by the Borough of the existence of a
public nuisance at a particular place, the Borough Solicitor shall, within 48
hours of service of said resolution and order of abatement upon persons
described in § 204-16 of this article, commence legal proceedings by the
filing of a civil action seeking the following relief:
§ 204-18. Cost of abatement.
A. Whenever a public nuisance exists in the Borough, as defined in
§ 204-12 of this article, the Borough Council shall, by resolution,
declare:
(1) Such public nuisance exists, setting forth the legal description or
street address of the place which constitutes the public nuisance.
(2) The evidentiary facts considered by the Borough Council in
determining that a public nuisance exists as herein described,
including a recitation of:
(a) The particular acts of lewdness, assignation, illicit sexual
conduct or prostitution which have occurred.
(b) The basis for the finding by the Borough Council that such acts
occur.
B. Upon enactment of the resolution declaring the existence of a public
nuisance as aforesaid, the Borough Council shall order the owner,
owners, tenants, lessees and/or other persons in charge of the place
where the public nuisance exists to abate such public nuisance within
24 hours of service of such order of abatement as hereinafter provided.
C. A true and correct copy of the resolution as aforesaid and the order of
abatement shall be personally served upon the owner, owners, tenants,
lessees, occupants and/or persons in charge of the place where such
public nuisance exists within 48 hours of the passage of such resolution
by the Borough Council. If service as hereinabove described cannot be
effectuated within 48 hours as aforesaid, it shall be sufficient notice
hereunder to post the place where such public nuisance exists by
affixing a true and correct copy of said resolution and order of
abatement to a conspicuous part of the place.
A. A declaratory judgment that the use of a place is for purposes of
lewdness, assignation, illicit sexual conduct or prostitution, as defined
by § 204-12 of this article.
B. A declaratory judgment that the place named by the Borough Council is
a public nuisance under this article and such resolution.
C. A mandatory injunction ordering abatement of said public nuisance.
D. All such other relief as the court may deem just and proper.
§ 204-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-18
1:217
A. The cost of abatement upon judgment for the Borough in legal
proceedings commenced by the Borough Solicitor pursuant to § 204-17
of this article shall include investigative costs, court costs, reasonable
attorney's fees arising out of the preparation for and trial of the case
and appeals therefrom and other costs allowed on appeal, printing
costs of trial and appellate briefs, and all other papers filed in such
proceedings.
B. Upon judgment for the Borough, costs of abatement are hereby made a
special assessment against the parcel of land upon which such public
nuisance is maintained. Upon its determination in a civil action, such
shall, by separate legal proceeding, be made a lien against such
property and a personal obligation against any person, persons, firm,
association, partnership, corporation or other entity and shall be
collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary
municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties
and the procedure and sale in the case of delinquency as provided for
ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and
enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to such special
assessment.
§ 204-18 IRWIN CODE § 204-18
1:218
Chapter 212
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 158.
Nuisances — See Ch. 169, Art. I.
Throwing objects in streets — See Ch. 225,
Art. I.
§ 204-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-18
1:219

ARTICLE I
Collection and Disposal
[Adopted 6-26-1961 by Ord. No. 6-1961 (Ch. 20, Part 1, of the 1993
Code)]
§ 212-1. Definitions. [Amended 6-11-1997 by Ord. No. 812;
10-10-2001 by Ord. No. 841]
Wherever in this article the following terms are used, they shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
ACT 97 — The Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act of 1980, P.L. 380,
No. 97, July 7, 1980.26
ACT 101 — The Pennsylvania Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and
Waste Reduction Act, SB 528, Act 1988-101, July 1998.27
ASHES — The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other
combustible materials for the purposes of heating and cooking. It shall not
include the cinders produced in steam-generating plants.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Irwin, Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania.
BULK WASTE — Large items of solid waste, including, but not limited to,
appliances, furniture, large auto parts, trees, branches or stumps which
may require special handling due to their size, shape or weight.
CONTAINER — A portable device in which waste is held for storage or
transportation.
COUNTY — The County of Westmoreland or the Westmoreland County
Board of County Commissioners.
DEPARTMENT or DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP)
DISPOSAL — The deposition, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing
of solid waste into or on the land or water in a manner that the solid waste
enters the environment, is emitted into the air or is discharged to the waters
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
DOMESTIC WASTE or HOUSEHOLD WASTE — Solid waste comprised of
garbage and rubbish which normally originates in the residential private
household or apartment house.
GARBAGE — Any solid waste derived from animal, mineral, grain, fruit or
vegetable matter that is capable of being decomposed by microorganisms
with sufficient rapidity to cause nuisances as odors, gases or vectors.
LICENSED HAULER or LICENSED COLLECTOR — Any municipal waste
hauler or collector possessing a valid and current county license issued by
the Westmoreland County Solid Waste Authority pursuant to the County
Ordinance No. 2.
26.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. 6018.101 et seq.
27.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 212-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-1
1:221
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other materials, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities;
and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste
under Act 97 from the municipal, commercial or institutional water supply
treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant, or air pollution control facility.
The term does not include source-separated recyclable materials.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, federal government
or agency, state institution and agency, or any other legal entity which is
recognized by law as the subject or rights and duties. In any provision
of this chapter which prescribes a fine, imprisonment or penalty, or any
combination of the foregoing, the term "person" shall include the officers
and directors of any corporation or other legal entity having officers and
directors.
REFUSE — All solid waste materials which are discarded as useless.
RESIDENT PROPERTY OWNER — The person who holds title by virtue of
a recorded deed filed in the Recorder of Deeds Office of Westmoreland
County, Pennsylvania, and who resides in the subject property and
designates the same as his/her primary residence and/or domicile or any
person who resides in said household who is 65 years of age or older.
RESIDUAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, other discarded material or
other waste, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
materials resulting from industrial, mining and agricultural water supply
treatment facility, wastewater treatment facility or air pollution control
facility, provided that it is not hazardous. The term "residual waste" shall not
include coal refuse as defined in the Coal Refuse Disposal Control Act.28 The
term shall not include treatment sludge from coal mine drainage treatment
plants, disposal of which is being carried on pursuant to and in compliance
with a valid permit issued pursuant to the Act of June 22, 1937, P.L. 1987,
No. 394, known as the "Clean Streams Law."29
RUBBISH — All nonputrescible municipal waste except garbage and other
decomposable matter. This category includes, but is not limited to, ashes,
bedding, cardboard, cans, crockery, glass, paper, wood and yard waste.
SOLID WASTE — Any waste, including, but not limited to, municipal,
residual or hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material.
STORAGE — The containment of any waste on a temporary basis in such
a manner as not to constitute disposal of such waste. It shall be presumed
that the containment of any waste in excess of one year constitutes disposal.
This presumption can be overcome by clear and convincing evidence to the
contrary.
28.Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 30.51 et seq.
29.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 212-1 IRWIN CODE § 212-1
1:222
TENANT — Any person who resides in said residence by virtue of a written
lease agreement and who designates the same as his/her primary residence.
§ 212-2. Administration. [Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791;
6-11-1997 by Ord. No. 812]
§ 212-3. Precollection practices. [Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No.
791; 6-11-1997 by Ord. No. 812]
A. All refuse accumulated in the Borough shall be collected, conveyed and
disposed of by an independent contractor, who shall be named from
time to time by the Borough of Irwin Council. The cost of such service
shall be paid for as provided in the schedule of fees set forth in § 212-5
of this article by the person producing the refuse or responsible for the
existence or disposal thereof or for whom such refuse is removed. It
shall be unlawful for any person other than the independent contractor
named by the Borough to collect, convey over any of the streets or
alleys of the Borough, or dispose of any refuse accumulated in the
Borough.30
B. The collection and disposal of refuse in the Borough shall be under the
supervision of the Borough Council. The Council shall have the
authority to make regulations concerning the days of collection, type
and location of waste containers and such other matters pertaining to
the collection and disposal as it may deem advisable, and to change and
modify the same after notice as required by law, provided that such
regulations are not contrary to the provisions hereof. Any aggrieved
persons shall have the right of appeal against any regulation made by
the Borough Council to said Council, which may confirm, modify or
revoke any such regulation.
A. Preparation of refuse.
(1) All garbage before being placed in garbage cans for collection shall
have drained from it all free liquids and shall be wrapped in paper
or placed in a paper bag.
(2) All rubbish shall be drained of liquid before being deposited for
collection.
(3) All cans and bottles which have contained food shall be thoroughly
rinsed and drained before being deposited for collection.
(4) Tree trimmings and hedge clippings and yard waste shall be cut to
length not to exceed four feet and securely tied in bundles not more
than two feet thick before being deposited for collection.
B. Refuse containers.
(1) Garbage receptacles.
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 212-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-3
1:223
(a) Garbage receptacles shall be made of metal or plastic
equivalent, must be watertight and be provided with a tightfitting
cover.
(b) No person shall use for the reception of garbage, ashes and/or
rubbish any receptacle having a capacity of more than 30
gallons.
(c) All garbage receptacles shall be kept as sanitary as possible in
view of the use to which they are put and shall be thoroughly
cleaned by the occupant after garbage is removed by the
collector.
(2) Refuse receptacles.
(a) All refuse receptacles shall be provided by the owner, tenant,
lessee or occupant of the premises.
(b) All refuse receptacles shall be maintained in good condition.
Any receptacle that does not conform to the provisions of this
article or that may have ragged or sharp edges or any other
defect liable to hamper or injure the person collecting the
contents thereof shall be promptly replaced upon notice.
Failure to comply may result in refusal to collect or the removal
of the defective receptacle as refuse.
C. Storing of refuse.
(1) No person shall place any refuse in any street, alley or other public
place or upon any private property, whether owned by such person
or not, within the Borough except it be in proper receptacles for
collection or under an express approval granted by the Borough
Council. No person shall throw or deposit any refuse in any stream
or other body of water or upon the streets or highways within the
Borough. All refuse containers shall be placed for storage in a
location preferably at the rear of the customer's residence, office or
apartment or in another inconspicuous location.
(2) Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse on any premises is hereby
declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any
existing accumulation of refuse within 30 days after the effective
date of this article shall be deemed a violation of this article.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the occupants of the
premises on which refuse receptacles are stored, or the collector to
remove the covers or any of the contents of refuse receptacles.
(4) Only garbage generated within the boundaries of the Borough shall
be eligible for collection by the designated garbage collector. It is
the intent of this section that garbage accumulated or generated
outside the boundaries of the Borough and subsequently brought
into the Borough for collection shall not be eligible for collection.
§ 212-3 IRWIN CODE § 212-3
1:224
§ 212-4. Collection practices. [Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791;
6-11-1997 by Ord. No. 812]
D. Points of collection. Refuse receptacles shall be placed for collection at
ground level on the property, not within the right-of-way of a street or
alley, and accessible to and not more than 40 feet from the side of the
street or alley from which collection is made, provided that receptacles
may be placed for collection at other than ground level and at a
distance of more than 40 feet when approved by the Borough Council
and an additional payment for the extra service is agreed upon by both
parties. Refuse containers shall not be placed for collection more than
12 hours prior to the date and time of actual collection by the Borough
refuse collection service. Refuse containers shall be removed from the
location of pickup as promptly as possible after pickup, but in no event
shall said refuse containers remain at the location of pickup for more
than 12 hours after collection by the Borough refuse collection service
has been completed.
A. Frequency of collection.
(1) Refuse shall be collected at least once each week.
(2) Hotels, restaurants and such other businesses and institutions as
deem it necessary may enter into an agreement for a greater
frequency of collection. Where necessary to protect the public
health, the Borough Manager may require that more frequent
collections be made.
B. Limitations on quantity.
(1) It is the intent of this article that the reasonable accumulation of
refuse of each family for the collection period will be collected for
the standard charge. The Borough Manager may refuse to collect
unreasonable amounts or make an additional charge for such
amounts.
(2) It is the intention of this article that large restaurants, hotels,
apartments and other businesses and institutions shall have their
reasonable accumulations of refuse for the collection period
collected at a fair charge based upon the average weight or
volume. The Borough Manager may refuse to collect unreasonable
amounts or may make an additional charge for such amounts.
C. Bulky waste. Every household shall be entitled to place outside for
collection one large or bulky waste item per month per residential unit;
examples of large or bulky items are washers, dryers, refrigerators, hot
water tanks, stoves, furniture, or five bags or boxes of cleanup material.
All CFC (freon) must first properly by removed and documented in
accordance with the EPA before collection.
D. Special refuse problems.
§ 212-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-4
1:225
§ 212-5. Fees. [Amended 6-10-1968 by Ord. No. 3-1968; 3-23-1970
by Ord. No. 10-1970; 4-12-1971 by Ord. No. 4-1971; 12-27-1973 by
Ord. No. 9-1973; 12-27-1973 by Ord. No. 10-1973; 12-30-1974 by
Ord. No. 11-1974; 5-12-1975 by Ord. No. 617; 1-3-1978 by Ord. No.
674; 7-11-1983 by Ord. No. 715; 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 766;
7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791; 6-11-1997 by Ord. No. 812; 10-10-2001 by
Ord. No. 841; 12-11-2002 by Ord. No. 852]
(1) Contagious disease refuse. The removal of wearing apparel,
bedding or other refuse from homes or other places where highly
infectious or contagious diseases have prevailed should be
performed under the supervision and direction of the responsible
local or state agency. Such refuse shall not be placed in containers
for regular collections.
(2) Inflammable or explosive refuse. Highly inflammable or explosive
materials shall not be placed in containers for regular collection
but shall be disposed of under the supervision and direction of the
responsible local or state agency.
A. The fees for the collection and disposal of refuse placed for collection at
the curb or right-of-way line if no curb exists from which refuse
collection is made shall be as follows: [Amended 11-12-2014 by Ord.
No. 92631]
(1) Residential family rate for one collection week.
(a) Collection for all single-family dwellings, duplexes, row houses,
garden apartments and any other residential dwellings having
a thirty-gallon garbage container for each dwelling unit shall
be and is hereby established at $58.74 per quarter for once-aweek
collection. [Amended 11-11-2015 by Ord. No. 93432;
11-9-2016 by Ord. No. 942; 10-31-2017 by Ord. No. 955;
11-27-2018 by Ord. No. 97433]
(b) Collection for apartment complexes or multifamily dwellings
having a dumpster shall be charged at the commercial rate
schedule identified in Subsection A(2), herein. [Amended
11-9-2016 by Ord. No. 942; 10-31-2017 by Ord. No. 955;
11-27-2018 by Ord. No. 974]
(c) All single-family dwellings, duplexes, row houses, garden
apartments and any other residential dwellings shall be
entitled to collection of an unlimited number of garbage bags.
(d) When it can be established, with adequate written
documentation, that the resident property owner or tenant is
31.Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 10-1-2014.
32.Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2016.
33.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it would be effective the first day of the fourth
quarter of 2017, first affecting the quarterly bill for the fourth quarter of 2018.
§ 212-4 IRWIN CODE § 212-5
1:226
65 years or older, a discount of $5 per quarter shall be applied
to the charges for garbage collection in said household.
(2) Commercial rate. Collection of all commercial refuse, which is
defined as not falling within the rate schedule in Subsection A(l),
shall be charged at a rate of $62.98 per quarter, which shall be
limited to five thirty-six-gallon garbage containers filled with bags
of garbage or related refuse for each and every commercial unit
within any commercial establishment. All collection encountered
which is in excess of the five thirty-six-gallon garbage container
limit shall be charged quarterly by the cubic yardage of garbage
generated by the resident for pickup, per number of days of week
that the garbage is collected, as follows: [Amended 11-11-2015
by Ord. No. 93434; 11-9-2016 by Ord. No. 942; 10-31-2017 by
Ord. No. 955; 11-27-2018 by Ord. No. 97435]
(a) For one cubic yard of commercial refuse: $124.13 for one day
per week pickup; $223.43 for two pickups per week (one
pickup per day, twice a week); $335.14 for three pickups per
week (one pickup per day, three times a week); $446.85 for
four pickups per week (one pickup per day, four times a week);
$558.56 for five pickups per week (one pickup per day, five
times a week); and $670.28 for six pickups per week (one
pickup per day, six times a week).
(b) For two cubic yards of commercial refuse: $235.84 for one day
per week pickup; $4242.51 for two pickups per week (one
pickup per day, twice a week); $636.76 for three pickups per
week (one pickup per day, three times a week); $849.02 for
four pickups per week (one pickup per day, four times a week);
$1,061.27 for five pickups per week (one pickup per day, five
times a week); and $1,273.53 for six pickups per week (one
pickup per day, six times a week).
(c) For three cubic yards of commercial refuse: $335.14 for one
day per week pickup; $603.25 for two pickups per week (one
pickup per day, twice a week); $904.87 for three pickups per
week (one pickup per day, three times a week); $1,206.50 for
four pickups per week (one pickup per day, four times a week);
$1,508.12 for five pickups per week (one pickup per day, five
times a week); and $1,809.75 for six pickups per week (one
pickup per day, six times a week).
(d) For four cubic yards of commercial refuse: $422.03 for one day
per week pickup; $759.65 for two pickups per week (one
pickup per day, twice a week); $1,139.47 for three pickups per
week (one pickup per day, three times a week); $1,519.29 for
34.Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2016.
35.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it would be effective the first day of the fourth
quarter of 2017, first affecting the quarterly bill for the fourth quarter of 2018.
§ 212-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-5
1:227
four pickups per week (one pickup per day, four times a week);
$1,899.12 for five pickups per week (one pickup per day, five
times a week); and $2,278.94 for six pickups per week (one
pickup per day, six times a week).
(e) For six cubic yards of commercial refuse: $558.56 for one day
per week pickup; $1,005.41 for two pickups per week (one
pickup per day, twice a week); $1,508.12 for three pickups per
week (one pickup per day, three times a week); $2,010.83 for
four pickups per week (one pickup per day, four times a week);
$2,513.54 for five pickups per week (one pickup per day, five
times a week); and $3,016.24 for six pickups per week (one
pickup per day, six times a week).
(f) For eight cubic yards of commercial refuse: $645.45 for one
day per week pickup; $1,161.81 for two pickups per week (one
pickup per day, twice a week); $1,742.72 for three pickups per
week (one pickup per day, three times a week); $2,323.63 for
four pickups per week (one pickup per day, four times a week);
$2,904.53 for five pickups per week (one pickup per day, five
times a week); and $3,485.44 for six pickups per week (one
pickup per day, six times a week).
B. All fees shall be paid quarterly (and shall not be subject to a discount).
C. Where the collection of refuse from other than ground level or from
more than 40 feet from the side of the street or alley is accepted, the fee
shall be set by the Borough Manager and may be amended from time to
time by the Borough Council, subject to appeal to the Borough Council.
D. All accounts shall be considered delinquent if not paid within 30 days of
the billing, and bills shall be made every three months and payable
quarter-annually. All delinquent accounts are subject to stoppage of
service without notice. If a delinquent account is not paid within 30
days, the Borough Council shall cease all refuse collection for that
account unless Borough Council specifically directs otherwise. Service
shall be resumed thereafter only on payment of the accumulated fees
for the period of collection and the period of noncollection, plus $1,
unless Borough Council specifically directs otherwise. The stoppage of
services hereinbefore authorized for nonpayment of collection charges
shall be in addition to the right of the Borough to proceed for collection
of such unpaid charges by an action in assumpsit or, at the election of
the Borough, in any other manner provided by or for the collection of a
municipal claim.
E. All commercial and residential accounts shall incur a penalty of 10%,
which shall be added to the unpaid balance if the entire quarterly
garbage bill is not paid within 30 days of the billing date.
F. Any resident may qualify for a five-percent discount if the total sum due
for the year is paid by April 30 of that year.
§ 212-5 IRWIN CODE § 212-6
1:228
§ 212-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-12-1975 by Ord. No.
617; 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs
and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 212-7. Responsibility of property owner. [Added 3-12-1979 by Ord.
No. 685]
§ 212-8. Right to designate sole and exclusive collector. [Added
7-12-1982 by Ord. No. 707; 6-11-1997 by Ord. No. 812]
It is the Borough's right to designate a sole and exclusive collector to
collect, convey and dispose of garbage, ashes, rubbish and refuse from
properties within the municipal limits of the Borough.
A. The owner of the property which receives the garbage service shall be
primarily responsible and liable for the payment of all garbage
collection and disposal service fees, regardless of whether the garbage
service was requested by the property owner or tenant of the property
receiving the garbage service.
B. If any delinquency in the garbage collection and disposal account for a
particular piece of property exists, even if due to previous owner or
tenant, the garbage collection and disposal service will not be provided
to that property until the delinquency has been paid by the present
property owner.
C. Before garbage collection and disposal service can be provided to a
tenant of property not receiving said service before the passage of this
article, all owners of said property to receive said service must execute
a letter of obligation indicating his/her/their promise to be primarily
responsible for the garbage collection and disposal fee.
§ 212-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-8
1:229

ARTICLE II
Refuse Dumpsters
[Adopted 7-10-2013 by Ord. No. 918]
§ 212-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
REFUSE DUMPSTER or DUMPSTER — Any portable container used or
designed for collection of, transportation of, or disposal of refuse, waste,
construction/demolition materials, or the like. "Refuse dumpster" shall
include, but not be limited to, roll-off boxes or containers, collection bins,
tubs and portable storage containers.
§ 212-10. Permit requirement.
The person/resident renting the dumpster must first obtain a permit from
the Borough of Irwin. No person shall place or cause to be placed any
dumpster or other type of trash receptacle in the right-of-way of any
Borough street except upon having obtained a dumpster permit to be issued
by the Borough of Irwin.
§ 212-11. Rules.
§ 212-12. Dumpsters in public right-of-way.
A. Dumpsters shall be well-maintained and in good working condition,
displaying the name or logo and telephone number of the owner of the
dumpster, and be suitably supported at each contact point to prevent
damage to paved surfaces.
B. Dumpsters must be covered when materials inside are easily airborne,
pose a hazard, emit an odor or are otherwise offensive.
C. Debris must be placed inside the dumpster, not alongside or on top of
it.
D. All dumpsters are required to be emptied when full. For the purpose of
this article, "full" is defined as when the contents of the dumpster reach
an average level of one foot below the top edge of the dumpster sides.
Any dumpster which has reached "full" status and is not emptied within
seven calendar days shall be considered in violation of this article.
E. Cleaning dumpsters on the street or sidewalk is not permitted.
A. A dumpster placed in the public right-of-way must have a flasher or
reflector on the outside corner facing traffic at all times. Where traffic
may approach from either side, the dumpster must have a flasher or
reflector on the outside corner of both sides. Type I or Type II
barricades can be used as an alternate to flashers or reflectors.
§ 212-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-12
1:231
§ 212-13. Denial of dumpster use.
§ 212-14. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this article is a misdemeanor.
B. Dumpsters shall not block a public sidewalk or be placed in a location
that restricts the sight lines of an intersection. "Sight lines" will be
determined by the Public Works Supervisor or the Police Department.
C. Dumpsters placed in the public right-of-way for construction,
remodeling or demolition projects shall be removed immediately upon
the completion of the project. No dumpster shall be placed in the public
right-of-way for more than 90 days. An extension of the ninety-day rule
may be allowed with written permission and at the sole discretion of the
Borough of Irwin.
D. No dumpster shall be placed on streets, sides of streets or areas
designated as "no parking." Dumpsters shall not be placed in public
parking lots or parks without prior written permission from the
Borough of Irwin.
E. The owner and/or user of a dumpster on a public right-of-way is/are
responsible for any public property, street, curb and gutter, or public
infrastructure damage.
F. No dumpster shall be placed in the public right-of-way during the
winter snow season, defined for the purpose of this article as the period
from November 1 to the next following April 1.
A. The Borough of Irwin may deny the use of a dumpster in the public
right-of-way if the dumpster is too wide to allow public safety vehicles
through or due to any other traffic concerns.
B. The Borough of Irwin may also deny the use of dumpsters to protect
public health or safety concerns.
A. The Borough of Irwin may remove or have a container removed from
the public right-of-way if the container is in violation of this article.
B. The owner of the container or, if the owner cannot be determined, the
person placing it in the public right-of-way shall pay all costs, fees,
penalties and other expenses incurred by the Borough of Irwin in
removal, storage fees and disposal of any container and its contents.
C. If the container is not claimed within 30 days by its owner or the person
responsible for placing it in the public right-of-way it may be disposed of
as abandoned property, but disposal shall not diminish the
responsibility of the owner or the person responsible for placing the
container in the public right-of-way to pay all amounts due.
D. The Borough of Irwin shall not release a container from storage until all
amounts due under this section have been paid.
§ 212-12 IRWIN CODE § 212-14
1:232
Chapter 216
SPECIAL EVENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 248.
§ 216-1. Purpose.
The following chapter, which shall be effective as provided herein, shall
govern the time, place and manner of holding certain special events on
Borough roads, on Borough property, and on private property when an
event has the potential for impact upon health, fire, police, transportation
and other services. The regulations provided herein are enacted in order to
promote the health, safety and welfare of all the persons in the Borough,
residents and visitors, by ensuring that special events do not create
disturbances, become nuisances, menace or threaten life, health and
property, disrupt traffic or threaten or damage private or public property.
It is not the intent of this chapter to regulate in any manner the content of
speech or infringe upon the right to assemble, except for the time, place and
manner of speech and assembly, and this chapter should not be interpreted
nor construed otherwise.
§ 216-2. Application of provisions.
This chapter imposes regulatory requirements on certain activities which
are held on Irwin Borough streets, Irwin Borough property and private
property, which are defined as "special events." The requirements imposed
by this chapter do not alter, supersede or nullify any requirements
contained in other statutes, ordinances or regulations which may also
regulate these same activities. These requirements shall be applied in a
content-neutral manner and without discrimination as to race, religion,
sex, national origin, political affiliation or other unlawful discriminatory
classification. This chapter shall not apply to the following events:
A. Events or assemblies occurring inside permanently established, fully
enclosed places of assembly, such as a place of worship, public
auditorium, theater, recreation hall, gym, or other enclosed structure
designed primarily for housing and assembly of people, provided that
the maximum number of persons expected to attend or in actual
attendance does not exceed the maximum capacity of the enclosed
place of assembly.
B. Events or assemblies in conjunction with school events on school
property, church events on church property if designed for that use, or
government-sponsored public hearings.
§ 212-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-3
1:233
§ 216-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
ATHLETIC EVENT — An organized competitive or recreational event in
which a group of people collectively engage in a sport or form of physical
exercise, including but not limited to running, jogging, walking, bicycling or
skating, on any Borough street or upon public or private property.
ENTERTAINMENT EVENT — An organized event having as its primary
purpose the entertainment or amusement of a group of people, including
but not limited to parades, carnivals, fairs, concerts, block parties or
neighborhood gatherings, on public or private property.
FARMERS MARKETS, ETHNIC FESTIVALS, CAR CRUISES, VENDOR
SALES — Any event that has vendors selling items, food, garden vegetables
and any other type of general items for sale, whether new, used, or craft
items. Any other type of event shall be covered even if not specifically listed
herein.
POLITICAL EVENT — An organized event, not including an athletic or
entertainment event, having as its primary purpose the exercise of
expressive activities of a political nature, including but not limited to
speechmaking, picketing, protesting, marching, demonstrating or debating
public issues, on any Borough street or upon property owned by Irwin
Borough or private property in Irwin Borough.
SPECIAL EVENT — Any athletic event, entertainment event or political
event, whether held for profit, nonprofit or charitable purposes.
§ 216-4. Permit required.
It is unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership, association or other
entity, public or private, to promote, advertise or hold a special event
without first obtaining a special event permit and paying the fees as
required in this chapter.
§ 216-5. Exemption from permit.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applied to regulate the use
of traditional public forums as alternative channels of communication by
the public, provided such use is for the free exercise of constitutionally
protected activities and does not disrupt or interfere with traffic on public
streets or the use of public places by other members of the public.
§ 216-6. Permit application process.
Special event permit application forms may be obtained from the Borough
of Irwin, 424 Main Street, Irwin, Pennsylvania 15642, (724) 864-3100.
§ 216-3 IRWIN CODE § 216-6
1:234
A. All applications for special event permits shall be made on a special
event permit application form and shall include the following
information:
(1) Type and description of event;
(2) Name of the sponsoring entity, contact person, address and
telephone number;
(3) Name of the promoting entity, contact person, address and
telephone number;
(4) Proposed date(s) of the event, together with beginning and ending
times for each date;
(5) Proposed location, including a plat or map of the proposed area to
be used, including any barricade, street route plans or perimeter/
security fencing;
(6) Estimated numbers of event staff, participants and spectators;
(7) Public health plans, including plans for culinary water supplies,
solid waste collections and disposal and wastewater (toilet
facilities);
(8) Fire prevention and emergency medical services plans;
(9) Security plans and/or law enforcement response;
(10) Admission fee, donation, or other consideration to be charged or
requested;
(11) Signature of applicant; and
(12) If the event is a block party or other event planned within a
residential area, the applicant must collect and submit with the
application form a list of signatures consenting to the street closure
from all neighbors whose vehicular access to their property is
affected by the street closure.
B. The applicant for a permit shall circulate copies of the application to the
following agencies for the purpose of obtaining their approval or
disapproval of the proposed special event. The application is not
complete until approved by the following agencies:
(1) Irwin Borough Council.
(2) Irwin Borough Police Department.
(3) Irwin Borough Fire and Ambulance Department.
(4) Appropriate Public Works division, Operations Department, if the
special event may create traffic impacts by its location, number of
attendees or participants. The applicant shall submit plans drawn
to scale for any signage, noting the location of each sign for which
§ 216-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-6
1:235
application is made. Signs for temporary special events shall not
be subject to the approval process of other Borough ordinances
governing sign display or placement.
(5) Irwin Borough Building Inspector, if any temporary facilities are to
be constructed or special electrical supplies are considered or
warranted.
C. In reviewing an application, the agencies or departments involved shall
consider the following:
(1) The impact of the special event on the traffic, security, health and
safety of the public and the plans of the applicant to address such
impacts;
(2) A determination by the agency that the plans for addressing any
such impacts are appropriate and reasonable to address traffic,
security, health and safety concerns, and an evaluation of the
measures proposed by the applicant to satisfy those requirements;
(3) The demonstrated ability of the applicant to comply with
requirements necessary to protect the safety, health and welfare of
the public and the past history of the applicant in complying with
such requirements;
(4) The location and duration of the special event and the Borough's
ability to accommodate the event with the necessary resources;
and
(5) Other previously approved special events that could cause
scheduling conflicts during the same period and cause
overextension of the county's resources.
D. The agencies involved in reviewing an application may impose
additional requirements or conditions necessary to protect the public
interest by ensuring traffic management, security of property, or the
health and safety of the public.
E. Insurance required.
(1) No special event permit shall be issued unless and until the
applicant has submitted to the permits section a certificate of
insurance, listing Irwin Borough as an additional insured on an
occurrence policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do
business in the state, showing comprehensive general liability and
property damage coverage for the event with minimum limits of
$1,000,000 for injury or death for one person in any one
occurrence; $3,000,000 for injury or death for two or more persons
in any one occurrence; and $500,000 for property damage in any
one occurrence.
(2) The following special events shall be exempt from the insurance
requirements set forth in this section:
§ 216-6 IRWIN CODE § 216-6
1:236
§ 216-7. Permit fees.
(a) Political events;
(b) School events on school property;
(c) Events sponsored in whole by the Borough; and
(d) Block parties.
(3) In consideration for the issuing of a special event permit, the
applicant shall agree to indemnify, save harmless and defend the
Borough, its officers and employees against any claim for loss,
damage or expense sustained by any person on account of injury,
death or property damage occurring by reason of or arising out of
the special event.
(4) By issuing a special event permit, Irwin Borough makes no
guarantees and assumes no liability for the safety of participants or
spectators of special events.
A. Each special event permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee
of $100 plus $5 per vendor to defray the administrative costs of
processing the application. [Amended 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 961]
B. In order to promote, protect and assure the safety and convenience of
the people in their use of public streets, public places, and/or private
property, the Irwin Police Department shall coordinate the use of
additional officers if the special event requires traffic control or police
protection. An additional fee shall be charged by the Police Department
to cover the costs incurred. The Police Department shall specify the fee
required upon its approval of the special event permit application,
based upon the number of officers and amount of support equipment
required by such factors as the date and time of the event; the event
location and length; the anticipated traffic and weather conditions; the
estimated number of participants and spectators; the nature,
composition, format and configuration of the event; and the estimated
time for the event. The fee charged for traffic control or police
protection shall be paid to the Borough Manager's office prior to the
issuing of the special event permit.
C. The following special events shall be exempt from the application fee
set forth in this section but shall be subject to fees of other agencies or
departments:
(1) Political events;
(2) School events on school property;
(3) Events sponsored in whole or in part by the County;
(4) Block parties; and
§ 216-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-7
1:237
§ 216-8. Permit approval and issuance.
§ 216-9. Appeal procedures.
Any permit applicant desiring to appeal an administrative decision of the
permits section concerning the denial of a special event permit may petition
the Irwin Borough Council. All appeals shall be in writing, shall state the
specific grounds for the appeal, and shall be filed in the Borough Manager's
office within seven calendar days after the date the applicant received
notice of the administrative denial. An applicant aggrieved by the decision
of the Irwin Borough Council may seek judicial review of such decision.
§ 216-10. Violations and penalties.
A violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. The Borough of Irwin
Police Department, in its discretion, may stop an event which has been
issued a permit and/or may issue citations where event staff or participants
violate state statutes or county ordinances, terms or conditions specified
in the application, and including, but not limited, to traffic rules and
regulations, disturbing the peace, public nuisance, failure to disperse,
trespassing or other health and safety regulations.
(5) Revenue-raising events where the revenue flows to the direct
benefit of Westmoreland County government. [Amended
8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 925]
A. Completed application forms shall be submitted to the Borough
Manager's office at least 60 calendar days before the event is scheduled
to take place, in order to allow sufficient time for final evaluation of the
application and to allow timely appeal to the Irwin Borough Council in
the event the application is denied. Applications submitted less than 60
calendar days prior to the scheduled event shall be denied unless the
applicant demonstrates to the Borough of Irwin Council that
compliance with the sixty-day deadline was impractical or impossible
due to the nature of the event.
B. A special event permit application may be approved and a permit issued
to the applicant by the Borough Manager's office upon approval by all
the agencies specified in § 216-6B. The Borough Manager shall notify
the Irwin Borough Council and all affected agencies of all special events
permits issued pursuant to this chapter.
C. Irwin Borough reserves the right to deny permit applications for
proposed special events which pose a significant danger or threat to the
public health, welfare or safety, or which may result in unreasonable
inconvenience or cost to the public.
D. If a special event permit application is denied by the Borough Manager,
the reason or reasons for denial shall be provided in writing to the
applicant.
§ 216-7 IRWIN CODE § 216-10
1:238
Chapter 220
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 110.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 135.
Grading and excavation — See Ch. 140.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 200.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
230.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 220-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Irwin
Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 220-2. Statement of findings.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Irwin finds that:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases runoff volumes,
flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation,
overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers, greatly
increases the cost of public facilities to carry and control stormwater,
undermines floodplain management and flood control efforts in
downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge, threatens
public health and safety, and increases nonpoint source pollution of
water resources.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management (SWM),
including reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated runoff, is fundamental to the public health, safety, and
welfare and the protection of people of the commonwealth, their
resources, and the environment.
C. Stormwater is an important water resource that provides groundwater
recharge for water supplies and supports the base flow of streams.
D. The use of green infrastructure and low-impact development (LID) is
intended to address the root cause of water quality impairment by using
systems and practices which use or mimic natural processes to 1)
infiltrate and recharge, 2) evapotranspire, and/or 3) harvest and use
precipitation near where it falls to earth. Green infrastructure practices
and LID contribute to the restoration or maintenance of predevelopment
hydrology.
E. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
§ 216-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-2
1:239
§ 220-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare within
the Borough of Irwin and its watershed by minimizing the harms and
maximizing the benefits described in § 220-2 of this chapter, through
provisions designed to:
§ 220-4. Statutory authority.
The municipality is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
runoff by the authority of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, no. 247, the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,37 as amended, and/or the Act of
October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as amended, the
Storm Water Management Act.38
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) program.
A. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore
the existing and designated uses of the waters of this commonwealth.
B. Preserve natural drainage systems.
C. Manage stormwater runoff close to the source, reduce runoff volumes
and mimic predevelopment hydrology.
D. Provide procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
E. Maintain groundwater recharge to prevent degradation of surface
water and groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water
resources.
F. Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
G. Provide proper operation and maintenance of all stormwater best
management practices (BMPs) that are implemented within the
municipality.
H. Provide standards to meet NPDES permit requirements.
I. To manage and control stormwater runoff resulting from land alteration
and disturbance activities in accordance with the watershed
stormwater management plans adopted pursuant to the Pennsylvania
Storm Water Management Act (Act 167 of 1978, as amended).36
J. To preserve the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
36.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
37.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
38.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 220-2 IRWIN CODE § 220-5
1:240
§ 220-5. Applicability.
All regulated activities and all activities that may affect stormwater runoff,
including land development and earth disturbance activity, are subject to
regulation by this chapter.
§ 220-6. Repealer.
Any other ordinance provision(s) or regulation of the municipality
inconsistent with any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed to
the extent of the inconsistency only.
§ 220-7. Severability.
In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares any section or
provision of this chapter invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 220-8. Compatibility with other requirements.
Approvals issued and actions taken under this chapter do not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for
activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation or ordinance.
§ 220-9. Erroneous permit.
Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading
or erroneous information provided by an applicant is void without the
necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use
established pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful.
No action may be taken by a board, agency or employee of the Borough
purporting to validate such a violation.
§ 220-10. Waivers; liability disclaimer.
A. If the Borough determines that any requirement under this chapter
cannot be achieved for a particular regulated activity, the Borough may,
after an evaluation of alternatives, approve measures other than those
in this chapter, subject to § 220-10, Subsections B and C.
B. Waivers or modifications of the requirements of this chapter may be
approved by the Borough if enforcement will exact undue hardship
because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question,
provided that the modifications will not be contrary to the public
interest and that the purpose of the chapter is preserved. Cost or
financial burden shall not be considered a hardship. Modification may
be considered if an alternative standard or approach will provide equal
or better achievement of the purpose of the chapter. A request for
modifications shall be in writing and accompany the stormwater
management site plan submission. The request shall provide the facts
§ 220-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-10
1:241
§ 220-11. Definitions.
on which the request is based, the provision(s) of the chapter involved
and the proposed modification.
C. No waiver or modification of any regulated stormwater activity
involving earth disturbance greater than or equal to one acre may be
granted by the Borough unless that action is approved in advance by
the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) or the delegated
county conservation district.
D. Liability disclaimer.
(1) Neither the granting of any approval under the stormwater
management provisions of this chapter nor the compliance with the
provisions of this chapter or with any condition imposed by a
Borough official hereunder shall relieve any person from any
responsibility for damage to persons or property resulting
therefrom, or as otherwise imposed by law, nor impose any liability
upon the Borough for damages to persons or property.
(2) The granting of a permit which includes any stormwater
management facilities shall not constitute a representation,
guarantee or warranty of any kind by the Borough, or by an official
or employee thereof, of the practicability or safety of any structure,
use or other plan proposed and shall create no liability, action or
cause of action against such public body, official or employee for
any damage that may result pursuant thereto.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein
shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine
gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
(2) The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
(3) The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
(4) These definitions do not necessarily reflect the definitions
contained in pertinent regulations or statutes and are intended for
this chapter only.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 220-10 IRWIN CODE § 220-11
1:242
ACT — The Storm Water Management Act (Act of October 4, 1978, P.L.
864, No. 167, 32 P.S. §§ 680.1 to 680.17, as amended by Act of May 24,
1984, No. 63).
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities associated with agriculture,
such as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal
heavy-use areas. This includes the work of producing crops, including
tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting
crops or the pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of
conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious
area is not considered an agricultural activity.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer, or other person who has filed an
application to the municipality for approval to engage in any regulated
activity at a project site in the municipality.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Activities, facilities,
designs, measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts
from regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to
promote groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes
of this chapter. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one
of two broad categories or measures: "structural" or "nonstructural."
In this chapter, nonstructural BMPs or measures refer to operational
and/or behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the contact
of pollutants with stormwater runoff, whereas structural BMPs or
measures are those that consist of a physical device or practice that
is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff. Structural BMPs
include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices,
from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands to smallscale
underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips,
low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed
swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and
manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
CHANNEL — A perceptible natural or artificial waterway which
periodically or continuously contains moving water or which forms a
connection link between two bodies of water. It has a definite bed and
banks which confine the water.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — A conservation district, as defined in
Section 3(c) of the Conservation District Law [3 P.S. § 851(c)], that
has the authority under a delegation agreement executed with DEP to
administer and enforce all or a portion of the regulations promulgated
under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
CULVERT — A closed conduit for the free passage of surface drainage
under a highway, railroad, canal or other embankment.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours) used in the design
§ 220-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-11
1:243
and evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see "return
period."
DETENTION POND — A pond or reservoir, usually small, constructed
to impound or retard surface runoff temporarily.
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
released into the waters of the commonwealth at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPER — The person, persons, or any corporation, partnership,
association, or other entity or any responsible person therein or agent
therefor that undertakes the activities associated with changes in land
use. The term "developer" is intended to include but not necessarily be
limited to the term "subdivider," "owner" and "builder," even though the
individuals involved in successive stages of a project may vary.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) — See "project site."
DISCHARGE — The flow or rate of flow from the canal, conduit, channel
or other hydraulic structure.
DISTURBED AREA — An unstabilized land area where an earth
disturbance activity is occurring or has occurred.
DRAINAGE — In general, the removal of surface water from a given
area. Commonly applied to surface water and groundwater.
DRAINAGE AREA — The area of a drainage basin or watershed,
expressed in acres, square miles, or other unit of area; also called
"catchment area," "watershed" or "river basin." The area served by
a sewer system receiving stormwater and surface water or by a
watercourse.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human
activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited
to, clearing and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road
maintenance; building construction; and the moving, depositing,
stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock, or earth materials.
ENCROACHMENT — Any structure or activity which in any manner
changes, expands or diminishes the course, current or cross section of
any watercourse, floodway or body of water.
EROSION — The natural process by which the surface of the land is
worn away by water, wind, or chemical action.
EROSION CONTROL — The application of measures to reduce erosion
of land surfaces.
EXISTING CONDITION — The dominant land cover during the five-year
period immediately preceding a proposed regulated activity.
FEMA — Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water
from any natural source or delineated by applicable FEMA maps and
studies as being a special flood hazard area. Also includes areas that
§ 220-11 IRWIN CODE § 220-11
1:244
comprise Group 13 Soils, as listed in Appendix A of the Pennsylvania
DEP Technical Manual for Sewage Enforcement Officers (as amended
or replaced from time to time by DEP).
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of
the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the one-hundred-year flood. Unless otherwise specified, the
boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance
studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies
have defined the boundary of the one-hundred-year floodway, it is
assumed — absent evidence to the contrary — that the floodway
extends from the stream to 50 feet from the top of the bank of the
stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and
activities necessary for the management of forestland. These include
conducting a timber inventory, preparation of forest management
plans, silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and
construction, timber harvesting, site preparation, and reforestation.
GOVERNING BODY — The Council of the Borough of Irwin.
GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE — Systems and practices that use or mimic
natural processes to infiltrate, evapotranspire, or reuse stormwater on
the site where it is generated.
GROUND COVER — Materials covering the ground.
GROUNDWATER — Subsurface water occupying the saturation zone,
from which wells and springs are fed.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of groundwater
naturally by precipitation or runoff or artificially by spreading or
injection.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Infiltration rates of soils vary
widely and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface
intake rates. Soils are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C, and D)
according to their minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare
soil after prolonged wetting. The NRCS defines the four groups and
provides a list of most of the soils in the United States and their group
classification. The soils in the area of the development site may be
identified from a soil survey report that can be obtained from local
NRCS offices or conservation district offices. Soils become less pervious
as the HSG varies from A to D (see references at § 220-42A and B).
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — A surface that
prevents the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces
(or areas) shall include, but not be limited to, roofs; additional indoor
living spaces, patios, garages, storage sheds and similar structures; and
any new streets or sidewalks. Decks, parking areas, and driveway areas
are not counted as impervious areas if they do not prevent infiltration.
§ 220-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-11
1:245
INFILTRATION — The flow or movement of water through the
interstices or pores of a soil or other porous medium. The absorption of
liquid by the soil.
KARST — A type of topography or landscape characterized by surface
depressions, sinkholes, rock pinnacles/uneven bedrock surface,
underground drainage, and caves. Karst is formed on carbonate rocks,
such as limestone or dolomite.
LAND DEVELOPMENT (DEVELOPMENT) — Inclusive of any or all of
the following meanings: i) the improvement of one lot or two or more
contiguous lots, tracts, or parcels of land for any purpose involving a) a
group of two or more buildings or b) the division or allocation of land or
space between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants
by means of, or for the purpose of, streets, common areas, leaseholds,
condominiums, building groups, or other features; ii) any subdivision
of land; iii) development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.39
LAND DISTURBANCES — Any activity involving the changing, grading,
transportation, fill and any other activity which causes land to be
exposed to the danger of erosion.
LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) — Site design approaches and
small-scale stormwater management practices that promote the use
of natural systems for infiltration, evapotranspiration, and reuse of
rainwater. LID can be applied to new development, urban retrofits, and
revitalization projects. LID utilizes design techniques that infiltrate,
filter, evaporate, and store runoff close to its source. Rather than rely
on costly large-scale conveyance and treatment systems, LID addresses
stormwater through a variety of small, cost-effective landscape features
located on site.
MAINTENANCE — The upkeep necessary for efficient operation of
physical properties.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Irwin, Westmoreland County,
Pennsylvania.
NRCS — USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously
SCS).
OUTFLOW CONTROL STRUCTURE — The means of controlling the
relationship between the headwater elevation and the discharge,
placed at the outlet or downstream end of any structure through which
water may flow.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PEAK FLOW — See "peak discharge."
39.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 220-11 IRWIN CODE § 220-11
1:246
PENNSYLVANIA DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A standard which establishes an end
result or outcome which is to be achieved but does not prescribe
specific means for achieving it.
PERVIOUS AREA — Any area not defined as impervious.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated
activities in the municipality are planned, conducted, or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed by the
Pennsylvania Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to
perform the work required by this chapter.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner
that may affect stormwater runoff.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving
earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92,40
25 Pa. Code Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.
RELEASE RATE PERCENTAGE — The watershed factor determined
by comparing the maximum rate of runoff from a subbasin to the
contributing rate of runoff to the watershed peak rate at points of
interest.
RETENTION POND — A basin, usually enclosed by artificial dikes, that
is used to retard stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff
and releasing it at a predetermined rate.
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff
that is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of this
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a
storm event of a given magnitude can be expected to occur one time.
For example, the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be
expected to occur on average once every 25 years, or stated in another
way, the probability of a twenty-five-year storm occurring in any one
year is 0.04 (i.e., a 4% chance).
RIPARIAN BUFFER — A permanent area of trees and shrubs located
adjacent to streams, lakes, ponds and wetlands.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land.
RUNOFF CHARACTERISTICS — The surface components of any
watershed which affect the rate, amount and direction of stormwater
runoff. These may include, but are not limited to, vegetation, soils,
slopes and man-made landscape alterations.
40.Editor's Note: Former 25 Pa. Code Ch. 92 was repealed effective 10-9-2010. See now 25 Pa.
Code Ch. 92a.
§ 220-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-11
1:247
SCS — The United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation
Service and/or the Natural Resources Conservation Service, or NRCS.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by surface water as
a product of erosion.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by moving water, wind or gravity.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory
requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality
under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.
STORAGE FACILITY — See "detention pond" and "retention pond."
STORM FREQUENCY — The average interval in years over which a
storm event of a given precipitation volume can be expected to occur.
STORM SEWER — A sewer that carries intercepted surface runoff,
street water and other drainage but excludes domestic sewage and
industrial waste.
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land
resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or
man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys,
stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater
management facilities include, but are not limited to, detention and
retention basins; open channels; storm sewers; pipes; and infiltration
facilities. This definition shall also be used for "stormwater collection
facility."
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by
the developer or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff
will be managed at the development site in accordance with this
chapter. "Stormwater management site plan" will be designated as
SWM site plan throughout this chapter.
SUBDIVISION — As defined in the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code,41 Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface
water runoff.
USDA — The United States Department of Agriculture.
WATERCOURSE — Any channel for conveyance of surface water having
a defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams,
creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers,
lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies
or channels of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts
41.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 220-11 IRWIN CODE § 220-11
1:248
§ 220-12. General requirements.
thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this
commonwealth.
WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse, or
other surface water of this commonwealth.
WATERSHED MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plan for managing
stormwater runoff throughout a designated watershed adopted by
Allegheny County and Westmoreland County as required by the
Pennsylvania Storm Water Management Act.42
WETLAND — Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
A. For all regulated activities, unless preparation of an SWM site plan is
specifically exempted in § 220-13:
(1) Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required.
(2) No regulated activities shall commence until the municipality
issues written approval of an SWM site plan, which demonstrates
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
B. SWM site plans approved by the Borough, in accordance with § 220-25,
shall be on site throughout the duration of the regulated activity.
C. The Borough may, after consultation with DEP, approve measures for
meeting the state water quality requirements other than those in this
chapter, provided that they meet the minimum requirements of, and do
not conflict with, state law, including, but not limited to, the Clean
Streams Law.
D. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g.,
during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this
chapter and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania
Code and the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and their design
standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual (E&S Manual [see the reference in § 220-42D]), No.
363-2134-008, as amended and updated.
E. Impervious areas.
42.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 220-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-12
1:249
(1) The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development even if
development is to take place in stages.
(2) For development taking place in stages, the entire development
plan must be used in determining conformance with this chapter.
(3) For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, the total
impervious area on the parcel is subject to the requirements of this
chapter; except that the volume controls in § 22-14 and the peak
rate controls of § 220-15 do not need to be retrofitted to existing
impervious areas that are not being altered by the proposed
regulated activity.
F. Stormwater flows onto adjacent property shall not be created,
increased, decreased, relocated, or otherwise altered without written
notification to the adjacent property owner(s). Such stormwater flows
shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter.
G. All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:
(1) Protect health, safety, and property.
(2) Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing
measures to:
(a) Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, and wooded
areas.
(b) Maintain or extend riparian buffers.
(c) Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
(d) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of this commonwealth.
(e) Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious
areas, wherever possible.
(3) Incorporate methods described in the Pennsylvania Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual (BMP Manual [see the
reference at § 220-42C]). If methods other than green
infrastructure and LID methods are proposed to achieve the
volume and rate controls required under this chapter, the SWM site
plan must include a detailed justification demonstrating that the
use of LID and green infrastructure is not practicable.
H. The design of all facilities over karst shall include an evaluation of
measures to minimize adverse effects.
I. Infiltration BMPs should be spread out, made as shallow as practicable,
and located to maximize use of natural on-site infiltration features while
still meeting the other requirements of this chapter.
§ 220-12 IRWIN CODE § 220-12
1:250
§ 220-13. Exemptions.
§ 220-14. Volume controls.
The green infrastructure and low-impact development practices provided
in the BMP Manual (see the reference at § 220-42C) shall be utilized for
all regulated activities wherever possible. Water volume controls shall be
implemented using the Design Storm Method in Subsection A or the
J. Normally dry, open-top storage facilities should completely drain both
the volume control and rate control capacities over a period of time not
less than 24 hours and not more than 72 hours from the end of the
design storm.
K. The design storm volumes to be used in the analysis of peak rates of
discharge should be obtained from the latest version of the
Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), National Weather Service,
Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland.
NOAA's Atlas 14 (see the reference at § 220-42E) can be accessed at
http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
L. For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be designed,
implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes and
requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under Title
25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law, and the Storm
Water Management Act.43
M. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the BMP Manual
(see the reference at § 220-42C).
A. Regulated activities that result in cumulative earth disturbances less
than 5,000 square feet are exempt from the requirements in §§ 220-14,
220-15, and 220-20 through 220-27 of this chapter.
B. Agricultural activity is exempt from the SWM site plan preparation
requirements of this chapter, provided that the activities are performed
according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
C. Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the SWM
site plan preparation requirements of this chapter, provided that the
activities are performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102.
D. Exemptions from any provisions of this chapter shall not relieve the
applicant from the requirements in § 220-12D through K.
E. The Borough may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this
section at any time for any project that the municipality believes may
pose a threat to public health and safety or the environment.
43.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 220-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-14
1:251
Simplified Method in Subsection B below. For regulated activity areas equal
or less than 5,000 square feet that do not require hydrologic routing to
design the stormwater facilities, this chapter establishes no preference for
either methodology; therefore, the applicant may select either methodology
on the basis of economic considerations, the intrinsic limitations on
applicability of the analytical procedures associated with each methodology
and other factors.
§ 220-15. Rate controls.
A. The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual) is applicable to
any size of regulated activity. This method requires detailed modeling
based on site conditions.
(1) Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume for all
storms equal to or less than the two-year twenty-four-hour duration
precipitation.
(2) For modeling purposes:
(a) Existing (predevelopment) nonforested pervious areas must be
considered meadow in good condition.
(b) Twenty percent of existing impervious area, when present,
shall be considered meadow in good condition in the model for
existing conditions.
B. The Simplified Method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual [see the reference at
§ 220-42C]) provided below is independent of site conditions and should
be used if the Design Storm Method is not followed. This method is not
applicable to regulated activities greater than 5,000 square feet or for
projects that require design of stormwater storage facilities. For new
impervious surfaces:
(1) Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two inches of
runoff from all new impervious surfaces.
(2) At least the first one inch of runoff from new impervious surfaces
shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow, i.e., it shall not
be released into the surface waters of this commonwealth. Removal
options include reuse, evaporation, transpiration, and infiltration.
(3) Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to
accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed
runoff; however, in all cases at least the first 0.5 inch of the
permanently removed runoff should be infiltrated.
(4) This method is exempt from the requirements of § 220-15, Rate
controls.
A. For areas not covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167
Stormwater Management Plan: Post-development discharge rates shall
not exceed the predevelopment discharge rates for the one-, two-, five-,
§ 220-14 IRWIN CODE § 220-15
1:252
§ 220-16. Riparian buffers.
ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storm
events. If it is shown that the peak rates of discharge indicated by
the post-development analysis are less than or equal to the peak rates
of discharge indicated by the predevelopment analysis for one-, two-,
five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour
storms, then the requirements of this section have been met.
Otherwise, the applicant shall provide additional controls as necessary
to satisfy the peak rate of discharge requirement.
B. For areas covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167
Stormwater Management Plan: For the one-, two-, five-, ten-, twentyfive-,
fifty-, and one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storm events, the
post-development peak discharge rates will follow the applicable
approved release rate maps. For any areas not shown on the release
rate maps, the post-development discharge rates shall not exceed the
predevelopment discharge rates.
A. In order to protect and improve water quality, a riparian buffer
easement shall be created and recorded as part of any subdivision or
land development that encompasses a riparian buffer.
B. Except as required by 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102, the riparian buffer
easement shall be measured to be the greater of the limit of the onehundred-
year floodplain or a minimum of 35 feet from the top of the
stream bank (on each side).
C. Minimum management requirements for riparian buffers.
(1) Existing native vegetation shall be protected and maintained within
the riparian buffer easement.
(2) Whenever practicable, invasive vegetation shall be actively
removed, and the riparian buffer easement shall be planted with
native trees, shrubs and other vegetation to create a diverse native
plant community appropriate to the intended ecological context of
the site.
D. The riparian buffer easement shall be enforceable by the municipality
and shall be recorded in the appropriate County Recorder of Deeds
Office, so that it shall run with the land and shall limit the use of the
property located therein. The easement shall allow for the continued
private ownership and shall count toward the minimum lot area as
required by zoning, unless otherwise specified in the municipal Zoning
Chapter.44
E. Any permitted use within the riparian buffer easement shall be
conducted in a manner that will maintain the extent of the existing one-
44.Editor's Note: See Ch. 260, Zoning.
§ 220-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-16
1:253
§ 220-17. Turtle Creek Stormwater Management Plan performance
standards.
hundred-year floodplain, improve or maintain the stream stability, and
preserve and protect the ecological function of the floodplain.
F. The following conditions shall apply when public and/or private
recreation trails are permitted within riparian buffers:
(1) Trails shall be for nonmotorized use only.
(2) Trails shall be designed to have the least impact on native plant
species and other sensitive environmental features.
G. Septic drainfields and sewage disposal systems shall not be permitted
within the riparian buffer easement and shall comply with setback
requirements established under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 73.
A. Stormwater management performance districts. For purposes of
stormwater management, the Borough of Irwin shall be construed to be
part of the watershed of Brush Creek and Tinkers Run and their
tributaries, all of which are set forth in the Turtle Creek Stormwater
Management Plan, which is incorporated herein by reference.
B. General standards.
(1) The following provisions shall be considered the overriding
performance standards against which all proposed stormwater
control measures shall be evaluated and shall apply throughout the
Borough of Irwin:
(a) Any landowner and any person engaged in the alteration or
development of land which may affect stormwater runoff
characteristics shall implement such measures as are
reasonably necessary to prevent injury to health, safety or
other property. Such measures shall include such actions as
are required:
[1] To assure that the maximum rate of stormwater runoff is
no greater after development than prior to development
activities; or
[2] To manage the quantity, velocity and direction of resulting
stormwater runoff in a manner which otherwise
adequately protects health and property from possible
injury.
(2) The stormwater management plan for the development site must
consider all the stormwater runoff flowing over the site.
(3) No discharge of toxic materials shall be permitted into any
stormwater management system.
§ 220-16 IRWIN CODE § 220-17
1:254
C. Watershed standards; Turtle Creek Stormwater Management District.
(1) The stormwater performance standards contained in this section
are intended to implement the standards and criteria contained in
the Turtle Creek Stormwater Management Plan, adopted and
approved in accordance with the Pennsylvania Storm Water
Management Act.45 If there is any discrepancy between the
provisions of this section and standards and criteria of the plan, or
if the watershed plan is subsequently amended, then the standards/
criteria of the current watershed plan shall govern.
(2) Storm frequencies. Stormwater management facilities on all
development sites shall control the peak stormwater discharge for
the two-, ten-, twenty-five- and one-hundred-year storm
frequencies. The SCS twenty-four-hour, Type II Rainfall
Distribution shall be used for analyzing stormwater runoff for both
pre- and post-development conditions. The twenty-four-hour total
rainfall for these storm frequencies in the watershed are:
Storm Frequency
Rainfall Depth
(inches)
2-year 2.50
10-year 3.61
25-year 4.31
100-year 5.71
NOTE: For additional information or data on other storm return
periods, consult the "Rainfall Duration Frequency Tables for
Pennsylvania," produced by Penn DEP, Office of Resource
Management, Bureau of Dams and Waterways Management,
Division of Stormwater Management, Harrisburg, February 1983.
(3) Calculation methods.
(a) Development sites. For the purpose of computing peak flow
rates and runoff hydrographs from development sites,
calculations shall be performed using one of the following: SCS
publications, Technical Release (TR) 55 or 20, HECI, or Penn
State Runoff Model.
(b) Stormwater collection/conveyance facilities. For the purpose of
designing storm sewers, open swales and other stormwater
runoff collection and conveyance facilities, any of the abovelisted
calculation methods or the Rational Method may be
used. Rainfall intensities for design should be obtained from
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation rainfall charts.
45.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 220-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-17
1:255
(c) Predevelopment conditions. Predevelopment conditions shall
be assumed to be those which exist on any site at the time of
the Turtle Creek Stormwater Management Plan. Hydrologic
conditions for all areas with pervious cover (i.e., fields, woods,
lawn areas, pastures, crop land, etc.) shall be assumed to be in
good condition, and the lowest recommended SCS runoff curve
number (CN) shall be applied for all pervious land uses within
the respective range for each land use and hydrologic soil
group.
(d) Routing of hydrographs through detention/retention facilities
for the purpose of designing those facilities shall be
accomplished using the Modified-Puls Method or recognized
reservoir routing method, subject to the approval of the
Borough and county.
(4) Release rate percentage.
(a) Definitions. The release rate percentage defines the
percentage of the predevelopment peak rate of runoff that can
be discharged from an outfall on the site after development. It
applies uniformly to all land development or alterations within
a subarea. A listing of the release rate percentage by subarea
appears in Appendix A of this chapter;46 the subareas are
delineated on the Borough Stormwater Management District
Map.
(b) Procedure for use.
[1] Identify the specific subarea in which the development site
is located from the watershed map, and obtain the subarea
release rate percentage from Appendix A.47
[2] Compute the pre- and post-development runoff
hydrographs for each stormwater outfall on the
development site using an acceptable calculation method
for the two-, ten-, twenty-five- and one-hundred-year
storm. Apply no on-site detention for stormwater
management but include any techniques to minimize
impervious surfaces and/or increase the time of
concentration for stormwater runoff flowing from the
development site. If the post-development peak runoff rate
and the runoff volume are less than equal to the
predevelopment peak runoff rate and volume, then
additional stormwater control shall not be required at that
outfall. If the predevelopment peak runoff rate and volume
are greater than the predevelopment peak runoff rate and
volume, then stormwater detention will be required, and
46.Editor's Note: Said listing is on file in the Borough offices.
47.Editor's Note: Said listing is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 220-17 IRWIN CODE § 220-17
1:256
the capacity of the detention facility must be calculated in
the manner prescribed below.
[3] Multiply the subarea release rate percentage by the
predevelopment rate of runoff from the development site
to determine the maximum allowable release rate from
any detention facility for the four prescribed storm events.
[4] Design the outlet control facilities and size the volume of
the detention facility using the calculated postdevelopment
hydrograph and accepted hydrograph
routing procedures in consideration of the maximum
allowable release rate.
(5) No-harm evaluation.
(a) An applicant may seek to exceed the otherwise applicable
subarea release rate percentage by performing the no-harm
evaluation. This evaluation requires an independent
engineering analysis to demonstrate that other reasonable
options exist to prevent the occurrence of increased
stormwater runoff discharge rates and/or velocities or that
measures can be provided to prevent increased stormwater
discharge rates and/or velocities from increasing flood
elevation and accelerating erosion at all downstream points in
the watershed.
(b) A no-harm evaluation will be considered only in instances
where the discharge to a stream channel from the development
occurs directly to the Mononogahela River, channelized
portion of the Turtle Creek, or through a properly sized and
designed regional stormwater detention facility.
(c) The analysis for the no-harm evaluation shall be submitted to
the Borough Engineer and Allegheny Planning Department
(Westmoreland Conservation District) for review and approval.
(d) The no-harm evaluation shall be prepared by a registered
engineer who is experienced in hydrology and hydraulics. The
no-harm evaluation shall be completed using the following
procedure: The Penn State Runoff Model (PSRM) is the
hydrologic model required in this procedure. Use of this model
would produce results from a no-harm evaluation analysis that
could be compared to the results of the watershed study.
[1] Develop the runoff hydrograph(s) for the design storm of
the site and areas tributary to it using the PSRM and the
Turtle Creek Watershed Stormwater Management Plan
land use of the development for both predevelopment and
post-development conditions.
§ 220-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-17
1:257
§ 220-18. Design criteria.
[2] Develop the runoff hydrograph(s) for the proposed site
using the PSRM. If no management or controls are
proposed, this would be equivalent to the runoff
hydrograph under post-development conditions. If some
management or controls are proposed, then the runoff
hydrograph under post-development conditions would be
modified to reflect their effect on the rate, volume and
timing of discharges.
[3] Subtract the runoff hydrograph ordinates under
predevelopment conditions {Subsection C(5)(d)[1]} from
the discharge hydrograph ordinates {Subsection
C(5)(d)[2]}, maintaining the time scales of both
hydrographs from one-to-one correspondence.
[4] Obtain the PSRM for existing conditions for the Turtle
Creek Watershed from the county.
[5] Locate the subbasin(s) in which the proposed development
is located and into which the discharge hydrograph enters.
If more than one subbasin receives this incremental flow,
divide the flow accordingly.
[6] Add the incremental increase computed in Subsection
C(5)(d)[3] to the runoff hydrograph for the basin(s)
identified in Subsection C(5)(d)[5].
[7] Route the adjusted runoff hydrograph through Turtle
Creek Watershed PSRM and note any increase in peak
flows which would occur in downstream subbasin(s). If no
increase is noted, then no harm has been demonstrated. If
no increase is observed in peak flows, the increased
potential for erosion and/or sedimentation in downstream
channels resulting from any change in the flood
hydrograph predicted by the model shall be evaluated. If
no increased potential can be demonstrated by
appropriate technical means, then the no-harm exemption
may be requested.
[8] If an increase in peak flow is observed in any of the
downstream subbasins or increased potential for erosion
and/or sedimentation is indicated, the no-harm exemption
shall not be granted.
A. General criteria.
(1) Applicants may select runoff control techniques, or a combination
of techniques, which are most suitable to control stormwater runoff
from the development site. All controls must be subject to approval
of the Borough Engineer. The Borough Engineer may request
§ 220-17 IRWIN CODE § 220-18
1:258
specific information of design and/or operating features of the
proposed stormwater controls in order to determine their
suitability and adequacy in terms of the standards of this chapter.
(2) The applicant should consider the effect of the proposed
stormwater management techniques on any special soil conditions
or geological hazards which may exist on the development site; the
Borough Engineer may require in-depth studies by a competent
geotechnical engineer. Not all stormwater control methods may be
advisable or allowable at a particular development site.
(3) The stormwater management practices to be used in developing a
stormwater management plan for a particular site shall be selected
according to the following order of preference:
(a) Infiltration of runoff on site.
(b) Flow attenuation by use of open vegetated swales and natural
depressions.
(c) Stormwater detention/retention structures.
(4) Infiltration practices shall be used to the extent practicable to
reduce volume increases and promote groundwater recharge. A
combination of successive practices may be used to achieve the
applicable minimum control requirements. Justification shall be
provided by the applicant for rejecting each of the preferred
practices based on actual site conditions.
B. Criteria for infiltration system.
(1) Infiltration systems shall be sized and designed based upon local
soil and groundwater conditions.
(2) Infiltration systems shall be greater than three feet deep and shall
be located at least 10 feet from the basement walls.
(3) Infiltration systems shall not be used to handle runoff from
commercial or industrial working or parking areas. This prohibition
does not extend to roof areas which are demonstrated to be
suitably protected from the effects of the commercial/industrial
activities.
(4) Infiltration systems may not receive runoff until the entire drainage
area to the system has received final stabilization.
(5) The stormwater infiltration facility designed shall provide an
overflow system with measures to provide a nonerosive velocity of
flow along its length and at the outfall.
C. Criteria for stormwater detention facilities.
(1) If detention facilities are utilized for the development site, the
facility(ies) shall be designed such that post-development peak
§ 220-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-18
1:259
runoff rates from the developed sites are controlled to those rates
defined by the subarea release rate percentage for the two-, ten-,
twenty-five-, and one-hundred-year storm frequencies.
(2) All detention facilities shall be equipped with outlet structures to
provide discharge control for the four designated storm
frequencies. Provisions shall also be made to safely pass, at
minimum, the post-development one-hundred-year storm runoff
without breaching or otherwise damaging (i.e., impairing the
continued function of) the facilities.
(3) Shared storage facilities, which provide detention of runoff for
more than one development within a single subarea, may be
considered and are encouraged. Such facilities shall meet the
criteria contained in this section. In addition, runoff from the
development sites involved shall be conveyed to the facility in a
manner that avoids adverse impacts (such as flooding or erosion) to
channels and properties located between the development site and
the shared storage facilities.
(4) Where detention facilities will be utilized, multiple-use facilities,
such as wetlands, lakes, ball fields or similar recreation/open space
uses, are encouraged wherever feasible, subject to the approval of
the Borough and Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection Chapter 105 regulations.48
(5) Other considerations which should be incorporated into the design
of the detention facilities include:
(a) Inflow and outflow structures shall be designed and installed to
prevent erosion, and bottoms of impoundment-type structures
should be protected from soil erosion.
(b) Control and removal of debris both in the storage structures
and in all inlet or outlet devices shall be a design consideration.
(c) Inflow and outflow structures, pumping stations, and other
structures shall be designed and protected to minimize safety
hazards.
(d) The water depth at the perimeter of a storage pond should be
limited to that which is safe for children. This is especially
necessary if bank slopes are steep or if ponds are full and
recirculating in dry periods. Restrictions of access (fence,
walls, etc.) may be necessary depending on the location of the
facility.
(e) Side slope of storage ponds shall not exceed a ratio of 2.5:1
horizontal to vertical dimension.
48.Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
§ 220-18 IRWIN CODE § 220-18
1:260
(f) Landscaping shall be provided for the facility which
harmonizes with the surrounding area.
(g) The facility shall be located to facilitate maintenance,
considering the frequency and type of equipment that will be
required.
D. Criteria for collection/conveyance facilities.
(1) All stormwater runoff collection or conveyance facilities, whether
storm sewers or other open or closed channels, shall be designed in
accordance with the following basic standards:
(a) All sites shall be graded to provide drainage away from and
around the structure in order to prevent any potential flooding
damage.
(b) Lots located on the high side of streets shall extend roof and
french drains to the curbline storm sewer (if applicable). Low
side lots shall extend roof french drains to a stormwater
collection/conveyance/control system or natural watercourse
in accordance with the approved stormwater management
plan for the development site.
(c) Collection/conveyance facilities should not be installed parallel
and close to the top or bottom of a major embankment to avoid
the possibility of failing or causing the embankment to fail.
(d) All collection/conveyance facilities shall be designed to convey
the twenty-five-year storm peak flow rate from the contributing
area and to carry it to the nearest suitable outlet, such as a
stormwater control facility, curbed street, storm sewer or
natural watercourse.
(e) Where drainage swales or open channels are used, they shall
be suitably lined to prevent erosion and designed to avoid
excessive velocities.
(2) Wherever storm sewers are proposed to be utilized, they shall
comply with the following criteria:
(a) Where practical, designed to traverse under seeded and
planted areas. If constructed within 10 feet of road paving,
walks or other surfaced areas, drains shall have a narrow
trench and maximum compaction of backfill to prevent
settlement of the superimposed surface or development.
(b) Preferably installed after excavating and filling in the area to
be traversed is completed, unless the drain is installed in the
original ground with a minimum of three feet cover and/or
adequate protection during the fill construction.
(c) Designed:
§ 220-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-18
1:261
§ 220-19. Erosion and sedimentation control.
[1] With cradle when traversing fill areas of indeterminate
stability.
[2] With anchors when gradient exceeds 20%.
[3] With encasement or special backfill requirements when
traversing under a paved area.
(d) Designed to adequately handle the anticipated stormwater
flow and be economical to construct and maintain. The
minimum pipe size shall be 15 inches in diameter.
(e) Drainpipe, trenching, bedding and backfilling requirements
shall conform to the requirements of the Borough and/or
applicable PennDOT specifications, Form 408.
(f) All corrugated metal pipe shall be polymer-coated and with
asbestos bonding and paved inverts where prone to erode. Pipe
within a municipal right-of-way shall be reinforced concrete
pipe with a minimum diameter of 15 inches.
(g) Storm inlets and structures shall be designed to be adequate,
safe, self-cleaning and unobtrusive and consistent with
Borough standards.
(h) Appropriate grates shall be designed for all catch basins,
stormwater inlets and other entrance appurtenances.
(i) Manholes shall be designed so that the top shall be at finished
grade and sloped to conform to the slope of the finished grade.
Top castings of structures located in roads or parking areas
shall be machined or installed to preclude rattling.
(j) Where proposed sewer connects with an existing storm sewer
system, the applicant shall demonstrate that sufficient capacity
exists in the downstream system to handle the additional flow.
(k) Storm sewer outfalls shall be equipped with energy dissipation
devices to prevent erosion and conform with applicable
requirements of the Pennsylvania DEP for stream
encroachments (Chapter 105 of Pennsylvania DEP rules and
regulations).49
A. An erosion/sedimentation plan shall be provided in accordance with the
Pennsylvania erosion/sedimentation regulations (25 Pa. Code Chapter
102) and the standards and guidelines of the County Conservation
District, as well as any chapters or rules of the Borough of Irwin.
49.Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
§ 220-18 IRWIN CODE § 220-19
1:262
§ 220-20. Plan requirements.
The following items shall be included in the SWM site plan:
B. Proposed erosion/sedimentation measures shall be submitted with the
stormwater management plan as part of the preliminary plan and final
application.
C. Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth disturbance
activities.
(1) No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Borough shall
commence until approval by the Borough of an erosion and
sediment control plan for construction activities.
(2) The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP)
has regulations that require an erosion and sediment control plan
for any earth disturbance activity of 5,000 square feet or more,
under 25 Pa. Code § 102.4(b).
(3) In addition, under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92,50 a DEP NPDES
construction activities permit is required for any earth disturbance
of one acre or more with a point source discharge to surface waters
or the Borough's storm sewer system, or five acres or more
regardless of the planned runoff (hereinafter collectively referred
to as "regulated earth disturbance activities"). This includes earth
disturbance on any portion of, part of, or during any stage of a
larger common plan of development.
(4) Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth
disturbance activities from the appropriate DEP regional office or
County Conservation District must be provided to the Borough. The
issuance of an NPDES construction permit [or permit coverage
under the statewide general permit (PAG-2)] satisfies the
requirements of Subsection C(1).
(5) A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required
permit, as required by DEP regulations, shall be available at the
project site at all times.
A. Appropriate sections from the Borough's Subdivision and Land
Development Chapter,51 and other applicable local chapters, shall be
followed in preparing the SWM site plans.
B. The Borough shall not approve any SWM site plan that is deficient in
meeting the requirements of this chapter. At its sole discretion and in
accordance with this chapter, when a SWM site plan is found to be
deficient, the Borough may either disapprove the submission and
50.Editor's Note: Former 25 Pa. Code Ch. 92 was repealed effective 10-9-2010. See now 25 Pa.
Code Ch. 92a.
51.Editor's Note: See Ch. 280 in this Code.
§ 220-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-20
1:263
require a resubmission, or in the case of minor deficiencies, the
Borough may accept submission of modifications.
C. Provisions for permanent access or maintenance easements for all
physical SWM BMPs, such as ponds and infiltration structures, as
necessary to implement the operation and maintenance (O&M) plan
discussed in Subsection E(9) below.
D. The following signature block for the municipality:
"The Borough Engineer, on this date, __________, has reviewed and
hereby certifies that the SWM Site Plan meets all design standards and
criteria of the Municipal Ordinance No. _____."
E. The SWM site plan shall provide the following information:
(1) The overall stormwater management concept for the project.
(2) A determination of site conditions in accordance with the BMP
Manual (see the reference at § 220-42C). A detailed site evaluation
shall be completed for projects proposed in areas of carbonate
geology or karst topography, and other environmentally sensitive
areas, such as brownfields.
(3) Stormwater runoff design computations and documentation as
specified in this chapter, or as otherwise necessary to demonstrate
that the maximum practicable measures have been taken to meet
the requirements of this chapter, including the recommendations
and general requirements in Section 301.52
(4) Expected project time schedule.
(5) A soil erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable, as
prepared for and submitted to the approval authority.
(6) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water quality,
and peak flows) on surrounding properties and aquatic features
and on any existing stormwater conveyance system that may be
affected by the project.
(7) Plan and profile drawings of all SWM BMPs, including drainage
structures, pipes, open channels, and swales.
(8) The SWM site plan shall show the locations of existing and
proposed on-lot wastewater facilities and water supply wells.
(9) The SWM site plan shall include an O&M plan for all existing and
proposed physical stormwater management facilities. This plan
shall address long-term ownership and responsibilities for O&M as
well as schedules and costs for O&M activities.
52.Editor's Note: See § 220-12.
§ 220-20 IRWIN CODE § 220-20
1:264
(10) A justification must be included in the SWM site plan if BMPs other
than green infrastructure methods and LID practices are proposed
to achieve the volume, rate and water quality controls under this
chapter.
F. Additional plan requirements.
(1) General requirements. No final subdivision/land development plan
shall be approved, no permit authorizing construction issued, or
any earthmoving or land disturbance activity initiated until the final
stormwater management plan for the development site is approved
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Exemptions for small developments.
(a) At the time of application, the Borough shall determine if the
subdivision/land development qualifies as a small development
and, therefore, is eligible for a simplified stormwater plan
submission. For the purposes of this chapter, a "small
development" is any subdivision or land development which
results (or will result when fully constructed) in the creation of
one acre or less square feet of impervious area and one acre or
less of any land cover change.
(b) Applications for small developments shall include a plan which
describes the type and location of proposed on-site stormwater
management techniques or the proposed connection to an
existing storm sewer system. The plan should show accurately
site boundaries, two-foot interval contours, locations of
watershed and/or subarea boundaries on the site (if applicable)
and any watercourses, floodplains, or existing drainage
facilities or structures located on the site. Contingent upon the
approval of the Borough Engineer, alternative runoff
computational techniques such as the Rational Method may be
used where applicable. The Borough reserves the right to
require that the plan be prepared by a registered professional
engineer, surveyor or landscape architect.
(c) The Borough Engineer shall review and approve the proposed
provisions for stormwater management in accordance with the
standards and requirements of this chapter.
(3) Stormwater plan contents.
(a) General format. The stormwater plan shall be drawn to a scale
of not less than one inch equals 200 feet. All sheets shall
contain a title block with name and address of applicant and
engineer, scale, North arrow, legend and date of preparation.
(b) Existing and proposed features. The plan shall show the
following:
§ 220-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-20
1:265
[1] Watershed location. Provide a Key Map showing the
location of the development site within the watershed(s)
and watershed subarea(s). On all site drawings, show the
boundaries of the watershed(s) and subarea(s) as they are
located on the development site and identify watershed
name(s) and subarea number(s).
[2] Floodplain boundaries. Identify one-hundred-year
floodplains on the development site (as appropriate) based
on the Borough Flood Insurance Study Map.
[3] Natural features. Show all bodies of water (natural or
artificial), watercourses (permanent and intermittent),
swales, wetlands and other natural drainagecourses on the
development site or which will be affected by runoff from
the development.
[4] Soils. Provide an overlay showing soil types and
boundaries within the development site (consult county,
SCS and United States Geological Survey for information).
[5] Contours. Show existing and final contours at intervals of
two feet; in areas with slopes greater than 15%, five-foot
contour intervals may be used.
[6] Land cover. Show existing and final land cover
classifications as necessary to support and illustrate the
runoff calculations performed.
[7] Drainage area delineation. Show the boundaries of the
drainage areas employed in the runoff calculations
performed.
[8] Stormwater management controls. Show any existing
stormwater management or drainage controls and/or
structures, such as sanitary and storm sewers, swales,
culverts, etc., which are located on the development site or
which are located off site but will be affected by runoff
from the development.
(c) Professional certification. The stormwater management plan
(including all calculations) must be prepared and sealed by a
registered professional engineer, surveyor or landscape
architect with training and expertise in hydrology and
hydraulics. Documentation of qualifications may be required
by the Borough.
(d) Runoff calculations. Calculations for determining pre- and
post-development discharge rates and for designing proposed
stormwater control facilities must be submitted with the
stormwater management plan. All calculations shall be
§ 220-20 IRWIN CODE § 220-20
1:266
prepared using the methods and data prescribed by § 220-17
of this chapter.
(e) Stormwater controls. All proposed stormwater runoff control
measures must be shown on the plan, including methods for
collection, conveying and storing stormwater runoff on site,
which are to be used both during and after construction.
Erosion and sedimentation controls shall be shown in
accordance with applicable Borough and County Conservation
District requirements. The plan shall provide information on
the exact type, location, sizing, design and construction of all
proposed facilities and the relationship to the existing
watershed drainage system.
[1] If the development is to be constructed in stages, the
applicant must demonstrate that stormwater facilities will
be installed to manage stormwater runoff solely during
each stage of development.
[2] A schedule for the installation of all temporary and
permanent stormwater control measures and devices shall
be submitted.
[3] If appropriate, a justification should be submitted as to
why any preferred stormwater management techniques,
as listed in § 220-18, are not proposed for use.
(f) Easements, rights-of-way, deed restrictions. All existing and
proposed easements and rights-of-way for drainage and/or
access to stormwater control facilities shall be shown and the
proposed owner identified. Show any areas subject to special
deed restrictions relative to or affecting stormwater
management on the development site.
(g) Other permits/approvals. A list of any approvals/permits
relative to stormwater management required from other
governmental agencies (including DEP Chapters 105 and 106
permits53) and anticipated dates of submission/receipt should
be included with the stormwater plan submission. Copies of
permit applications may be requested by the Borough where
they may be helpful for the plan review.
(h) Maintenance program. The application shall contain a
proposed maintenance plan for all stormwater control facilities
in accordance with the following:
[1] Identify the proposed ownership entity (e.g., municipality,
property owner, private corporation, homeowners'
association, or other entity).
53.Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Chapters 105 and 106.
§ 220-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-20
1:267
§ 220-21. Plan submission.
Five copies of the SWM site plan shall be submitted as follows:
§ 220-22. Plan review.
[2] Include a maintenance program for all facilities, outlining
the type of maintenance activities, probable frequencies,
personnel and equipment and estimated annual
maintenance costs.
[3] Identify method of financing continuing operation and
maintenance if the facility is to be owned by other than the
Borough or governmental agency.
[4] Submit any legal agreement required to implement the
maintenance program and copies of the maintenance
agreement as required by this chapter.
(i) Financial guarantees. Submit financial guarantees in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
A. Two copies to the Borough.
B. One copy to the Borough Engineer.
C. One copy to the County Conservation District.
D. One copy to the County Planning Commission/Office.
A. SWM site plans shall be reviewed by the Borough for consistency with
the provisions of this chapter.
B. The Borough shall notify the applicant in writing within 45 days
whether the SWM site plan is approved or disapproved. If the SWM site
plan involves a subdivision and land development plan, the notification
shall occur within the time period allowed by the Municipalities
Planning Code (90 days).54 If a longer notification period is provided by
other statute, regulation, or ordinance, the applicant will be so notified
by the Borough.
C. For any SWM site plan that proposes to use any BMPs other than green
infrastructure and LID practices to achieve the volume and rate
controls required under this chapter, the Borough will not approve the
SWM site plan unless it determines that green infrastructure and LID
practices are not practicable.
D. If the Borough disapproves the SWM site plan, the Borough will state
the reasons for the disapproval in writing. The Borough also may
approve the SWM site plan with conditions and, if so, shall provide the
acceptable conditions for approval in writing.
54.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 220-20 IRWIN CODE § 220-22
1:268
E. Application process.
(1) Preapplication phase.
(a) Before submitting the stormwater plan, applicants are urged to
consult with the Borough, Westmoreland County Planning
Department and Westmoreland County Conservation District
on the requirements for safely managing from the development
site in a manner consistent with the Borough ordinances and
applicable watershed stormwater management plan. These
agencies may also be helpful in providing necessary data for
the stormwater management plan.
(b) Applicants are encouraged to submit a sketch plan with a
narrative description of the proposed stormwater management
controls for general guidance and discussion with the Borough
and other agencies.
(c) The preapplication phase is not mandatory; any review
comments provided by the Borough or other agencies are
advisory only and do not constitute any legally binding action
on the part of the Borough or any county agency.
(2) Stormwater plan reviews.
(a) Submission of plans. Stormwater plan applications shall be
submitted with the preliminary and final subdivision/land
development applications.
(b) Notification of affected municipalities. The Borough shall notify
municipalities upstream and downstream of the development
site which may be affected by the stormwater runoff and
proposed controls for the site. Copies of the plans will be made
available to the municipalities upon request. Comments
received from any affected municipality will be considered by
the Borough Engineer and county agencies in their reviews.
(c) Review by Borough Engineer and County Conservation
District. Stormwater plans shall be reviewed by the Borough
Engineer and County Conservation District. At its discretion,
the Borough and/or county may also engage other specialists in
hydrology or hydraulics to assist with the stormwater plan
review. The Conservation District will review the plan for
general compliance with the watershed plan standards and
criteria and watershed-wide impacts and, where appropriate,
may consult with adjacent counties for their comments. If the
Conservation District's review identifies the improper
application of the watershed standards and criteria or the
possibility of harmful impacts downstream from the
development site's proposed stormwater management system,
the applicant and the Borough Engineer will be notified so that
§ 220-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-22
1:269
§ 220-23. Modification of plans.
A modification to a submitted SWM site plan that involves a change in
SWM BMPs or techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of
SWM BMPs, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are not
as stated on the SWM site plan as determined by the Borough shall require
a resubmission of the modified SWM site plan in accordance with this
chapter. If the request for a plan modification is initiated after construction
is under way, the Borough Engineer shall have the authority to approve
or disapprove the modification based on field inspection, provided that the
requested changes in stormwater controls do not result in any modifications
to other approved Borough land use/development requirements (e.g.,
building setbacks, yards, etc.) and the performance standards in § 220-17
are met. Notification of the Engineer's action shall be sent to the Borough
Council, which may issue a stay of the plan modification within five days and
require the permittee to resubmit the plan modification for full stormwater
plan review in accordance with § 220-22 above.
the necessary modifications can be made to promote safe
stormwater management.
(d) Borough Engineer's review. The Borough Engineer shall
approve or disapprove the stormwater management plan
based on the requirements of the Borough ordinances, the
standards and criteria of the watershed plan and good
engineering practice. The Engineer shall submit a written
report, along with supporting documentation, stating their
reasons for approval or disapproval.
(e) Status of the Engineer's determination. The approval/
disapproval of the site's stormwater management plan by the
Borough Engineer shall be considered final. The Planning
Commission shall not reverse the Engineer's determination by
approving or disapproving the site's stormwater management
plan or any specific control measure in contradiction to the
Engineer's action. The Planning Commission may request
modifications or alternative approaches to the stormwater
management controls, provided that these are agreed to by the
Borough Engineer and the applicant's engineer.
(f) Permits required from other governmental agencies. Where
the proposed development requires an obstruction permit from
the Pennsylvania DEP or an erosion/sedimentation permit from
the Westmoreland County Conservation District, then final
stormwater management plan approval shall be conditional
upon receipt of such permits. However, no building permit
shall be issued, nor construction started, until the permits are
received and copies filed with the Borough.
§ 220-22 IRWIN CODE § 220-24
1:270
§ 220-24. Resubmission of disapproved SWM site plans.
A disapproved SWM site plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions
addressing the Borough's concerns, to the Borough in accordance with this
chapter. The applicable review fee must accompany a resubmission of a
disapproved SWM site plan.
§ 220-25. Authorization to construct and term of validity.
The Borough's approval of an SWM site plan authorizes the regulated
activities contained in the SWM site plan for a maximum term of validity
of five years following the date of approval. The Borough may specify a
term of validity shorter than five years in the approval for any specific SWM
site plan. Terms of validity shall commence on the date the municipality
signs the approval for an SWM site plan. If an approved SWM site plan is
not completed according to § 220-27 within the term of validity, then the
municipality may consider the SWM site plan disapproved and may revoke
any and all permits. SWM site plans that are considered disapproved by
the municipality shall be resubmitted in accordance with § 220-24 of this
chapter. If site development or building construction does not begin within
two years of the date of final approval of the stormwater management
plan, then before doing so, the applicant shall resubmit the stormwater
management plan to verify that no condition has changed within the
watershed that would affect the feasibility or effectiveness of the previously
approved stormwater management controls. Further, if for any reason
development activities are suspended for two years or more, then the same
requirements for resubmission of the stormwater management plan shall
apply.
§ 220-26. Inspections of stormwater management controls during
construction.
A. The Borough Engineer or a designated representative shall inspect the
construction of the temporary and permanent stormwater management
system for the development site. The permittee shall notify the
Engineer 48 hours in advance of the completion of the following key
development phases:
(1) At the completion of preliminary site preparation, including
stripping of vegetation, stockpiling of topsoil and construction of
temporary stormwater management and erosion control facilities.
(2) At the completion of rough grading but prior to placing topsoil,
permanent drainage or other site development improvements and
ground covers.
(3) During construction of the permanent stormwater facilities at such
times as specified by the Borough Engineer.
(4) Completion of permanent stormwater management facilities,
including established ground covers and plantings.
§ 220-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-26
1:271
§ 220-27. As-built plans, completion certificate, and final
inspection.
§ 220-28. Operations and maintenance: responsibilities of
developers and landowners.
(5) Completion of final grading, vegetative control measures or other
site restoration work done in accordance with the approved plan
and permit.
B. No work shall commence on any subsequent phase until the preceding
one has been inspected and approved. If there are deficiencies in any
phase, the Borough Engineer shall issue a written description of the
required corrections and stipulate the time by which they must be
made.
C. If, during construction, the contractor or permittee identifies any site
condition, such as subsurface soil conditions or alterations in
subsurface drainage, which could affect the feasibility of the approved
stormwater facilities, he/she shall notify the Borough Engineer within
24 hours of the discovery of such condition and request a field
inspection. The Borough Engineer shall determine if the condition
requires a stormwater plan modification.
D. In cases where stormwater facilities are to be installed in areas of
landslide-prone soils or other special site conditions exist, the Borough
may require special precautions such as soil tests and core borings, fulltime
inspectors and/or similar measures. All costs of any such measures
shall be borne by the permittee.
A. The developer shall be responsible for providing as-built plans of all
SWM BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan. The as-built plans
and an explanation of any discrepancies with the construction plans
shall be submitted to the municipality.
B. The as-built submission shall include a certification of completion
signed by a qualified professional verifying that all permanent SWM
BMPs have been constructed according to the approved plans and
specifications. The latitude and longitude coordinates for all permanent
SWM BMPs must also be submitted, at the central location of the BMPs.
If any licensed qualified professionals contributed to the construction
plans, then a licensed qualified professional must sign the completion
certificate.
C. After receipt of the completion certification by the municipality, the
municipality may conduct a final inspection.
A. The Borough shall make the final determination on the continuing
maintenance responsibilities prior to final approval of the SWM site
plan. The Borough may require a dedication of such facilities as part of
the requirements for approval of the SWM site plan. Such a
§ 220-26 IRWIN CODE § 220-28
1:272
§ 220-29. Operation and maintenance agreements.
requirement is not an indication that the Borough will accept the
facilities. The Borough reserves the right to accept or reject the
ownership and operating responsibility for any portion of the
stormwater management controls.
B. Facilities, areas, or structures used as SWM BMPs shall be enumerated
as permanent real estate appurtenances and recorded as deed
restrictions or conservation easements that run with the land.
C. The O&M plan shall be recorded as a restrictive deed covenant that
runs with the land.
D. The Borough may take enforcement actions against an owner for any
failure to satisfy the provisions of this chapter.
A. Maintenance responsibilities.
(1) The stormwater management plan for the development site shall
contain an operation and maintenance plan prepared by the
developer and approved by the Borough Engineer. The operation
and maintenance plan shall outline required routine maintenance
actions and schedules necessary to insure proper operation of the
facility(ies).
(2) The stormwater management plan for the development site shall
establish responsibilities for the continuing operation and
maintenance of all proposed stormwater control facilities,
consistent with the following principles:
(a) If a development consists of structures or lots which are to be
separately owned and in which streets, sewers, and other
public improvements are to be dedicated to the Borough,
stormwater control facilities should also be dedicated to and
maintained by the Borough.
(b) If a development site is to be maintained in single ownership or
if sewers and other public improvements are to be privately
owned and maintained, then the ownership and maintenance
of stormwater control facilities should be the responsibility of
the owner or private management entity.
(3) Borough Council, upon recommendation of the Borough Engineer,
shall make the final determination on the continuing maintenance
responsibilities prior to final approval of the stormwater
management plan. Borough Council reserves the right to accept
the ownership and operating responsibility for any or all of the
stormwater management controls.
B. Prior to final approval of the SWM site plan, the property owner shall
sign and record an operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement (see
§ 220-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-29
1:273
§ 220-30. Performance guarantee.
Appendix A)55 covering all stormwater control facilities which are to be
privately owned.
(1) The owner, successor and assigns shall maintain all facilities in
accordance with the approved maintenance schedule in the O&M
agreement.
(2) The owner shall convey to the Borough conservation easements to
assure access for periodic inspections by the Borough and
maintenance, as necessary.
(3) The owner shall keep on file with the Borough the name, address,
and telephone number of the person or company responsible for
maintenance activities; in the event of a change, new information
shall be submitted by the owner to the Borough within 10 working
days of the change.
C. The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance (O&M) of the
SWM BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the O&M agreement, the
Borough may perform the services required and charge the owner
appropriate fees. Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the
property.
A. Guarantee of completion. A completion guarantee in the form of a bond,
cash deposit, certified check or other negotiable securities acceptable
to the Borough shall be filed. The guarantee shall cover all streets,
sanitary sewers, stormwater management facilities, water systems, fire
hydrants, sidewalks and other required improvements; it shall be in the
amount and form prescribed by the Municipalities Planning Code
(Section 509).56
B. Release of completion guarantee. The completion guarantee shall be
returned or released upon written certification by the Borough
Engineer or a designated agent that improvements and facilities have
been installed and completed in accordance with the approved plan and
specifications. The procedures for requesting and obtaining a release of
the completion guarantee shall be in a manner prescribed by the
Municipalities Planning Code (Section 510).57
C. Default of completion guarantee. If improvements are not installed in
accordance with the approved final plan, the Borough Council may
enforce any corporate bond or other security by appropriate, legal and
equitable remedies. If proceeds of such bond or other security are
insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections
to all the improvements covered by said security, the Borough Council
55.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
56.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10509.
57.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10510.
§ 220-29 IRWIN CODE § 220-30
1:274
§ 220-31. Post-construction requirements.
may, at its option, install part of such improvements in all or part
of the development and may institute appropriate legal or equitable
action to recover the monies necessary to complete the remainder of
the improvements. All proceeds, whether resulting from the security
or from any legal or equitable action brought against the developer,
or both, shall be used solely for the installation of the improvements
covered by such security and not for any other municipal purpose.
D. Dedication of public improvements.
(1) When streets, sanitary sewers, stormwater management facilities,
waterlines or other required improvements in the development
have been completed in accordance with the final approved plan,
such improvements shall be deemed private until such time as they
have been offered for dedication to the Borough and accepted by
separate ordinance or resolution or until they have been
condemned for use as a public facility.
(2) Prior to acceptance of any improvement or facility, the Borough
Engineer shall inspect to ensure that it is constructed in
accordance with the approved plan and is functioning properly. In
the case of any stormwater control facility, it must be free of
sediment and debris.
(3) The owner shall submit as-built plans for all facilities proposed for
dedication.
E. Maintenance guarantee. Prior to acceptance of any improvements or
facilities, the applicant shall provide a financial security to secure the
structural integrity and functioning of the improvements. The security
shall be in the form of a bond, cash, certified check or other negotiable
securities acceptable to the Borough; be for a term of 18 months; and
be in an amount equal to 15% of the actual cost of the improvements
and facilities so dedicated.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Borough shall
commence until approval by the Borough of a plan, which demonstrates
compliance with state water quality requirements after construction, is
complete.
B. The BMPs must be designed to protect and maintain existing uses (e.g.,
drinking water use; cold-water fishery use) and maintain the level of
water quality necessary to protect those uses in all streams and to
protect and maintain water quality in special protection streams, as
required by statewide regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93
(collectively referred to herein as "state water quality requirements").
C. To control post-construction stormwater impacts from regulated earth
disturbance activities, state water quality requirements can be met by
BMPs, including site design, which provide for replication of
§ 220-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-31
1:275
§ 220-32. Fees and expenses.
preconstruction stormwater infiltration and runoff conditions, so that
post-construction stormwater discharges do not degrade the physical,
chemical or biological characteristics of the receiving waters. As
described in the DEP Comprehensive Stormwater Management Policy
(No. 392-0300-002, September 28, 2002), this may be achieved by the
following:
(1) Infiltration: replication of preconstruction stormwater infiltration
conditions;
(2) Treatment: use of water quality treatment BMPs to ensure the
filtering out of chemical and physical pollutants from the
stormwater runoff; and
(3) Stream bank and streambed protection: management of volume
and rate of post-construction stormwater discharges to prevent
physical degradation of receiving waters (e.g., from scouring and
erosion).
D. DEP has regulations that require municipalities to ensure design,
implementation and maintenance of best management practices
(BMPs) that control runoff from new development and redevelopment
(hereinafter "development") after regulated earth disturbance activities
are complete. These requirements include the need to implement postconstruction
stormwater BMPs with assurance of long-term operations
and maintenance of those BMPs.
E. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate DEP regional office or County
Conservation District must be provided to the Borough. The issuance of
an NPDES construction permit [or permit coverage under the statewide
general permit (PAG-2)] satisfies the requirements of Subsection A.
A. The Borough may include all costs incurred in the review fee charged to
an applicant. The review fee may include, but not be limited to, costs for
the following:
(1) Administrative/clerical processing.
(2) Review of the SWM site plan.
(3) Attendance at meetings.
(4) Inspections.
B. Fee schedule. The Borough Council may adopt by resolution from time
to time a reasonable schedule of fees to cover the cost of plan reviews,
inspections and other activities necessary to administer the provisions
of this chapter. All fees shall be set in accordance with the applicable
provisions of the Municipalities Planning Code,58 and any dispute over
§ 220-31 IRWIN CODE § 220-32
1:276
§ 220-33. Prohibited discharges and connections.
the fee amount shall be resolved in the manner prescribed by the
Municipalities Planning Code.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water, to enter a regulated small MS4 or to enter
the surface waters of this commonwealth is prohibited.
B. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the separate storm sewer system which has not been
documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the
Borough.
C. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into a regulated
small MS4, or discharges into waters of this commonwealth, which are
not composed entirely of stormwater, except 1) as provided in
Subsection D below and 2) discharges authorized under a state or
federal permit.
D. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution of a regulated small MS4 or to
the waters of this commonwealth:
(1) Discharges or flows from firefighting activities.
(2) Discharges from potable water sources, including waterline
flushing and fire hydrant flushing, if such discharges do not contain
detectable concentrations of total residual chlorine (TRC).
(3) Noncontaminated irrigation water, water from lawn maintenance,
landscape drainage and flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(4) Diverted stream flows and springs.
(5) Noncontaminated pumped groundwater and water from foundation
and footing drains and crawl space pumps.
(6) Noncontaminated HVAC condensation and water from geothermal
systems.
(7) Residential (i.e., not commercial) vehicle wash water where
cleaning agents are not utilized.
(8) Noncontaminated hydrostatic test water discharges, if such
discharges do not contain detectable concentrations of TRC.
E. In the event that the Borough or DEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection D significantly contribute pollutants
to a regulated small MS4 or to the waters of this commonwealth, the
58.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 220-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-33
1:277
§ 220-34. Roof drains and sump pumps.
Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration or vegetative
BMPs wherever feasible.
§ 220-35. Alteration of SWM BMPs.
No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any SWM BMPs,
facilities, areas, or structures that were installed as a requirement of this
chapter without the written approval of the Borough.
§ 220-36. Right of entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Borough or its designated
agent may enter at reasonable times upon any property within the
municipality to inspect the condition of the stormwater structures and
facilities in regard to any aspect regulated by this chapter.
§ 220-37. Inspection.
§ 220-38. Enforcement.
municipality or DEP will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the
discharge.
A. The landowner or the owner's designee (including the Borough for
dedicated and owned facilities) shall inspect SWM BMPs, facilities and/
or structures installed under this chapter according to the following
frequencies, at a minimum, to ensure the BMPs, facilities and/or
structures continue to function as intended:
(1) Annually for the first five years.
(2) Once every three years thereafter.
(3) During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year or greater
storm.
B. Inspections should be conducted during or immediately following
precipitation events. A written inspection report shall be created to
document each inspection. The inspection report shall contain the date
and time of the inspection, the individual(s) who completed the
inspection, the location of the BMP, facility or structure inspected,
observations on performance, and recommendations for improving
performance, if applicable. Inspection reports shall be submitted to the
Borough within 30 days following completion of the inspection.
A. It shall be unlawful for a person to undertake any regulated activity
except as provided in an approved SWM site plan, unless specifically
exempted in § 220-13.
B. It shall be unlawful to violate § 220-34 of this chapter.
§ 220-33 IRWIN CODE § 220-38
1:278
§ 220-39. Suspension and revocation.
C. Inspections regarding compliance with the SWM site plan are a
responsibility of the municipality.
A. Any approval or permit issued by the municipality pursuant to this
chapter, or any other chapter of this Borough Code, may be suspended
or revoked for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approved SWM site plan or O&M agreement.
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule, or regulation relating to the regulated activity.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
the regulated activity which constitutes or creates a hazard,
nuisance or pollution, or endangers the life or property of others.
B. A suspended approval may be reinstated by the municipality when:
(1) The municipality has inspected and approved the corrections to the
violations that caused the suspension.
(2) The municipality is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
C. An approval that has been revoked by the municipality cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the
provisions of this chapter.
D. If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health, or
property, at its sole discretion, the Borough may provide a limited time
period for the owner to correct the violation. In these cases, the
Borough will provide the owner, or the owner's designee, with a written
notice of the violation and the time period allowed for the owner to
correct the violation. If the owner does not correct the violation within
the allowed time period, the Borough may revoke or suspend any, or all,
applicable approvals and permits pertaining to any provision of this
chapter.
E. In accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code (Section 515.1),59
the Borough may refuse to issue any permit or grant approval to further
improve or develop any property which has been developed in violation
of this chapter.
F. Additional remedies. In addition to the above remedies, the Borough
may also seek remedies and penalties under applicable Pennsylvania
statutes, or regulations adopted pursuant thereto, including but not
limited to the Storm Water Management Act (32 P.S. §§ 680.1 to 680.17)
and the erosion and sedimentation regulations (25 Pa. Code Chapter
102). Any activity conducted in violation of this chapter or any
59.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 515.1.
§ 220-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-39
1:279
§ 220-40. Violations and penalties.
§ 220-41. Appeals.
§ 220-42. References.
Pennsylvania-approved watershed stormwater management plan may
be declared a public nuisance by the Borough and abatable as such.
Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $500 for each violation, recoverable with costs and
reasonable attorneys fees. Each day that the violation continues shall
be a separate offense, and penalties shall be cumulative.
B. In addition, the Borough may institute injunctive, mandamus, or any
other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the
enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall
have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Borough or its designee,
relevant to the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the Borough
within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Borough, relevant to the
provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the Westmoreland County
Court of Common Pleas within 30 days of the Borough's decision.
A. U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Resources Conservation
Service (NRCS). National Engineering Handbook. Part 630: Hydrology,
1969-2001. Originally published as the National Engineering
Handbook, Section 4: Hydrology. Available from the NRCS online at
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/.
B. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation
Service. 1986. Technical Release 55: Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, 2nd Edition. Washington, D.C.
C. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No.
363-0300-002 (December 2006), as amended and updated.
Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual.
Harrisburg, PA.
D. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No.
363-2134-008 (March 31, 2012), as amended and updated. Erosion and
Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual. Harrisburg, PA.
E. U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, National Weather Service, Hydrometeorological Design
Studies Center. 2004-2006. Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United
§ 220-39 IRWIN CODE § 220-42
1:280
Chapter 225
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 95.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 110.
Grading and excavation — See Ch. 140.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
230.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 248.
States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0, Silver Spring, Maryland.
Internet address: http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
§ 220-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-42
1:281

ARTICLE I
Throwing Objects in Streets
[Adopted 9-14-1959 by Ord. No. 373 (Ch. 6, Part 5, of the 1993
Code)]
§ 225-1. Prohibited acts.
Ball playing, including the throwing, kicking or knocking of any ball,
snowballing, and the throwing of any stone or other missile of any kind
upon or onto any of the public streets, alleys or sidewalks in the Borough is
hereby prohibited.
§ 225-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-12-1975 by Ord. No.
609; 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600, and
costs, and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment
for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 225-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-2
1:283

ARTICLE II
Sidewalk and Curb Construction and Repair
[Adopted 9-14-1959 by Ord. No. 377 (Ch. 21, Part 3, of the 1993
Code)]
§ 225-3. Construction by property owner upon notice.
Every owner of property in the Borough shall, on 20 days' notice from
the Borough Council, construct a sidewalk and/or construct a curb, which
shall conform to all applicable requirements of this article, in front of or
alongside such property.
§ 225-4. Repair by property owner upon notice. [Amended
5-12-1975 by Ord. No. 612; 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
§ 225-5. Construction materials.
All sidewalks and curbs shall be constructed, reconstructed and repaired of
concrete only, according to specifications determined from time to time by
the Borough Council. Provided, where the existing sidewalk is of brick or
flagstone and at least 2/3 of such sidewalk is in good repair, such sidewalk
may be repaired with brick or flagstone, as the case may be, as used in the
original construction. Provided, further, that Council may, at its discretion,
authorize the use of material other than concrete in the construction,
reconstruction or repair of any sidewalk, where the owner of the property
shall request authority for the use of such material.
§ 225-6. Width of sidewalk.
All sidewalks hereafter constructed or reconstructed in the Borough shall
be not less than six feet wide and not more than 10 feet wide, except that
Council may authorize a sidewalk width of less than six feet in special cases
which the nature of the terrain or the width of the street may make a wider
sidewalk impracticable.
A. Every owner of property in the Borough shall, on 30 days' notice from
the Borough Council, repair the sidewalk and/or curb in front of and/or
alongside such property in the manner stipulated in such notice.
B. Where, in the opinion of the Borough Manager or other designated
official, a dangerous condition exists that can be repaired by an
expenditure of $500, the Borough shall send such property owner
notice, by registered or certified mail, stating emergency repairs are
required. Upon failure of such owner to comply with the notice within
48 hours after receiving it, the Borough may make emergency repairs
and levy the cost of its work on such owner as a property lien to be
collected in the manner provided by law.
§ 225-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-7
1:285
§ 225-7. Conformity to line and grade.
All sidewalks and all curbs shall be constructed, and the grading therefor
shall be done, upon the line and grade obtained by the property owner from
the Manager, and not otherwise.
§ 225-8. Supervision and inspection of work. [Amended 5-12-1975
by Ord. No. 61260]
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Manager or his designated
representative to determine, in the case of any individual property, whether
or not the sidewalk and/or curb shall be constructed or repaired. At least
two days prior to commencement of such work, it shall be the duty of the
owner of the property where the work is to be done to notify the Manager
or his designated representative of that fact so that he or his designated
representative can visit the site of the work in order to ascertain whether
the work is being done according to requirements. Within two days after the
completion of the work, the Manager or his designated representative shall
inspect the sidewalk and/or curb to determine whether all requirements of
this article were adhered to in such work.
§ 225-9. Voluntary construction by property owner. [Amended
5-12-1975 by Ord. No. 612]
Any property owner, upon his own initiative, and without notice from any
Borough authority, may construct a sidewalk and/or curb in front of and/or
alongside his property, provided that he shall first notify the Council, make
application to the Manager for the correct line and grade for such sidewalk
and/or curb, and conform to the requirements of this article as to line and
grade and as to materials used and to § 225-8 of this article.
§ 225-10. Work performed by Borough; costs. [Amended 5-12-1975
by Ord. No. 61261]
Whenever any property owner shall fail to construct, reconstruct or repair
any sidewalk and/or curb within the time limit specified in this article or,
having undertaken to construct, reconstruct or repair any sidewalk and/or
curb, either upon his own initiative or following his notice from the Borough
to do so, shall fail to conform strictly to the proper line and grade and to
all other requirements or to repair or correct any deficiency, the Borough
may cause the work to be done at the cost of such property owner and may
collect the cost thereof and 10% additional, together with all charges and
expenses, from such property owner and may file a municipal claim therefor
or collect the same by action in assumpsit.
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-7 IRWIN CODE § 225-10
1:286
ARTICLE III
Obstructions on Streets and Sidewalks
[Adopted 9-14-1959 by Ord. No. 379 (Ch. 21, Part 5, of the 1993
Code)]
§ 225-11. Definitions; word usage. [Amended 5-12-1975 by Ord. No.
614]
§ 225-12. Placement and maintenance of obstructions restricted.
[Amended 11-13-2019 by Ord. No. 985]
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, municipal
authority, firm or corporation.
B. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and the neuter.
A. No person shall place or maintain any obstruction upon any street, alley
or sidewalk, except as the same may be specifically authorized in this
article or any other ordinance of the Borough, provided that nothing
herein shall apply to or limit the lawful use of streets and alleys for
vehicular travel and the parking of vehicles.
B. It shall be lawful to place and allow to be placed tables, shelves and/or
clothing racks, not exceeding 30 inches in depth and five feet in length,
on the sidewalks in the C-B-R District for the purpose of trade, sale or
offering for sale. Upon approval of an application submitted to the
zoning officer or their designee stating the size and dimensions of the
table, shelf and/or clothing rack, each business shall be permitted to
place tables, shelves, and/or racks to be placed against the main wall of
the building wherein said business is located, such tables, shelves, and/
or racks to be removed at the close of each business day. Said tables,
shelves, and/or racks shall only be permitted where the sidewalk has a
level grade and the sidewalk improvements are wide enough to
maintain a pedestrian walkway width of at least five feet on Main Street
and Oak Street and four feet on all other streets.
C. Cafe sidewalk dining.
(1) Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
RESTAURANT — As defined in the Borough of Irwin Code § 260-9,
and shall be inclusive of all breweries, wineries, meaderies and
similar establishments. This definition shall exclude places that are
exempt from the smoking prohibitions of the Pennsylvania Clean
Indoor Air Act.62
62.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 637.1 et seq.
§ 225-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-12
1:287
SIDEWALK AREA — That portion of the Borough street right-of-way
reserved for sidewalks.
SIDEWALK CAFE — An outdoor dining area operated by a
restaurant located on a sidewalk area or other designated public
place and containing removable tables, chairs, plants and related
appurtenances, which does not encroach upon the pedestrian
walkway as established under the Borough of Irwin Code. It shall
not be enclosed by fixed railings, walls or other improvements, and
shall be open to the air.
(2) Cafe sidewalk dining shall be permissible if in compliance with the
following requirements:
(a) Sidewalk dining shall be an accessory to and extension of a
lawful and permitted restaurant, pursuant to the Borough of
Irwin Code and all other applicable provisions, located within
the C-B-R District. Said sidewalk dining area shall be located
on the same parcel as the restaurant, shall be abutting the
restaurant, and said area shall have direct access to the
interior of the restaurant through a door for use by the public.
Alcohol may be sold to and consumed by patrons in the
sidewalk dining area if the restaurant has a valid license for
the sale and/or on-site consumption of alcoholic beverages, as
issued by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board.
(b) The restaurant must obtain a cafe sidewalk dining permit from
the Borough. The cafe sidewalk dining permit shall be subject
to an application and inspection fee of $50, which may be
changed from time to time through way of resolution and
identified in the Borough fee schedule.
(c) Cafe sidewalk dining shall only be permitted where the
sidewalk has a level grade and the sidewalk improvements are
wide enough to maintain a pedestrian walkway width of at
least five feet on Main Street and Oak Street and four feet on
all other streets. The sidewalk dining area shall be separated
from the remainder of the sidewalk by temporary barriers,
such as through the use of temporary stations with retractable
belts or ropes.
(d) Smoking shall not be permitted in cafe sidewalk dining areas.
(e) The possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages in the
cafe sidewalk dining area shall be permitted, if lawfully sold by
the restaurant pursuant to the appropriate and necessary
permits and licenses as issued by the commonwealth and the
municipality. Persons shall not be in violation of the Borough of
Irwin Code §§ 80-2 and 80-3 solely by virtue of their possession
and consumption of alcoholic beverages in compliance with
this Code and within the cafe sidewalk dining area. Said
alcoholic beverages may not leave the cafe sidewalk dining
§ 225-12 IRWIN CODE § 225-12
1:288
§ 225-13. Temporary use of sidewalk for loading and unloading.
Any person engaged in delivering any goods, wares or merchandise to any
property abutting upon any sidewalk or in removing any personal property
of any nature or character whatsoever from such property may temporarily,
for a total period of not more than one hour, place such goods, wares or
merchandise, or other personal property, upon such sidewalk, as close as
possible to the curb, to facilitate the loading or unloading of the same. The
occupant of such property, or the owner thereof where such property is
not occupied, shall be responsible for adhering to the requirements of this
section, and any failure to conform to such requirements shall constitute a
violation of this article.
§ 225-14. Obstructions during sidewalk work. [Amended 5-12-1975
by Ord. No. 614; 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
Any person engaged in the construction, reconstruction or repair of any
sidewalk and/or curb may obstruct such sidewalk and the portion of the
street directly abutting the same, where there is not sufficient space upon
the sidewalk, with materials, tools and supplies used in the work of
construction, reconstruction or repair of the sidewalk and/or curb and may
block off such sidewalk and/or street where necessary for the protection
of the public and the pursuance of such work, provided a permit for such
obstruction shall first be obtained from the Manager, the fee for which shall
be in an amount as established, from time to time, by resolution of the
Borough Council; and provided, further, every such obstruction, whether
comprising material, tools, supplies or blocked-off portions of the sidewalk
and street, shall be adequately guarded and blocked off and, between
sunset and sunrise, shall be indicated by one or more warning lights.
area, unless they are brought into the restaurant. Should a
patron of the restaurant who is possessing and/or consuming
alcoholic beverages become an annoyance to peaceable
persons nearby or traveling upon any street, alley or sidewalk,
they shall be subject to the provisions of the Borough of Irwin
Code §§ 80-2 and 80-3.
(f) All items placed by the restaurant in the cafe sidewalk dining
area shall be temporary in nature. All patrons must be seated
at tables. There shall be no standing room. Live entertainment
shall be prohibited in the cafe sidewalk dining area. Lighting
shall not create glare for pedestrians and motorists. Nothing
may be permanently affixed to the sidewalk or exterior of the
building to accommodate cafe sidewalk dining. All items
placed in the cafe sidewalk area must be removed when the
restaurant is not in operation. No items may be placed in such
a position as to block the expedient entry of or exit from the
restaurant or the cafe sidewalk dining area.
§ 225-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-15
1:289
§ 225-15. Permit to disturb sidewalk. [Amended 5-12-1975 by Ord.
No. 614; 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
Any person desiring to open or disturb the surface of any sidewalk, for any
purpose whatsoever, shall first obtain a permit therefor from the Manager,
for which there shall be a fee in an amount as established, from time
to time, by resolution of the Borough Council. The permit shall state any
safety requirements, the manner of reconstruction and an expiration date.
Provided, no other permit required by this article shall be necessary.
§ 225-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-12-1975 by Ord. No.
614; 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600, and
costs, and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment
for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 225-15 IRWIN CODE § 225-16
1:290
ARTICLE IV
Underground Installations
[Adopted 5-8-1967 by Ord. No. 7-1967; amended in its entirety
5-12-1975 by Ord. No. 624 (Ch. 21, Part 6, of the 1993 Code)]
§ 225-17. Map to be filed; updating.
§ 225-18. Abandoned facilities.
A. Every person owning, using, controlling or having an interest in pipes,
conduits, ducts, or other structures under the surface of any street used
for the purpose of supplying or conveying gas, electricity,
communication impulses, water or steam to or from the Borough, or to
or from premises of its inhabitants, or for any other purposes, shall file
with the Manager of the Borough, within 120 days after the adoption of
this article, a map or set of maps, each drawn to a scale of not less than
one inch to 200 feet, showing the location, size and description of all
such installations.
B. Within 30 days after the first day of January of each and every year,
such person shall file with the Manager of the Borough a corrected map
or set of maps, each drawn to scale as above, showing such
installations, including all those made during the previous year;
however, if no additions have been made to its installation during the
previous year, a utility company or authority may file with the Manager
a written statement to that effect, within the period of time specified
above. A utility company or authority may, at its own option, elect to
provide corrected atlas sheets throughout the year as they are available
rather than proceed as above noted.
A. Whenever any pipe, conduit, duct channel, or other structure located
under the surface of any street, or the use thereof, is abandoned, the
person owning, using, controlling or having an interest therein shall,
within 30 days after such abandonment, file with the Manager a
statement in writing, giving in detail the location of the structures so
abandoned.
B. Each map, or set of maps, filed pursuant to the provisions of this article,
shall show in detail the location of all such structures abandoned
subsequent to the filing of the last preceding map or set of maps.
C. When the Borough plans to pave or improve streets in which there are
abandoned facilities, the owner of such facilities shall be notified to
remove them if, in the opinion of the Council, their removal is in the
best interest of the Borough. If the owner shall refuse to remove such
facilities, the Borough shall remove the abandoned facilities, and the
owner shall reimburse the Borough for such removal.
§ 225-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-19
1:291
§ 225-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No.
791]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600, and
costs, and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment
for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 225-19 IRWIN CODE § 225-19
1:292
ARTICLE V
Construction Requirements for Acceptance of Streets
[Adopted 8-11-1975 by Ord. No. 638 (Ch. 21, Part 1, of the 1993
Code)]
§ 225-20. Acceptance of certain streets. [Amended 8-8-2002 by Ord.
No. 847; 3-10-2004 by Ord. No. 860]
No street shall be accepted by the Borough unless all of the requirements
and provisions of this article shall first have been complied with.
§ 225-21. Excavating and grading. [Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No.
791]
A. The Borough hereby accepts and dedicates, for purposes of use,
maintenance and liquid fuels allocations, that certain roadway situate
within the Borough, commonly referred to as "Melrose Avenue," for its
entire distance between Brush Hill Road and Seminole Street, the same
consisting of a distance of approximately 597 feet in length, containing
approximately 19 feet in width of pavement and containing a thirty-foot
right-of-way therein as depicted on that certain drawing, a copy of
which is incorporated herein by reference, attached to this section and
marked "Exhibit A."63
B. The Borough hereby accepts and dedicates, for purposes of use,
maintenance and liquid fuels allocations, a portion of a certain street,
commonly known as "Oakmont Street," between U.S. Route 30 and the
boundary line common to the Borough of Irwin and North Huntington
Township, being approximately 201 feet in length, containing
approximately 18 feet in width of pavement, and containing a fifty-foot
right-of-way therein. A copy of the drawing of the aforementioned
portion of a certain street commonly known as "Oakmont Street" is
incorporated herein by reference, attached to this section and marked
"Exhibit A."64
A. The excavation and/or grading must be carried the full width of the
street right-of-way, with a maximum two-to-one slope at the extremities.
B. The subgrade must be well drained at all times to prevent soaking in
case of rain, and when spongy or unsuitable subgrade areas are
encountered, the earth causing the condition must be removed and
replaced with suitable fill, well tamped or rolled, and must comply with
the latest specifications of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation. Six-inch subgrade drains must be installed under each
edge of the pavement, and the drainage from the subgrade drains must
be drained away from the road area and disposed of in an inlet or
approved drainageway.
63.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Borough offices.
64.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 225-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-22
1:293
§ 225-22. Specifications. [Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
§ 225-23. Curb inlets and storm sewers.
The curb inlets shall conform to the latest specifications of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation. The curb inlets and storm sewers must be
installed at locations designated by the Borough and of sufficient size and
number to properly drain the roadway or street to be constructed. Separate
specifications will be furnished for this operation.
§ 225-24. Rights-of-way and cartways.
Rights-of-way shall be at least 50 feet. Cartways are to be a width of not less
than 28 feet. Curb specifications and sidewalk construction specifications
are to be determined by Council at the time of approval or adoption of the
developer's proposed plans.
A. The subgrade shall be uniformly covered with a fine material which may
include approved granulated slag or the equivalent stone to form a bed
or filler, prior to placing the coarse material, and shall be two inches
thick.
B. The base course shall consist of eight inches of compacted, crushed,
aggregate, thoroughly choked with dry fines or screenings, then rolled,
along with a four-inch bituminous surface course consisting of a threeinch
binder and a one-inch wearing surface, or as an alternate method,
use a four-inch subbase along with a six-inch black base and one-inch
wearing surface. Either method of construction is to comply with the
latest specifications of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation,
Form 408.
C. Finished course must be placed in two courses. The first course is to be
approved binder; the second, a finish course or approved wearing
course and rolled between courses by an approved roller.
§ 225-22 IRWIN CODE § 225-24
1:294
ARTICLE VI
Street Excavations
[Adopted 8-14-2019 by Ord. No. 98465]
§ 225-25. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates otherwise:
APPLICANT — Any person who makes application for a permit. For the
purposes of this chapter, any public utility company or municipal authority
required to obtain a permit shall be considered the applicant. An application
shall not be submitted in the name of contractors of the public utility
company or municipal authority.
BLOCK — A section of a street between two cross streets, or 800 feet of
street, whichever is less.
EMERGENCY — Any unforeseen circumstances or occurrence, the
existence of which constitutes a clear and immediate danger to persons or
properties.
ENGINEER — The duly appointed Borough Engineer of the Borough of
Irwin or its authorized representative.
EXCAVATION — Any activity within the right-of-way of any street which
involves cutting, breaking, crossing (either laterally or longitudinally),
drilling, grading, digging, or disturbing the earth or other material making
up the surface or subsurface of any street. In this chapter, the term
"opening" shall have the same meaning as excavation.
MANAGER — The Manager of the Borough of Irwin or his or her authorized
representative, including without limitation the Borough Engineer or the
Superintendent of Public Works.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Irwin.
NEWLY IMPROVED STREET — A street constructed and/or improved within
the past five years, including base and surfacing of either concrete or
asphalt and reconstructed streets surfaced with at least a one-and-onequarter-
inch top of asphalt.
PERMITTEE — Any applicant who has been issued a permit and has agreed
to fulfill all the terms of this chapter.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm, association, corporation
or municipal authority.
PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY — The Western Westmoreland Municipal
Authority, the Municipal Authority of Westmoreland County, or any company
subject to the jurisdiction of and control by the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission.
65.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. VI, Street Excavations, adopted
5-12-1975 by Ord. No. 639 (Ch. 21, Part 2, of the 1993 Code), as amended.
§ 225-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-25
1:295
STREET — A public street, public easement, right-of-way, public highway,
public alley, public way or public road accepted or maintained by the
municipality or open for travel and use by the public, whether or not so
accepted or maintained, including the entire area within the right-of-way
thereof.
§ 225-26. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any tunnel, opening, or
excavation of any kind in or under the surface of any street without first
securing a permit from the Manager for each separate undertaking;
provided, however, any person maintaining pipes, lines or other
underground facilities in or under the surface of any street may proceed
with an opening without a permit when emergency circumstances demand
the work to be done immediately, provided the permit could not reasonably
and practically have been obtained beforehand. The person shall thereafter
apply for a permit on the first regular business day on which the office of
the Manager is open for business, and said permit shall be retroactive to
the date when the work was begun. In all cases where emergency openings
are necessary, the Police Department shall be notified prior to such opening.
All inspections of permitted work shall be concluded by the Department of
Public Works or their designee, as appropriate.
§ 225-26.1. Street openings limited.
No person to whom a permit has been granted shall perform any of the work
authorized by such permit in any amount greater than that specified in the
permit, except that where the permittee desires to perform additional work
not in excess of an amount greater than 10% of the amount specified in the
permit, the permittee may apply to the Manager for an amended permit to
permit additional work. If the additional work desired to be performed by
the permittee exceeds 10% of the amount specified in the original permit,
an application for a new permit shall be made. Any deposit or bond posted
in connection with the original permit shall be deemed to cover any such
additional work as may be added pursuant to the issuance of an amended
permit within the limit specified herein.
§ 225-26.2. Commencement of work.
Work for which a permit has been issued shall commence within 30 days
after the issuance of the permit therefor. If not so commenced, the permit
shall be terminated automatically unless the permittee applies for an
extension of time within which to commence work. If such an extension is
granted, the original permit shall remain in force for the period of time
specified in the extension. Permits which terminate by reason of failure
to commence work within 30 days after issuance or within any extension
of time granted hereunder may be renewed only upon the payment of an
additional permit fee as originally required. Permits shall be issued for a
period not to exceed one year, and any application to renew an expired
§ 225-25 IRWIN CODE § 225-26.2
1:296
permit shall be treated as a new application, including the payment of a new
permit fee.
§ 225-26.3. Permits nontransferable.
Permits are not transferable from one person to another, and the work
shall not be performed in any place other than the location specifically
designated in the permit.
§ 225-26.4. Expiration of permits.
Every permit shall expire at the end of the period of time which shall be
set out in the permit. If the permittee shall be unable to complete the work
within the specified time, he shall, prior to expiration of the permit, present
in writing to the Manager a request for an extension of time, setting forth
therein the reasons for the requested extension. If the Manager finds that
the failure to complete the work under the permit within the time specified
therein was due to circumstances reasonably beyond the control of the
permittee and that an extension of time to complete the work under the
permit is necessary and not contrary to the public interest, the permittee
may be granted additional time for the completion of the work.
§ 225-26.5. Rights of municipality.
Every permit shall be granted subject to the right of the municipality or of
any other person entitled thereto to use the street for any purpose for which
such street may lawfully be used not inconsistent with the permit.
§ 225-26.6. Revocation of permits.
A. Any permit may be revoked by the Manager or his duly authorized
representative, after notice to the permittee, for:
(1) Violation of any condition of the permit or of any provision of this
chapter;
(2) Violation of any other applicable provisions of the Borough of Irwin
Code, or any law relating to the work;
(3) Existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting or
creating a nuisance or endangering the life or property of others.
B. A permittee shall be granted a period of three days from the date of the
notice to correct the violation and to proceed with the diligent
prosecution of the work authorized by the permit before said permit is
revoked.
C. Written notice of any such violation or condition shall be served upon
the permittee or his agent engaged in the work. The notice shall contain
a brief statement of the reasons for revoking the permit. Notice may be
given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or
§ 225-26.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-26.6
1:297
§ 225-27. Duties and responsibilities of applicants.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of any applicant to:
§ 225-27.1. Duties and responsibilities of permittees.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of any person receiving a permit to:
by certified or registered United States mail addressed to the person to
be notified.
D. When any permit has been revoked and the work authorized by the
permit has not been completed, the Manager shall do or cause to be
done such work as may be necessary to restore the street or part
thereof to as good a condition as before the opening was made. All
expenses thereby incurred by the municipality shall be recovered from
the deposit or bond the permittee has made or filed with the
municipality.
A. Make written application for such permit with the Manager on such
form as he shall prescribe. No work shall commence until the Manager
has approved the application and plan and issued a permit and until the
permittee has paid and provided all required fees, deposits, certificates,
and bonds.
B. Upon request of the Borough, furnish in triplicate the plan showing the
work to be performed under said permit. Two copies of such plan shall
be returned to the applicant at the time the permit is granted. One copy
of the permit shall remain on site with the construction crew.
C. Agree to save the municipality, its officers, employees and agents
harmless from any and all costs, damages and liabilities which may
accrue or be claimed to accrue by reason of any work performed under
said permit. The acceptance of a permit shall constitute such an
agreement by the applicant whether the same is expressed or not.
A. Pay a minimum permit fee in an amount specified by the Manager in
accordance with a schedule of fees, charges and expenses determined
by the municipality. Said fee at the time of passage of this section shall
be determined by the length of the area subject to excavation. The fee
shall be $80 for the first 15 feet and an additional $2.50 for each
additional linear foot. Said schedule of fees shall be posted in the
municipal office. The municipality may alter the fee schedule from time
to time by resolution adopted at any public meeting of the municipality;
provided, however, that public utility companies may elect to be billed
monthly for such fees as they accrue, upon written notice to the
Manager.
B. Furnish a performance bond as required in § 225-29 of this chapter.
C. Furnish a maintenance bond as required in § 225-29.1 of this chapter.
§ 225-26.6 IRWIN CODE § 225-27.1
1:298
§ 225-28. Opening and excavation restrictions.
D. Furnish a certificate of insurance as required in § 225-30 of this chapter
unless otherwise excepted from such requirement by the provisions of
this chapter.
E. Present evidence, when required, that all materials, labor and
equipment which are needed to complete such work as authorized by
the permit are available.
F. Keep the original copy of the permit and an approved copy of the plan at
all times while such work is in progress at the location for which such
permit was granted and show such permit and/or plan upon demand by
the municipal public works personnel.
A. No opening or excavation in any street shall extend beyond the center
line of the street before being backfilled and the surface of the street
temporarily restored unless specific prior permission is obtained from
the Manager.
B. No more than 250 feet measured longitudinally shall be opened or
excavated in any street at any one time, except by special permission of
the Manager. At the end of the workday, all trenches shall be either
backfilled or plated.
C. All utility facilities shall be exposed sufficiently or definite location be
determined ahead of trench excavation work to avoid damage to those
facilities and to permit their relocation, if necessary. Any such facilities
damaged by the permittee shall be repaired and/or replaced by the
permittee.
D. Pipe drains, pipe culverts, or other facilities encountered shall be
protected by the permittee. Any such facilities damaged by the
permittee shall be repaired and/or replaced by the permittee.
E. Monuments of concrete, iron, or other lasting material set for the
purposes of locating or preserving the lines of any street or property
subdivision, or a precise survey reference point or a permanent survey
benchmark within the municipality shall not be removed or disturbed or
caused to be removed or disturbed unless permission to do so is first
obtained in writing from the Manager. Permission shall be granted only
upon condition that the permittee shall pay all expenses incident to the
proper replacement of the monument.
F. When work performed by the permittee interferes with the established
drainage system of any street, provision shall be made by the permittee
to provide proper drainage.
G. When any earth, gravel, or other excavated material is caused to flow,
roll, or wash upon any street, the permittee shall cause removal of same
from the street within four hours after deposit to permit safe flow of
traffic. In the event the earth, gravel, or other excavated material so
§ 225-27.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-28
1:299
deposited is not removed as specified, the Manager shall cause such
removal and the cost incurred shall be paid by the permittee or
deducted from his deposit.
H. Safety requirements.
(1) Every permittee shall place around the project such barriers,
barricades, lights, warning flags and danger signs as shall be
determined by the Manager to be necessary for the protection of
the public. Additional safety requirements may be prescribed by
the Manager and, where applicable, as set forth in the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation publications, which are
applicable thereto.
(2) Whenever a person fails to provide or maintain the required safety
devices, such devices shall be installed and maintained by the
municipality. The amount of the cost incurred shall be paid by the
permittee or deducted from his deposit.
(3) No person shall willfully move, remove, injure, destroy, or
extinguish any barrier, warning light, sign, or notice erected,
placed or posted in accordance with the provisions of this section.
I. Access to private driveways shall be coordinated with abutting property
owners and shall be provided to said abutting property owners during
working construction operations.
J. Work authorized by a permit shall be performed between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, unless the permittee
obtains written consent from the Manager to do the work at an earlier
or later hour in the case of an emergency or in the event the work
authorized by the permit is to be performed in traffic-congested areas.
K. In granting any permit, the Manager may attach such other conditions
thereto as may be reasonably necessary to prevent damage to public or
private property or to prevent the operation from being conducted in a
manner hazardous to life or property. The conditions may include but
are not limited to the following:
(1) Limitations on the period of the year in which the work may be
performed;
(2) Restrictions as to the size, weight, and type of equipment;
(3) Designation of routes upon which materials may be transported;
(4) Designation of the place and manner of disposal of excavated
materials;
(5) Requirements as to the laying of dust, the cleaning of streets, the
prevention of noise, and other results offensive or injurious to the
neighborhood, the general public, or any portion thereof; and
§ 225-28 IRWIN CODE § 225-28
1:300
§ 225-28.1. Backfilling and restoring opening.
(6) Regulations as to the use of streets in the course of the work.
A. All pavement cuts, openings and excavations shall be made properly
and backfilled properly by the permittee according to municipality
specifications as set forth in Appendix A, attached hereto.66 The
permittee also shall place a surface on the pavement cut, opening or
excavation in accordance with municipality specifications as set forth
on Appendix A, attached hereto. The municipality may from time to time
by resolution, duly adopted, amend Appendix A.
B. If the permittee has been granted permission to restore the street
surface but weather conditions are such as to prevent the completion of
permanent restoration of the street surface at the time backfilling is
completed, the permittee shall install a temporary surface and maintain
same in accordance with municipality specifications until such time as
weather conditions will permit restoration of the street surface.
C. The Department of Public Works shall be notified by the permittee
during the forty-eight-hour period preceding the beginning of
backfilling of the site and the approximate time at which backfilling will
be begun.
D. If paving surfaces adjacent to the street openings may be damaged
where trenches are made parallel to the street, where trenches and/or
street openings are laid through and/or along the right-of-way, where
cross trenches are laid in proximity to one another, or where the
equipment used may cause such damage to the roadway, the
municipality shall, if the total linear length of the street opening and/or
trench repair, parallel or perpendicular to the direction of travel,
exceeds 250 lineal feet or exceeds 25% of the length of the affected
block of the street, whichever is less, require a full-width, or lane-width,
as appropriate, overlay of the entire affected area. Full-width overlay
will only be required when the street opening crosses the center line of
the street, with the exception of the requirements of § 225-31.1
concerning newly improved streets. The municipality may require a
contribution from the permittee for the resurfacing of the entire
roadway in lieu of patching or restoration. Such negotiations shall be
carried on and contributions agreed upon prior to issuance of a permit.
E. After excavation is commenced, the work of making and backfilling the
same shall be prosecuted with due diligence.
F. Inspections of all work authorized by a permit shall be made by the
Department of Public Works and/or the Borough consulting engineer, at
such times and in such manner as required to ensure compliance with
the provisions of this chapter. If the nature of the work to be performed
under any permit is such to require the services of a full-time inspector,
66.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 225-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-28.1
1:301
§ 225-29. Performance bond.
In those instances where the applicant or permittee has received or intends
to apply for permission to perform the work of restoration of the street
surface, each such applicant or permittee, upon receipt of a permit, shall
provide the municipality with an acceptable corporate surety bond to
guarantee faithful performance of the work authorized by a permit granted
pursuant to this chapter. The amount of the bond shall be 100% of the
estimated cost of restoring the street opening. The term of the bond shall
begin upon the date of posting thereof and shall terminate upon receipt
by the permittee of a certificate of final inspection from the Department of
Public Works. If the permittee anticipates requesting more than one permit
per year as required by this chapter, the Manager, in his/her discretion,
may require a continuing corporate surety bond to guarantee faithful
performance in the amount of $50,000.
§ 225-29.1. Maintenance bond.
Each applicant, upon the receipt of a permit, shall provide the municipality
with an acceptable corporate surety bond conditioned for compliance with
the street opening specifications of the municipality and the provisions
of this chapter. The Manager shall determine the amount of the bond,
and it shall be in relation to the cost of restoring the pavement cut to
be made by the permittee; provided, however, that the minimum amount
of the bond shall not be less than $2,000. The term of each such bond
shall begin from the completion date of the permanent restoration of the
opening by the municipality and shall terminate upon the receipt by the
permittee of a certificate of final inspection from the Department of Public
Works. If the permittee anticipates requesting more than one permit a year,
the Manager, in his/her discretion, may require a filing of a continuing
the Department of Public Works, or their designee, shall provide for the
services of such an inspector.
G. All inspection costs, including those of the Borough consulting
engineer, shall be borne by the permittee. Such costs shall be based
upon a schedule of charges on file in the office of the Manager.
H. If any settlement in a restored area occurs within a period of two years
from the date of completion of the permanent restoration, and the
permittee fails to make such correction after notification, any expense
incurred by the municipality in correcting such settlement shall be paid
by the permittee or recovered from his bond, unless the permittee
submits proof satisfactory to the Manager that the settlement was not
due to defective backfilling.
I. In no case shall any opening made by the permittee be considered in the
charge or care of the municipality, or any of its officers or employees,
and no officer or employee of the municipality is authorized in any way
to take or assume any jurisdiction over any such opening, except in the
exercise of police power, which is necessary to protect life and property.
§ 225-28.1 IRWIN CODE § 225-29.1
1:302
corporate surety bond in the amount of $50,000, conditioned for compliance
with the specifications of the municipality and the provisions of this chapter.
§ 225-29.2. Default in performance.
Whenever the Manager and/or Department of Public Works find that a
default has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of the
permit, written notice thereof shall be given to the principal and to the
surety on the bond. Such notice shall state the work to be done, the
estimated cost thereof, and the period of time deemed by the Manager
and/or Department of Public Works to be reasonably necessary for the
completion of such work.
§ 225-29.3. Completion of work.
After receipt of such notice, the surety must, within the time therein
specified, either cause the required work to be performed, or, failing
therein, indemnify the municipality for the cost of doing the work as set
forth in the notice.
§ 225-30. Insurance requirements.
Each applicant, upon the receipt of a permit, shall provide the municipality
with an acceptable certificate of insurance indicating that he is insured
against claims for damages for personal injury as well as against claims
for property damage which may arise from or out of the performance of
the work, whether such performance be by himself, his subcontractor, or
anyone directly or indirectly employed by him. Such insurance shall cover
collapse, explosive hazards, and underground work by equipment on the
street, and shall include protection against liability arising from completion
operations. The amount of the insurance shall be prescribed by the Manager
in accordance with the nature of the risk involved; provided, however, that
the liability insurance for bodily injury shall be in an amount no less than
$250,000 for each person and $500,000 for each accident and for property
damages an amount no less than $100,000, with an aggregate of $300,000
for all accidents. Public utility companies and authorities may be relieved
of the obligation of submitting such a certificate if they submit satisfactory
evidence that they are insured in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter or have adequate provision for self- insurance. Public utility
companies and authorities may file an annual certificate of insurance in lieu
of individual certificates for each permit.
§ 225-31. Notice of proposed improvement.
When the municipality intends to improve or pave any street, the Manager
first shall give notice to all persons owning property abutting on the street
about to be paved or improved, and to all public utility companies and
authorities operating in the municipality, and all such persons, public utility
companies and authorities shall make all connections as well as any repairs
to any utility or use of the right-of-way which would necessitate excavation
§ 225-29.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-31
1:303
of the street, within 60 days from the giving of such notice. The time shall be
extended if permission is requested in writing and approved by the Manager
after consultation with the Municipal Engineer and Manager.
§ 225-31.1. Restrictions upon opening newly improved street.
No permit shall be issued by the Manager which would allow an excavation
or opening in a paved and improved street surface less than five years
old, unless the applicant can demonstrate clearly that public health or
safety require that the proposed work be permitted or unless an emergency
condition exists. For all streets less than five years old, the applicant shall
be responsible for restoration of the entire width, curb to curb, for the
entire length of the disturbed area, plus one foot on each side, with a
minimum length of 20 feet.
§ 225-32. Abandoned facilities.
Whenever any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, or other structure located under
the surface of any street is abandoned, or the use thereof abandoned,
the person owning, using, controlling, or having an interest therein shall,
within 30 days after such abandonment, file with the Manager a statement
in writing giving in detail the location of the structure so abandoned.
Whenever there are manholes or tunnels associated with any abandoned
underground facilities, such manholes or tunnels shall be capped at the time
of the abandonment and the Manager notified thereof in writing.
§ 225-32.1. Notice to property owners and tenant abutting project.
§ 225-32.2. Failure to comply; violations and penalties.
A. If the work to be undertaken by the permittee is such that it will affect
the use of properties abutting or adjoining the project, the Manager
may require the permittee to submit a list of owners and/or tenants and/
or addresses of all properties abutting the area where the work
authorized by the permit is to be performed. Upon receipt of such list,
the Manager shall notify the affected property owners and/or tenants of
the proposed work to be done.
B. If the work to be undertaken by a permittee will affect other subsurface
installation(s) in the vicinity of the proposed opening, the Manager shall
notify the owner(s) of such facilities of the proposed work.
A. Penalties. Any person, as defined by this chapter, who fails to comply
with any of the requirements or provisions of this chapter or refuses to
comply with any notice, order or direction of the Borough or its
designee or any other authorized employee of the Borough shall pay a
civil penalty not to exceed $600 per violation. A separate offense shall
arise for each day or portion thereof in which a violation is found to
exist or for each section of this chapter which is found to be violated.
§ 225-31 IRWIN CODE § 225-32.2
1:304
B. Enforcement. The Manager of the Borough of Irwin, at his/her sole
discretion, may issue a written notice to the person(s) responsible for
the violation requiring the payment to the Borough of a penalty of $300
per violation. In the event the person(s) who has/have received notice of
the penalty imposed for violation of this chapter does not voluntarily
pay to the Borough the penalty set forth in said notice, the Borough
shall institute a civil proceeding before a Magisterial District Court. The
civil enforcement proceedings shall be initiated by a complaint or by
such other means as may be provided for by the Pennsylvania Rules of
Civil Procedure. In any case where a penalty for violation of a Borough
ordinance has not been timely paid and the person upon whom the
penalty was imposed is found to have been liable therefor in a civil
proceeding, the violator shall be liable for the penalty imposed,
including additional daily penalties for continuing violations, plus court
costs and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings.
C. In addition to or in lieu of a civil action before the Magisterial District
Court, the Borough of Irwin may enforce this chapter in equity.
§ 225-32.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-32.2
1:305

ARTICLE VII
Removal of Snow, Ice and Vegetation
[Adopted 5-14-1984 by Ord. No. 722 (Ch. 21, Part 4, of the 1993
Code)]
§ 225-33. Removal requirements.
The property owner, occupant, or tenant of every property having a
sidewalk and/or curb in front of, to the rear of and alongside of any street or
alley in the Borough is hereby required to remove or cause to be removed
from all sidewalks and/or curbs:
§ 225-34. Notice requirements.
The Borough Council shall cause to be placed in a newspaper of general
circulation within the Borough no later than January 31 of each year an
article advertising the existence of this article and of its intention to enforce
the terms and conditions of this article. Provided, however, that the failure
to place this notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the Borough
each year shall not prohibit the Borough from enforcing the terms,
conditions and penalties under this article against any owner, tenant and/or
occupant who violates this article. The purpose of this notice is for general
information and convenience to the members of the public.
A. All snow and ice thereon fallen or formed, within 10 hours after the
same shall have ceased to fall or to be formed, provided that snow and
ice that has ceased to fall or to be formed after 6:00 p.m. after every
evening may be removed at any time before 10:00 a.m. of the following
morning; provided, further, that no snow or ice shall be pushed,
shoveled or placed by snowblower in the streets or cartways, but must
be placed in an area between the sidewalk and curb or the sidewalk and
the center point of the subject property.
B. All grass, weeds, leaves, branches, vegetation, plants and other foreign
matter growing or falling upon sidewalks and/or curbs must be
removed and disposed of in accordance with other Borough ordinances,
provided that no grass, weeds, leaves, branches, vegetation, plants and/
or other foreign matter shall be removed from the sidewalks and/or
curbs and placed in the streets or cartways.
C. The property owner shall be primarily responsible and liable for the
removal of the snow, ice, grass, weeds, leaves, branches, vegetation,
plants and/or other foreign matter from the sidewalks and/or curbs, and
the tenants and/or occupants other than the owner shall be secondarily
responsible and liable for the removal of the snow, ice, grass, weeds,
leaves, branches, vegetation, plants and/or other foreign matter from
the sidewalks and/or curbs.
§ 225-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-35
1:307
§ 225-35. Work performed by Borough; costs.
In any case where the owner, occupant, or tenant, as aforesaid, shall fail,
neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this article within
the time limit, the Borough Council may direct the Borough of Irwin Street
Department employees to immediately clear all snow, ice, grass, weeds,
leaves, branches, vegetation, plants and/or other foreign matter from those
sidewalks and/or curbs in the Borough, and the Borough is hereby
authorized to collect the expenses of such clearance or removal, with any
additional amounts allowed by law, from such owner, occupant or tenant,
as the case may be, by the filing of a municipal claim against the subject
property, in addition to any fine or penalty which may be imposed under
another provision in this article. The Borough shall not be obligated to
perform this service under this article, nor does its ability to file a municipal
claim against the property release or relieve the property owner, occupant
and/or tenant from the responsibility set forth in this article or other
penalties set forth in this article.
§ 225-36. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No.
791]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600, and
costs, and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment
for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 225-35 IRWIN CODE § 225-36
1:308
Chapter 230
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 34.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 95.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 110.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 135.
Grading and excavation — See Ch. 140.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 200.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 220.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 225.
Trees — See Ch. 242.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 230-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance of the Borough of Irwin."
§ 230-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the orderly and harmonious
development of the Borough of Irwin; to promote, protect and facilitate
public health, safety, morals, and general welfare; to coordinate community
development; to encourage the establishment of public facilities; and to
achieve flexibility and ingenuity in layout and design of land developments.
§ 230-3. Definitions; word usage. [Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No.
791; 5-14-2003 by Ord. No. 854]
Unless otherwise expressly stated herein, the terms hereinafter
enumerated shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings as
defined herein. Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and
the plural shall include the singular. The word "person" shall include a
corporation, firm, or partnership. The word "building" shall include mobile
homes and trailers used for human habitation. The word "watercourse" shall
include drains, ditches and streams.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior to
the start of construction or development, including but not limited to an
application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or
plan or for the approval of a development plan.
BOROUGH ENGINEER — Professional engineer or engineering firm
licensed as such by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as
the engineer for the Borough or Planning Commission.
§ 225-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-3
1:309
BUILDING LINE — A line within the property defining the required
minimum distance between any enclosed structure and an adjacent
boundary line and/or right-of-way.
CARTWAY — The improved or paved portion or portions between curbs
where curbs are used.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water,
or a combination of land and water, within a development site and designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a development, not
including streets, off-street parking areas, and areas set aside for public
facilities.
CUL-DE-SAC — A short street terminating in a circular vehicular
turnaround area, having only one means of access.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development, including a
planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity
of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities,
common open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of
development plan," when used in this chapter, shall mean the written and
graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DRAINAGE PLAN AND FACILITY — A complete drainage plan, including
all necessary storm sewers and appurtenances for the conveyance of
stormwater runoff of other watercourses.
EASEMENT — The right granted by a property owner for the use of others.
GOVERNING BODY — Refers to the Council for the Borough of Irwin.
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of,
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features;
(b)
(1)
A.
§ 230-3 IRWIN CODE § 230-3
1:310
LOT — A tract or parcel of land intended for the transfer of ownership, use
or improvement, whether immediate or future.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MONUMENTS — As utilized in the context of these regulations, a
monument shall designate survey reference points utilized in laying out a
given subdivision.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — A body politic and corporate created pursuant
to the Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No. 164), known as the "Municipalities
Authority Act of 1945."67
PLANNING COMMISSION — A commission established by the Council of
the Borough of Irwin to act as a planning body and, in that capacity,
to submit preliminary recommendations to the Borough Council for
consideration of and final approval of Borough Council.
B. A subdivision of land.
"Land development" does not include development which involves:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than three
residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium;
(1)
The addition of an accessory building, including farm building, on
a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building; or
(2)
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines
of an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park.
For the purposes of this subsection, an "amusement park" is
defined as a tract or area used principally as a location for
permanent amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall not
apply to newly acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial
plans for the expanded area have been approved by the proper
authorities.
(3)
C.
67.Editor's Note: The Municipalities Authority Act of 1945 was repealed 6-19-2001 (P.L. 287,
No. 22). See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 230-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-3
1:311
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes:
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the
Borough Council or Planning Commission, intended to inform and obtain
public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this chapter.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July
3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act," 65 P.S. § 271 et
seq.68
RECORDED PLAN OR PLAT — A map or drawing of a certain described
land prepared as an instrument for recording of real estate interests with
the County Recorder of Deeds, showing right-of-way lines, lot lines and
other relevant information required by the rules and regulations of the
Westmoreland County Planning Department or this chapter.
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE — A line defining the limits of land dedicated to public
use for a street or utility purpose.
STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, alley, viaduct or any other ways used or intended to be used
by vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether public or private.
STREET PROFILE PLAN — A plan of profiles showing existing profiles of
streets and grade to be established.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines, for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SURVEY — A drawing to scale prepared by a professional engineer or land
surveyor showing property lines and physical features.
TOPOGRAPHIC MAP — A drawing showing ground elevations by contour
lines and the location of significant natural and man-made features.
UTILITY PLAN — A drawing or drawings setting forth location and depth of
all public and private underground utilities.
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other
public areas;
A.
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly
owned or operated facilities; and
B.
C. Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
68.Editor's Note: Former 65 P.S. § 271 et seq. was repealed 10-15-1998 (P.L. 729, No. 93). See
now 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
§ 230-3 IRWIN CODE § 230-3
1:312
WATER SURVEY — An inventory of the source, quantity, yield and use of
groundwater and surface water resources within the Borough.
§ 230-4. Designation of authority; applicability.
§ 230-5. Procedural requirements. [Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No.
791; 5-14-2003 by Ord. No. 854]
A. Designation of authority. The Council of the Borough of Irwin hereby
designates the Planning Commission of the Borough of Irwin to exercise
the powers and duties of the Borough Council with respect to the
regulation of subdivision and land development within the municipality
in accordance with this chapter as authorized by Article V of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.69
B. Application of regulations.
(1) No division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any
means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions,
including changes in existing lot lines, for the purpose of lease,
transfer of ownership or building or lot development shall be
permitted within the Borough of Irwin except in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
(2) A subdivision of five lots or less, or the division of a lot containing
more than one principal structure for the purpose of transferring
legal ownership of a structure and the land on which it is situated,
which involves no new streets or realignment of existing streets
within such subdivision may be considered a minor subdivision by
the Planning Commission. In such instances, provided that all
zoning and design ordinances and criteria established by the
Borough are met, the Planning Commission may waive such
procedures and requirements of this chapter, except for the
required payment of fees, as the Commission may deem advisable.
A. Administrative procedures.
(1) All applications for approval of a subdivision under this chapter,
whether preliminary or final, shall be considered for approval by
the Planning Commission as follows:
(a) The Planning Commission shall render its recommendations to
the Borough of Irwin Council, within 90 days following the date
of the regular meeting next following the date the application
is filed. If the next meeting is more than 30 days following filing
of the application, the 90 days shall be measured from the 30th
day following the filing date.
(b) Within 30 days after the Planning Commission submits its
recommendations to the Borough of Irwin Council, the
69.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 230-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-5
1:313
Borough Council shall render its decision, the same being
communicated to the applicant, in writing, not later than 15
days following the decision.
(c) If an application is not approved by Borough Council, the
decision shall specify the defects, describe the requirements
not met and cite the provision of the ordinance which apply
thereto.
(2) In the absence of a written agreement to an extension of time by
the applicant, failure of Borough Council to render a final decision
based upon the Planning Commission recommendations shall be
deemed an approval.
(3) The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the
applications for subdivision after public notice.
B. Application procedures.
(1) Preapplication conference.
(a) A preapplication conference shall be held to enable the
applicant to discuss general and conceptual plans with the
Planning Commission.
(b) A sketch plan and/or data related to the proposed subdivision
or development activity may be submitted to enable all parties
to participate in the formulation of preliminary evaluations of
the proposed action.
(2) Preliminary approval.
(a) The developer shall submit to the Borough Manager, at least 15
days prior to the regular monthly meeting of the Planning
Commission, eight copies of a preliminary plan of the
subdivision for which approvals are being requested.
(b) The Borough Manager shall forward four copies of the plan to
the Westmoreland County Planning Department for review and
response. The Irwin Planning Commission shall not approve
the plan until the county response is received or until 30 days
have expired following forwarding of the plan to the county.
(c) The Planning Commission shall notify the developer of the
time, place and agenda of the meeting at which the plan is to
be considered within five days of the receipt of the plan.
(d) The Planning Commission shall act on the plan as prescribed
by this chapter.
(e) Documentation submitted in support of the preliminary plan
shall include data and plans necessary to the evaluation of the
proposed subdivision. This shall include but not be limited to:
§ 230-5 IRWIN CODE § 230-5
1:314
[1] Detailed plan at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or less.
[2] Draft of protective covenants.
[3] Plan of proposed improvements.
[4] Street and circulation plans.
[5] Utility plans.
[6] Documentation of perimeter conditions.
[7] Such other data as may be requested by the Planning
Commission.
(3) Final approval.
(a) Following preliminary approval, the developer shall submit to
the Borough Manager at least 15 days prior to the regular
monthly meeting of the Planning Commission a reproducible
original plan plus five copies of the plan and all other data
required for final approval. Plans for final approval must be
submitted within five years following approval of the
preliminary plan; otherwise, such approval shall become null
and void.
(b) The Borough Manager shall forward one copy of the plan and
data to the Westmoreland County Planning Department.
(c) The Planning Commission shall notify the developer of the
time, place and agenda of the meeting at which the plan is to
be considered within five days of receipt of the plan.
(d) The Planning Commission shall act on the plan as prescribed
by this chapter.
(e) Documentation submitted in support of the final plan shall
include data and plans necessary to the evaluation of the
subdivision proposal. The plat submitted:
[1] Shall be on acceptable reproducible material on sheets in
multiples of 18 inches by 24 inches. Multiple sheets shall
be indexed.
[2] Shall be drawn to the scale of one inch to 100 feet, or less.
[3] Shall include, at a minimum, property lines, lot lines,
perimeter bounds, streets, acreage of plot, area of each
lot, setback lines, purpose of each site, lot numbers,
easements, right-of-way widths, owners of adjoining lands
and protective covenants.
[4] Such other data as may be required by the Planning
Commission.
§ 230-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-6
1:315
§ 230-6. Design and construction standards; improvements.
[Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
A. Standards. The following standards shall govern the design, layout and
construction of all subdivisions and improvements therein within the
Borough of Irwin:
(1) Suitability. Lands shall be suited for the purpose for which they are
to be developed. Lands subject to hazards of life, health and safety
shall not be subdivided.
(2) Natural quality. Where possible, natural environmental qualities
shall be preserved.
(3) Lot size and use. All lot dimensional, setback, land use and other
applicable requirements of Chapter 260, Zoning, shall apply.
(4) Streets and accessways. All streets and sidewalks and all aspects of
the design of vehicular and pedestrian accessways shall conform to
the applicable standards and ordinances of the Borough of Irwin.
(5) Utilities. All sanitary sewers, water supply systems, storm drainage
facilities and watercourses shall be designed and constructed in
strict compliance with applicable standards and ordinances of the
Borough of Irwin.
(6) Access. All subdivisions shall be accomplished in a manner that will
not bar access of adjacent properties to streets and necessary
rights-of-way.
(7) Street names. All street names shall be approved by the Planning
Commission. No duplication of existing street names in Irwin shall
be permitted other than approved extensions.
(8) Water supply. If water is to be provided by means other than private
wells owned and maintained by the individual owners of lots within
the subdivision or development, applicants shall present evidence
to the Borough Council that the subdivision is to be supplied by a
certified public utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot
owners, or by a municipal corporation, authority or utility. A copy of
a certificate of public convenience from the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission or an application for such certificate, a
cooperative agreement or a commitment or agreement to serve the
area in question, whichever is appropriate, shall be acceptable.
B. Improvements. The following regulations shall govern all improvements
made in conjunction with subdivision development within the Borough
of Irwin:
(1) Grading. All grading, site development, utility and street
construction, slope treatments and other related improvements
shall be undertaken on the basis of plans which must be approved
§ 230-6 IRWIN CODE § 230-6
1:316
§ 230-7. Completion of improvements; financial guarantees.
[Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
by the Borough Engineer or such other official designated by the
Planning Commission.
(2) Monuments. Permanent concrete monuments shall be placed at
subdivision boundary intersection points and at street
intersections.
(3) Street signs and streetlights. Street signs and lighting shall be
installed in accordance with Borough specifications.
(4) Erosion control. Temporary and permanent soil erosion and
sedimentation controls shall be installed as required by state and
county authorities.
(5) Reservations. In any development exceeding 10 acres, the Planning
Commission may require dedication of land for recreational area.
C. If the irregular shape of a lot proposed for subdivision is, in the opinion
of the Planning Commission, not consistent with the shape at adjacent
properties and is not a good faith effort to conform with the area
requirements of this chapter, the subdivision may be disapproved.
A. No plat shall be finally approved unless the streets shown on such plat
have been improved to a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable
condition, or improved as may be otherwise required by this chapter,
and any walkways, curbs, gutters, streetlights, fire hydrants, shade
trees, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers and other
improvements as may be required by this chapter have been installed in
accordance with this chapter. In lieu of the completion of any
improvements required as a condition for the final approval of a plat,
including improvements or fees otherwise required by this chapter, the
developer may deposit with the Borough financial security in an amount
sufficient to cover the costs of such improvements or common
amenities, including basins and other related drainage facilities,
recreational facilities, open space improvements, or buffer or screen
plantings which may be required.
B. When requested by the developer, in order to facilitate financing, the
Planning Commission shall furnish the developer with a signed copy of
a resolution indicating approval of the final plat contingent upon the
developer obtaining a satisfactory financial security. The final plat or
record plan shall not be signed nor recorded until the financial
improvements agreement is executed. The resolution or letter of
contingent approval shall expire and be deemed to be revoked if the
financial security agreement is not executed within 90 days, unless a
written extension is granted by the Planning Commission; such
extension shall not be unreasonably withheld and shall be placed in
writing at the request of the developer.
§ 230-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-7
1:317
C. Without limitation as to other types of financial security which the
Borough may approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld, federal- or commonwealth-chartered lending institution
irrevocable letters of credit and restrictive or escrow accounts in such
lending institutions shall be deemed acceptable financial security for
the purposes of this section.
D. Such financial security shall be posted with a bonding company or
federal- or commonwealth-chartered lending institution chosen by the
party posting the financial security, provided said bonding company or
lending institution is authorized to conduct such business within the
commonwealth.
E. Such bond or other security shall provide for, and secure to the public,
the completion of any improvements which may be required on or
before the date fixed in the formal action of approval or accompanying
agreement for completion of the improvements.
F. The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of the
required improvements shall be equal to 110% of the cost of completion
estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for completion by
the developer. Annually, the Borough may adjust the amount of the
financial security by comparing the actual cost of the improvements
which have been completed and the estimated cost for the completion
of the remaining improvements as of the expiration of the 90th day after
either the original date scheduled for completion or a rescheduled date
of completion. Subsequent to said adjustment, the Borough may require
the developer to post additional security in order to assure that the
financial security equals said 110%. Any additional security shall be
posted by the developer in accordance with this subsection.
G. The amount of financial security required shall be based upon an
estimate of the cost of completion of the required improvements,
submitted by the applicant or developer and prepared by a professional
engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and certified by such
engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of such cost. The
Borough, upon the recommendation of the Borough Engineer, may
refuse to accept such estimate for good cause shown. If the applicant or
developer and the Borough are unable to agree upon an estimate, then
the estimate shall be recalculated and recertified by another
professional engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and
chosen mutually by the Borough and the applicant or developer. The
estimate certified by the third engineer shall be presumed fair and
reasonable and shall be the final estimate. In the event that a third
engineer is so chosen, fees for the services of said engineer shall be
paid equally by the Borough and the applicant or developer.
H. If the party posting the financial security requires more than one year
from the date of posting of the financial security to complete the
required improvements, the amount of financial security may be
increased by an additional 10% for each one-year period beyond the
§ 230-7 IRWIN CODE § 230-7
1:318
first anniversary date from posting of financial security or to an amount
not exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the required
improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the
preceding one-year period by using the above bidding procedure.
I. In the case where development is projected over a period of years, the
Planning Commission may authorize submission of final plats by
sections or stages of development, subject to such requirements or
guarantees as to improvements in future sections or stages of
development as it finds essential for the protection of any finally
approved section of the development.
J. As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the
party posting the financial security may request the Borough Council to
release or authorize the release, from time to time, of such portions of
the financial security necessary for payment to the contractor or
contractors performing the work. Any such requests shall be in writing
addressed to the Borough Council, and the Borough Council shall have
45 days from receipt of such request within which to allow the Borough
Engineer to certify, in writing, to the Borough Council that such portion
of the work upon the improvements has been completed in accordance
with the approved plat. Upon such certification, the Borough Council
shall authorize release by the bonding company or lending institution of
an amount as estimated by the Borough Engineer fairly representing
the value of the improvements completed or, if the Borough Council
fails to act within said forty-five-day period, the Borough Council shall
be deemed to have approved the release of funds as requested. The
Borough Council may, prior to final release at the time of completion
and certification by its Engineer, require retention of 10% of the
estimated cost of the aforesaid improvements.
K. Where the Borough Council accepts dedication of all or some of the
required improvements following completion, the Borough Council may
require the posting of financial security to secure structural integrity of
said improvements, as well as the functioning of said improvements in
accordance with the design and specifications as depicted on the final
plat, for a term not to exceed 18 months from the date of acceptance of
dedication. Said financial security shall be of the same type as
otherwise required in this section with regard to installation of such
improvements, and the amount of the financial security shall not exceed
15% of the actual cost of installation of said improvements.
L. If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with apparatus or
facilities related thereto, are to be installed under the jurisdiction and
pursuant to the rules and regulations of a public utility or municipal
authority separate and distinct from the Borough, financial security to
assure proper completion and maintenance thereof shall be posted in
accordance with the regulations of the controlling public utility or
municipal authority and shall not be included within the financial
security as otherwise required by this section.
§ 230-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-7
1:319
§ 230-8. Inspection of improvements; costs. [Added 7-7-1993 by
Ord. No. 791]
M. If financial security has been provided in lieu of the completion of
improvements required as a condition for the final approval of a plat as
set forth in this section, the Borough shall not condition the issuance of
building, grading or other permits relating to the erection or placement
of improvements, including buildings, upon the lots or land as depicted
upon the final plat upon actual completion of the improvements
depicted upon the approved final plat. Moreover, if said financial
security has been provided, occupancy permits for any building or
buildings to be erected shall not be withheld following the improvement
of the streets providing access to and from existing public roads to such
building or buildings to a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable
condition, as well as the completion of all other improvements as
depicted upon the approved plat, either upon the lot or lots or beyond
the lot or lots in question, if such improvements are necessary for the
reasonable use of or occupancy of the building or buildings.
A. When the developer has completed all of the necessary and appropriate
improvements, the developer shall notify the Borough Council, in
writing, by certified or registered mail, of the completion of the
aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Borough
Engineer. The Borough Council shall, within 10 days after receipt of
such notice, direct and authorize the Borough Engineer to inspect all of
the aforesaid improvements. The Borough Engineer shall, thereupon,
file a report, in writing, with the Borough Council and shall promptly
mail a copy of the same to the developer by certified or registered mail.
The report shall be made and mailed within 30 days after receipt by the
Borough Engineer of the aforesaid authorization from the Borough
Council; said report shall be detailed and shall indicate approval or
rejection of said improvements, either in whole or in part, and if said
improvements, or any portion thereof, shall not be approved or shall be
rejected by the Borough Engineer, said report shall contain a statement
of reasons for such nonapproval or rejection.
B. The Borough Council shall notify the developer, within 15 days of
receipt of the Engineer's report, in writing, by certified or registered
mail, of the action of said Borough Council with relation thereto.
C. If the Borough Council or the Borough Engineer fails to comply with the
time limitation provisions contained herein, all improvements will be
deemed to have been approved, and the developer shall be released
from all liability pursuant to its performance guaranty bond or other
security agreement.
D. If any portion of the said improvements shall not be approved or shall
be rejected by the Borough Council, the developer shall proceed to
complete the same, and, upon completion, the same procedure of
notification, as outlined herein, shall be followed.
§ 230-7 IRWIN CODE § 230-8
1:320
E. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the
developer's right to contest or question, by legal proceedings or
otherwise, any determination of the Borough Council or the Borough
Engineer.
F. Where herein reference is made to the Borough Engineer, he shall be as
a consultant thereto.
G. The applicant or developer shall reimburse the Borough for the
reasonable and necessary expense incurred for the inspection of
improvements according to a schedule of fees adopted by resolution of
the Borough Council and as from time to time amended. Such expense
shall be reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and customary
fees charged by the Borough Engineer or consultant for work
performed for similar services in the community, but in no event shall
the fees exceed the rate or cost charged by the Engineer or consultant
to the Borough when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on
applicants.
(1) In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such expense
in connection with the inspection of improvements, the applicant
shall, within 10 working days of the date of billing, notify the
Borough that such expenses are disputed as unreasonable or
unnecessary, in which case the Borough shall not delay or
disapprove a subdivision or land development application or any
approval or permit related to development due to the applicant's
request over disputed Engineer expenses.
(2) If, within 20 days from the date of billing, the Borough and the
applicant cannot agree on the amount of expenses which are
reasonable and necessary, then the applicant and the Borough shall
jointly, by mutual agreement, appoint another professional
engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to
review the said expenses and make a determination as to the
amount thereof which is reasonable and necessary.
(3) The professional engineer so appointed shall hear such evidence
and review such documentation as the professional engineer in his
or her sole opinion deems necessary and render a decision within
50 days of the billing date. The applicant shall be required to pay
the entire amount determined in the decision immediately.
(4) In the event that the Borough and applicant cannot agree upon the
professional engineer to be appointed within 20 days of the billing
date, then, upon application of either party, the President Judge of
the Court of Common Pleas of the judicial district in which the
Borough is located (or, if at the time there be no President Judge,
then the senior active Judge then sitting) shall appoint such
engineer, who, in that case, shall be neither the Borough Engineer
nor any professional engineer who has been retained by, or
§ 230-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-8
1:321
§ 230-9. Remedies to effect completion of improvements. [Added
7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
In the event that any improvements which may be required have not been
installed as provided in this chapter or in accord with the approved final
plat, the Borough Council is hereby granted the power to enforce any
corporate bond or other security by appropriate legal and equitable
remedies. If the proceeds of such bond or other security are insufficient
to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections to all the
improvements covered by said security, the Borough Council may, at its
option, install part of such improvements in all or part of the subdivision
or land development and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action
to recover the moneys necessary to complete the remainder of the
improvements. All of the proceeds, whether resulting from the security or
from any legal or equitable action brought against the developer, or both,
shall be used solely for the installation of the improvements covered by such
security and not for any other Borough purpose.
§ 230-10. Modifications. [Added 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
performed services for, the Borough or the applicant within the
preceding five years.
(5) The fee of the appointed professional engineer for determining the
reasonable and necessary expenses shall be paid by the applicant if
the amount of payment required in the decision is equal to or
greater than the original bill. If the amount of payment required in
the decision is less than the original bill by $1,000 or more, the
Borough shall pay the fee of the professional engineer, but,
otherwise, the Borough and the applicant shall each pay 1/2 of the
fee of the appointed professional engineer.
A. The Borough Council may grant a modification of the requirements of
one or more provisions of this chapter if the literal enforcement will
exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the
land in question, provided that such modification will not be contrary to
the public interest and that the purpose and intent of this chapter is
observed.
B. All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall accompany
and be a part of the application for development. The request shall state
in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which
the request is based, the provision or provisions of this chapter involved
and the minimum modification necessary.
C. The request for modification shall be referred to the Planning
Commission for advisory comments.
D. The Borough Council shall keep a written record of all action on all
requests for modifications.
§ 230-8 IRWIN CODE § 230-11
1:322
§ 230-11. Review fees. [Added 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
§ 230-12. Exemptions. [Added 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
The following are exempt or partially exempt from the provisions of this
chapter:
§ 230-13. Recording of plats and deeds. [Added 7-7-1993 by Ord.
No. 791]
A. Review fees shall include the reasonable and necessary charges by the
Borough's professional consultants or Engineer for review and report to
the Borough and shall be set by resolution. Such review fees shall be
reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and customary charges
by the Borough Engineer or consultant for similar service in the
community, but in no event shall the fees exceed the rate or cost
charged by the Engineer or consultant to the Borough when fees are
not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants.
B. In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such review fees,
the applicant shall, within 10 days of the billing date, notify the Borough
that such fees are disputed, in which case the Borough shall not delay
or disapprove a subdivision or land development application due to the
applicant's request over disputed fees.
C. In the event that the Borough and the applicant cannot agree on the
amount of review fees which are reasonable and necessary, then the
fees shall be recalculated and recertified by another professional
engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and chosen mutually
by the Borough and the applicant or developer. The estimate certified
by the third engineer shall be presumed fair and reasonable and shall
be the final estimate. In the event that a third engineer is so chosen,
fees for the services of said engineer shall be paid equally by the
Borough and the applicant or developer.
A. The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or singlefamily
semidetached dwelling into not more than three residential
units, unless such units are intended to be a condominium;
B. The addition of an accessory building, including farm buildings, on a lot
or lots subordinate to an existing principal building; or
C. The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines of
an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park. For the
purposes of this subsection, an "amusement park" is defined as a tract
or area used principally as a location for permanent amusement
structures or rides. This exclusion shall not apply to newly acquired
acreage by an amusement park until initial plans for the expanded area
have been approved by proper authorities.
A. Upon the approval of a final plat, the developer shall, within 90 days of
such final approval, record such plat in the office of the Recorder of
§ 230-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-13
1:323
§ 230-14. Preventive remedies. [Added 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
§ 230-15. Violations and penalties. [Added 7-7-1993 by Ord. No.
791]
Deeds of the county in which the Borough is located. The Recorder of
Deeds shall not accept any plat for recording unless such plat officially
notes the approval of the Borough Council and review by the county
planning agency.
B. The recording of the plat shall not constitute grounds for assessment
increases until such time as lots are sold or improvements are installed
on the land included within the subject plat.
A. In addition to other remedies, the Borough may institute and maintain
appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate
violations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages and to
prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises. The
description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other
documents used in the process of selling or transferring shall not
exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or from the
remedies herein provided.
B. The Borough may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval
necessary to further improve or develop any real property which has
been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of real
property in violation of this chapter. This authority to deny such a
permit or approval shall apply to any of the following applicants:
(1) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
(2) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation, without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had
actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(3) The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent
to the time of violation, without regard as to whether such current
owner had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(4) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired
the property subsequent to the time of violation, without regard as
to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
C. As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting of an
approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee for the
development of any such real property, the Borough may require
compliance with the conditions that would have been applicable to the
property at the time the applicant acquired an interest in such real
property.
§ 230-13 IRWIN CODE § 230-15
1:324
§ 230-16. Amendments. [Added 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a
civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Borough, pay a
judgment of not more than $500, plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the Borough as a result thereof.
No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the
date of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial District
Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules
of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless the Magisterial District Judge determining
that there has been a violation further determines that there was a good
faith basis for the person, partnership, or corporation violating this
chapter to have believed that there was no such violation, in which
event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until
the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the
Magisterial District Judge, and thereafter each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation.
B. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Borough the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
D. Magisterial District Judges shall have initial jurisdiction in proceedings
brought under this section.
A. Amendments to this chapter shall become effective only after a public
hearing held pursuant to public notice. A brief summary setting forth
the principal provisions of the proposed amendment and a reference to
the place within the Borough where copies of the proposed amendment
may be secured or examined shall be incorporated in the public notice.
Unless the proposed amendment shall have been prepared by the
Planning Commission, the Borough Council shall submit the
amendment to the Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to the
hearing on such amendment to provide the Planning Commission an
opportunity to submit recommendations. In addition, at least 30 days
prior to the public hearing on the amendment, the Borough shall submit
the proposed amendment to the county planning agency for
recommendations.
B. Within 30 days after adoption, the Borough Council shall forward a
certified copy of the amendment to the county planning agency.
C. Proposed amendments shall not be enacted unless notice of proposed
enactment is given in the manner set forth in this section and shall
§ 230-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-16
1:325
Chapter 234
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 234-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SWIMMING POOL or POOL — An outdoor swimming pool used or intended
to be used solely by the owner of a residential property, his family, or lessee
thereof and his family, and by guests invited to use it without the payment
of any fee.
§ 234-2. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all new outdoor swimming pools hereinafter
constructed, as well as existing swimming pools, whether above ground or
in the ground, and having a depth of 18 inches or more at any one point.
include the time and place of the meeting at which passage will be
considered, a reference to a place within the Borough where copies of
the proposed amendment may be examined without charge or obtained
for a charge not greater than the cost thereof. The Borough Council
shall publish the proposed amendment once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Borough not more than 60 days nor less than seven
days prior to passage. Publication of the proposed amendment shall
include either the full text thereof or the title and a brief summary,
prepared by the Borough Solicitor and setting forth all the provisions in
reasonable detail. If the full text is not included:
(1) A copy thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of general
circulation in the Borough at the time the public notice is
published.
(2) An attested copy of the proposed amendment shall be filed in the
county law library (or other county office designated by the County
Commissioners).
D. In the event substantial amendments are made in the proposed
amendment, before voting upon enactment, the Borough Council shall,
at least 10 days prior to enactment, readvertise, in one newspaper of
general circulation in the Borough, a brief summary setting forth all the
provisions in reasonable detail, together with a summary of the
amendments.
§ 230-16 IRWIN CODE § 234-3
1:326
§ 234-3. Construction permit and approval.
§ 234-4. Fences, walls and similar enclosures.
§ 234-5. Location requirements.
A. Before any work is commenced on the construction of a swimming pool
or on any alteration, addition, remodeling or other improvement to a
swimming pool, an application for a permit for construction, together
with plans and specifications pertinent to the construction, as well as
explanatory data, shall be submitted to the Building Inspector. No part
of the work shall be commenced until approval has been granted the
applicant by a written permit. The fee for such permit shall be fixed by
resolution of Borough Council.
B. All plans, including a plot plan, shall bear the name and seal of a
registered architect, engineer or surveyor. The plot plan shall show the
location of all buildings and the proposed pool on the property,
distances to all property lines in the immediate vicinity of the swimming
pool and dwelling, and the location of wells, sewage disposal systems
and proposed enclosures or fences around the pool.
C. Standard pools, properly designed by established swimming pool
companies and having the approval of a registered engineer or
registered architect, shall be acceptable when accompanied by suitable
plans and specifications, including information as stated herein.
A. Every swimming pool shall be completely surrounded by a fence, wall
or similar enclosure not less than four feet in height, which shall be so
constructed as to have no openings, holes or gaps larger than two
inches in any dimension. If the fence or wall is a picket fence, the
horizontal dimensions maintained shall not exceed four inches. A
dwelling or accessory building may be used as part of such enclosure.
B. All gates or door openings through such enclosure shall be equipped
with a self-closing, self-latching device on the pool side for keeping the
gate or door securely closed at all times when not in use, except that
the door of any dwelling or accessory building which forms a part of the
enclosure need not be so equipped. The fence shall surround the pool
and the deck area. Fences shall be erected around all existing
swimming pools no later than when the pool is completed.
A. A swimming pool shall be located at the rear of a dwelling or along the
side of the dwelling where practical.
B. There shall be a minimum of three feet of concrete, stone, brick or block
sidewalk or other all-weather surface around all pools, except portable
aboveground pools.
C. No swimming pool or appurtenances, including decks and shelters,
shall be erected nearer to any property line than permitted by Chapter
260, Zoning.
§ 234-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-5
1:327
§ 234-6. Design and construction requirements.
No permit to construct new swimming pools (Existing pools are excluded
from this section.) shall be issued unless and until the following design and
construction requirements are observed:
§ 234-7. Aboveground pools.
D. No swimming pool shall be so located as to interfere with the operation
of a well or on-site septic system or be located where there is potential
danger of a septic system discharging into the pool or onto the adjacent
area around the pool.
A. Material. The material used for lining a swimming pool shall be light in
color, impervious and shall provide a tight tank with easily cleaned
surfaces. Sand or dirt bottoms are prohibited if uncovered.
B. Walls and bottom. All pool walls and bottoms shall be designed to
withstand water pressure from within and to resist the pressure of
earth or groundwater when the pool is empty.
C. Steps, ladders, handholds. One or more steps, ladders, stepholes or
handholds shall be provided for all pools. The coping of the swimming
pool, if not higher than eight inches above the water surface, shall be
considered a handhold.
D. Makeup water. Pools shall be equipped with suitable facilities for
adding makeup water as required. There shall be no physical
connection between the water supply line and the pool system. When
makeup water is added to the pool, the inlet shall be at least six inches
above the pool water surface.
E. Drainage outlet. No pool water shall be drained at the curb, along the
gutter line of any street or on the surface of any street.
F. Recirculation. Provision shall be made for complete circulation of water
throughout the pool. The system shall be designed and constructed so
that a turnaround at least once every twelve-hour period shall be
provided. Recirculation systems shall consist of pumping equipment, a
hair and lint catcher, filters, together with all necessary pipe
connections to the pool inlets and outlets, facilities and pipe
connections necessary for backwashing or cleaning filters.
G. Safety equipment. Life preservers, ropes and poles shall be readily
available at the pool site.
A. Aboveground pools are not subject to the fee schedules nor the design
and requirements as set forth herein. However, all such pools having
walls less than four feet shall be enclosed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 234-5 IRWIN CODE § 234-7
1:328
§ 234-8. Interference with property rights prohibited.
No swimming pool shall be so located or maintained as to interfere unduly
with the enjoyment of the property rights of others.
§ 234-9. Lighting requirements.
Lights used to illuminate any swimming pool shall be so arranged as to
reflect light away from adjoining premises.
§ 234-10. Noise restrictions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made
or continued at any swimming pool any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise
which disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, health, peace or safety of
others. The use or operation of any radio, musical instrument, phonograph,
recording equipment, or other machine or device for the producing or
reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and
comfort of neighboring inhabitants or at any time with volume louder than
is necessary for convenient hearing of persons at the swimming pool site
shall be unlawful.
§ 234-11. Electrical connections.
B. Portable aboveground pools having walls four feet or greater in height
may be excluded from the fencing requirement, provided such pools are
equipped with access ladders which may be raised and locked in a nearvertical
position when the pool is unattended. An aboveground pool as
described in this subsection which is served by a ladder or steps which
cannot be raised and locked so as to prevent access by small children
shall be enclosed in accordance with § 234-4.
A. All electrical installations shall conform to the specifications of the
National Electrical Code. No electric wires or conductors shall cross,
either overhead or underground, on any part of a swimming pool, nor
shall any electric wiring be installed parallel to any pool wall closer
than five feet, if underground, unless enclosed in a rigid conduit, or
within five feet if overhead.
B. All underwater lights must be watertight, self-contained units with
ground connections running from a waterproof junction box to a proper
grounding facility or medium. All underground electric wires supplying
current to said lights within a distance of five feet of the pool wall or
walls shall be enclosed in rigid conduits. All metal fences, enclosures or
railings, near or adjacent to a swimming pool, which might become
electrically charged as a result of contact with broken overhead
conductors, or from any other cause, shall be effectively grounded.
§ 234-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-12
1:329
§ 234-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs,
to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation
of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 238
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tax Collector — See Ch. 55.
§ 234-12 IRWIN CODE § 234-12
1:330
ARTICLE I
Earned Income and Net Profits Tax
[Adopted 5-12-1975 by Ord. No. 603 (Ch. 24, Part 3, of the 1993
Code)]
§ 238-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership, or any other
unincorporated group of two or more persons.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Irwin, Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania.
BUSINESS — An enterprise, activity, profession, or any other undertaking
of an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for
profit, whether by a person, partnership, association, or any other entity.
CORPORATION — A corporation or joint-stock association organized under
the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any
other state, territory, foreign country or dependency.
CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his permanent home and
to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent. Actual
residence is not necessarily domicile, for domicile is the fixed place of abode
which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than transitory.
Domicile is the place in which a man has voluntarily fixed the habitation
of himself and his family, not for a mere special or limited purpose, but
with the present intention of making a permanent home until some event
occurs to induce him to adopt some other permanent home. In the case
of businesses, or associations, the domicile is that place considered as the
center of business affairs and the place where its functions are discharged.
EARNED INCOME — Salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive
payments, fees, tips and other compensation received by a person or his
personal representative for services rendered, whether directly or through
an agent, and whether in cash or in property; not including, however,
wages or compensation paid to persons on active military service, periodic
payments for sickness and disability other than regular wages received
during a period of sickness, disability or retirement or payments arising
under workmen's compensation acts, occupational disease acts and similar
legislation or payments commonly recognized as old-age benefits,
retirement pay or pensions paid to persons retired from service after
reaching a specific age or after a stated period of employment or payments
commonly known as "public assistance" or "unemployment compensation"
payments made by any governmental agency or payments to reimburse
expenses or payments made by employers or labor unions for wage and
salary supplemental programs, including, but not limited to, programs
covering hospitalization, sickness, disability or death, supplemental
unemployment benefits, strike benefits, social security and retirement.
§ 238-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-1
1:331
EMPLOYER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, institution,
governmental body or unit or agency or any other entity employing one or
more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation.
INCOME TAX OFFICER or OFFICER — A person, public employee or
private agency designated by the Borough Council to collect and administer
the tax on earned income and net profits.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, except corporations, after provision for all
costs and expenses incurred in the conduct thereof, determined either on
a cash or accrual basis in accordance with the accounting system used in
such business, profession, or other activity, but without deduction of taxes
based on income.
NONRESIDENT — A person, partnership, association, or other entity
domiciled outside the Borough.
PERSON or INDIVIDUAL — A natural person.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
RESIDENT — A person, partnership, association, or other entity domiciled
in the Borough.
SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
TAXPAYER — A person, partnership, association, or any other entity
required hereunder to file a return of earned income or net profits, or to pay
a tax thereon.
§ 238-2. Imposition of tax.
A. A tax of 1/2 of 1% is hereby imposed for general revenue purposes on:
(1) Earned income received by residents of the Borough during the
period beginning January 1, 1975, and ending December 31, 1975,
and each calendar year thereafter.
(2) Earned income received by nonresidents of the Borough for work
done or services performed or rendered in the Borough during the
period beginning January 1, 1975, and ending December 31, 1975,
and each calendar year thereafter.
(3) Net profits of residents of the Borough earned during the period
beginning January 1, 1975, and ending December 31, 1975, and
each calendar year thereafter.
(4) Net profits of nonresidents of the Borough arising out of the
operation of a business, profession or other activity conducted in
the Borough during the period beginning January 1, 1975, and
ending December 31, 1975, and each calendar year thereafter.
B. The taxes levied under Subsection A(1) and (2) shall relate to and be
imposed upon compensation paid by an employer or on his behalf to any
§ 238-1 IRWIN CODE § 238-2
1:332
§ 238-3. Declaration and payment of tax.
person who is employed by or renders service to him. The taxes levied
under Subsection A(3) and (4) shall relate to and be imposed upon the
net profits of any business, profession or enterprise carried on by any
person or owner or proprietor, either individually or in association with
any other person or persons.
C. Such taxes shall be levied with respect to the earned income or net
profits derived during the calendar year for which such tax is levied,
provided, where the fiscal year of a business, profession or other
activity differs from the calendar year, the tax shall be applicable to the
net profits of the fiscal year.
A. Net profits.
(1) Every taxpayer making net profits shall, on or before April 15 of the
current year, make and file with the Officer, on a form prescribed or
approved by the Officer, a declaration of his estimated net profits
during the period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of
the current year and pay to the Officer in four equal quarterly
installments the tax thereon as follows: the first installment at the
time of filing the declaration, and the other installments on or
before June 15 of the current year, September 15 of the current
year and January 15 of the succeeding year, respectively.
(2) Any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profits after April 15 of
the current year shall make and file the declaration hereinabove
required on or before June 15 of the current year, whichever of
these dates next follows the date on which the taxpayer first
anticipates such net profit, and pay to the Officer in equal
installments the tax due thereon on or before the quarterly
payment dates which remain after the filing of the declaration.
(3) Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding year,
make and file with the Officer, on a form prescribed or approved by
the Officer, a final return showing the amount of net profits earned
during the period beginning January 1 of the current year and
ending December 31 of the current year, the total amount of tax
due thereon and the total amount of tax paid thereon. At the time of
filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay to the Officer the
balance of tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in the
case of overpayment. Any taxpayer may, in lieu of paying the fourth
quarterly installment of his estimated tax, elect to make and file
with the Officer, on or before January 31 of the succeeding year, the
final return as hereinabove required.
(4) The Officer is authorized to provide by regulation for the making
and filing of adjusted declarations of estimated net profits and for
the payments of the estimated tax in cases where a taxpayer who
has filed the declaration hereinabove required anticipates
§ 238-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-3
1:333
§ 238-4. Collection at source.
additional net profits not previously declared or finds that he has
overestimated his anticipated net profits.
(5) Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of
the current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of
business, file his return as hereinabove required and pay the tax
due.
B. Earned income.
(1) Annual earned income tax return. Every taxpayer shall, on or
before April 15 of the succeeding year, make and file with the
Officer, on a form prescribed or approved by the Officer, a final
return showing the amount of earned income received during the
period beginning January 1 of the current year and ending
December 31 of the current year, the total amount of tax due
thereon, the amount of tax paid thereon, the amount of tax thereon
that has been withheld pursuant to the provisions relating to the
collection at source and the balance of tax due. At the time of filing
the final return, the taxpayer shall pay the balance of the tax due or
shall make demand for refund or credit in the case of overpayment.
(2) Earned income not subject to withholding. Every taxpayer who is
employed for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation
and who received any earned income not subject to the provisions
relating to collection at source shall make and file with the Officer,
on a form prescribed or approved by the Officer, a quarterly return
on or before April 30 of the current year, July 31 of the current year,
October 31 of the current year, and January 31 of the succeeding
year, setting forth the aggregate amount of earned income not
subject to withholding by him during the three-month periods
ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the current year,
September 30 of the current year, and December 31 of the current
year, respectively, and subject to the tax, together with such other
information as the Officer may require. Every taxpayer making
such return shall, at the time of filing thereof, pay to the Officer the
amount of tax shown as due thereon.
A. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse,
or other place of business within the Borough, who employs one or
more persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation, shall, within 15 days after
becoming an employer, register with the Officer his name and address
and such other information as the Officer may require.
B. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse,
or other place of business within the Borough who employs one or more
persons subject to this tax, other than domestic servants, for a salary,
wage, commission or other compensation, shall deduct, at the time of
§ 238-3 IRWIN CODE § 238-4
1:334
payment thereof, the tax imposed by this article on the earned income
due to his employee or employees and shall, on or before April 30 of
the current year, on or before July 31 of the current year, on or before
October 31 of the current year, and on or before January 31 of the
succeeding year, file a return and pay to the Income Tax Officer the
amount of taxes deducted during the preceding three-month period
ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the current year,
September 30 of the current year, and December 31 of the current
year, respectively. Each such return filed, unless otherwise agreed upon
between the Income Tax Officer and the employer, shall show the
name and social security number of each such employee, the earned
income of such employee during the preceding three-month period,
or other period, the tax deducted therefrom, the political subdivisions
imposing the tax upon such employee, the total earned income of all
such employees during such preceding three-month period, or other
period, and the total tax deducted therefrom and paid with the return.
Any employer who, for two of the preceding four quarterly periods, has
failed to deduct the proper tax, or any part thereof, or has failed to
pay over the proper amount of tax to the Income Tax Officer of the
Borough, may be required by such Officer to file his return and pay the
tax monthly. In such cases, payments of tax shall be made to the Officer
on or before the last day of the month succeeding the month for which
the tax was withheld.
C. On or before February 28 of every year after 1975, every employer shall
file with the Officer:
(1) An annual return showing the total amount of earned income paid,
the total amount of tax deducted, and the total amount of tax paid
to the Officer for the period beginning January 1 of the immediate
preceding year and ending December 31 of the immediate
preceding year.
(2) A return withholding statement for each employee employed
during all or part of the period beginning January 1 of the
immediate preceding year and ending December 31 of the
immediate preceding year, setting forth the employee's name,
address, and social security number, the amount of earned income
paid to the employee during said period, and the amount of tax
deducted, the political subdivisions imposing the tax upon such
employee, and the amount of tax paid to the Officer. Every
employer shall furnish two copies of the individual return to the
employee for whom it is filed.
D. Every employee who discontinues business prior to December 31 of any
current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business,
file the returns and withholding statements hereinabove required and
pay the tax due.
E. Except as otherwise provided by Section 9 of the Act of General
Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, approved the 31st day
§ 238-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-4
1:335
§ 238-5. Appointment of Income Tax Officer. [Amended 7-7-1993 by
Ord. No. 791]
The Borough Council may, from time to time, appoint and designate a
person or entity to serve as Income Tax Officer.
§ 238-6. Powers and duties of Income Tax Officer.
of December 1965, P.L. 1257, known as the "Local Tax Enabling Act," 53
P.S. § 6901 et seq.,70 every employer who willfully or negligently fails or
omits to make the deductions required by this section shall be liable for
payment of the taxes which he was required to withhold to the extent
that such taxes have not been recovered from the employee.
F. The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions
required by this section shall not relieve any employee from the
payment of the tax or from complying with the requirements of this
article relating to the filing of declarations and returns.
A. It shall be the duty of the Officer to collect and receive the taxes, fines
and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his duty to keep a
record showing the amount received by him from each person or
business paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
B. The Income Tax Officer, before entering upon his official duties, shall
give and acknowledge a bond to the Borough in such amount as may be
fixed from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.
(1) Each bond shall be joint and several, with one or more corporate
sureties which shall be surety companies authorized to do business
in this commonwealth and duly licensed by the Insurance
Commissioner of this commonwealth.
(2) Each bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful discharge by the
Income Tax Officer, his clerks, assistants and appointees of all
trusts confided in him by virtue of this office, upon the faithful
execution of all duties required of him by virtue of his office, upon
the just and faithful accounting or payment over, according to law,
of all moneys and all balances thereof paid to, received or held by
him by virtue of his office and upon the delivery to his successor or
successors in office of all books, papers, documents or other official
things held in right of his office.
(3) Each bond shall be taken in the name of the Borough and shall be
for the use of such Borough and for the use of such other person or
persons for whom money shall be collected or received, or as his or
her interest shall otherwise appear, in case of a breach of any of the
conditions thereof by the acts or neglect of the principal on the
bond.
70.Editor's Note: See also 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 238-4 IRWIN CODE § 238-6
1:336
(4) The Borough or any person may sue upon the said bond in its or his
own name for its or his own use.
(5) Each such bond shall contain the name or names of the surety
company or companies bound thereon. The Borough shall fix the
amount of the bond at an amount equal to the maximum amount of
taxes which may be in the possession of the Officer at any given
time.
(6) The Borough may, at any time, upon cause shown and due notice to
the Income Tax Officer, and his surety or sureties, require or allow
the substitution or the addition of a surety company acceptable to
said Borough for the purpose of making the bond sufficient in
amount, without releasing the surety or sureties first approved
from any accrued liability or previous action on such bond.
(7) The Officer's bond shall be held in the custody of the President of
Council of the Borough, or such other custodian as Council may
from time to time determine.
C. The Borough Council is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt,
promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter
pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article,
including provisions for the reexamination and correction of
declarations and returns and of payments alleged or found to be
incorrect or as to which any overpayment is claimed or found to have
occurred, and to make refunds in cases of overpayment, for any period
of time not to exceed six years subsequent to the date of payment of the
sum involved, and to prescribe forms necessary for the administration
of this article. Such rules and regulations shall be inscribed by the
Borough Secretary into a book kept for that purpose and open for the
inspection of the public. Such rules and regulations shall have the same
force and effect as if they have been incorporated into this article.
D. The Officer shall refund, on petition of and proof by the taxpayer,
earned income tax paid on the taxpayer's ordinary and necessary
business expenses, to the extent that such expenses are not paid by the
taxpayer's employer.
E. The Officer and agents designated by him are hereby authorized to
examine the books, papers and records of any employer or of any
taxpayer or of any person whom the Officer reasonably believes to be an
employer or taxpayer, in order to verify the accuracy of any declaration
or return, or if no declaration or return was filed, to ascertain the tax
due. Every employer and every taxpayer and every person whom the
Officer reasonably believes to be an employer or taxpayer is hereby
directed and required to give to the Officer, or to any agent designated
by him, the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination and
investigations as are hereby authorized.
F. Any information gained by the Officer, his agents, or by any other
official or agent of the Borough, as a result of any declarations, returns,
§ 238-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-6
1:337
§ 238-7. Compensation of Income Tax Officer.
The Income Tax Officer shall receive such compensation for his services and
expenses as determined from time to time by the Council of the Borough.
§ 238-8. Suit for recovery of tax.
investigations, hearings or verifications required or authorized by this
article, or by proper rules and regulations issued thereunder, shall be
confidential, except for official purposes and except in accordance with
proper judicial order, or as otherwise provided by law.
G. The Officer is authorized to establish different filing, reporting and
payment dates for taxpayers whose fiscal years do not coincide with the
calendar year.
A. The Officer may sue in the name of the Borough for the recovery of
taxes due and unpaid under this article.
B. Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by this article shall be
begun within three years after such tax is due or within three years
after the declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is later;
provided, however, that this limitation shall not prevent the institution
of a suit for the collection of any tax due or determined to be due in the
following cases:
(1) Where no declaration or return was filed by any person although a
declaration or return was required to be filed by him under
provisions of this article, there shall be no limitation.
(2) Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any
person, or of other evidence relating to such declaration or return
in the possession of the Officer, reveals a fraudulent evasion of
taxes, there shall be no limitation.
(3) In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability of 25% or
more and no fraud, suit shall be begun within six years.
(4) Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of this
article and has failed to pay the amounts so deducted to the Officer,
or where any person has willfully failed or omitted to make the
deductions required by this article, there shall be no limitation.
(5) No provision of this article shall be construed to limit the governing
body from recovering delinquent taxes by any other means
provided by the Local Tax Enabling Act, as approved December 31,
1965, P.L. 1257.71
C. The Officer may sue for recovery of an erroneous refund, provided such
suit is begun two years after making such refund, except that the suit
71.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 238-6 IRWIN CODE § 238-8
1:338
§ 238-9. Interest and penalties.
If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
per annum on the amount of said tax, and an additional penalty of 1/2 of 1%
of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof during
which the tax remains unpaid, shall be added and collected. Where suit is
brought for the recovery of any such tax, the person liable therefor shall, in
addition, be liable for the costs of collection and the interest and penalties
imposed herein.
§ 238-10. Violations and penalties.
may be brought within five years if it appears that any part of the refund
was induced by fraud or misrepresentation of material fact.
A. Any person who fails, neglects, or refuses to make any declaration or
return required by this article, any employer who fails, neglects or
refuses to register or to pay the tax deducted from his employees or
fails, neglects or refuses to deduct or withhold the tax from his
employees, any person who refuses to permit the Officer or any agent
designated by him to examine his books, records, and papers, and any
person who knowingly makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent
return, or attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full
disclosure of the amount of his net profits of earned income in order to
avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed by this
article, shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $500 for each offense, and costs, and, in default of payment
of said fine and costs, to be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30
days.
B. Any person who divulges any information which is confidential under
the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500 for each offense, and
costs, and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to be imprisoned
for a period not exceeding 30 days.
C. The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
D. The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for
making the declaration or returns required by this article shall not
excuse him from making such declaration or return.
§ 238-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-10
1:339

ARTICLE II
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 12-29-1986 by Ord. No. 742 (Ch. 24, Part 1, of the 1993
Code)]
§ 238-11. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of Irwin
Borough."
§ 238-12. Statutory authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within the
Borough, regardless of where the documents making the transfer are made,
executed or delivered, or where the actual settlements on such transfer took
place, as authorized by Article XI-D, "Local Real Estate Transfer Tax," 72
P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 238-13. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership, or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Irwin.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust,
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States, or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof, unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include a
declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under this
article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
§ 238-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-13
1:341
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing, and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association, or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both, the term "person" as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof, and, as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
Recreational activities, such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
A.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities.
B.
C. Fur farming.
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within the Borough, including
without limitation buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil,
gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower boundaries, trees,
and other improvements, immovables or interests which, by custom,
usage or law, pass with a conveyance of land, but excluding
permanently attached machinery and equipment in an industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in an cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate.
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
§ 238-13 IRWIN CODE § 238-13
1:342
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including without limitation an estate in fee simple, life estate, or
perpetual leasehold.
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or
possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of
30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate, provided that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the value thereof shall be determined from the price set
forth and actual consideration for the contract of sale.
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties, or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations.
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interest.
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related
D.
§ 238-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-13
1:343
§ 238-14. Imposition of tax; interest.
§ 238-15. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth, or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 238-16. Excluded transactions.
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording shall be
subject to pay, for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof,
a tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by
such document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the Recorder, whereon the
date of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the signature of
the collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.,72 so that if any other political
subdivision shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same
person or transfer, then the tax levied by the Borough under the
authority of that Act shall, during the time such duplication of the tax
exists, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate, and
such one-half rate shall become effective without any action on the part
of the Borough; provided, however, that the Borough and any other
political subdivision which impose such tax on the same person or
transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their respective rates to 1/2
of the rate herein provided, they will impose respectively different
rates, the total of which shall not exceed the maximum rate permitted
under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
D. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due shall be added and collected.
A. The tax imposed by § 238-14 of this article shall not be imposed upon:
72.Editor's Note: See also 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 238-13 IRWIN CODE § 238-16
1:344
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation, which reconveyance may include property line
adjustments, provided said reconveyance is made within one year
from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the Borough is prohibited from taxing under the
Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school
district or county of a tax-delinquent property at Sheriff sale or Tax
Claim Bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided the property or interest therein subject to such transfer
was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to
the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent and
child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister, and between a grandparent and
grandchild or the spouse of such grandchild, except that a
subsequent transfer by the grantee within one year shall be subject
to tax as if the grantor were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
§ 238-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-16
1:345
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party; or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would
be imposed under this article. Where the document by which title is
acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that
the property was acquired by the grantee from, or for the benefit
of, his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the
property is the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if
the grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this
subsection.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the Department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if the
grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary purpose
of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing,
publishing, research and development, transportation, energy
conversion, energy production, pollution control, warehousing or
agriculture; and the agency or authority has the full ownership
interest in the real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
§ 238-16 IRWIN CODE § 238-16
1:346
§ 238-17. Documents relating to associations or corporations.
Except as otherwise provided in § 238-16, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 238-18. Acquired companies.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax-exempt status
pursuant to § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 [68A
Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its primary purpose
preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic, agricultural
or open space opportunities.
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
(21) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(22) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of value
may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation of the
reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company and, of itself or together
with prior changes, has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
§ 238-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-18
1:347
§ 238-19. Credits against tax.
§ 238-20. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 238-21. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made, except the state realty transfer tax, and the Sheriff, or
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax declaration of acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
§ 238-18 IRWIN CODE § 238-21
1:348
other officer conducting said sale, shall pay the tax herein imposed out of
the first moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the
sale are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser
shall be liable for the remaining tax.
§ 238-22. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
§ 238-23. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of
value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 238-24. Civil penalties.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by the Act of July 7, 1983
(P.L. 40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for
the local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to Borough
based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax,
without compensation from the Borough.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to
Borough all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for use of the
county, together with a report containing the information as is required
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania reporting collections of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The two-percent commission shall be
paid to the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall record the deed or
record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the state
and the local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee have been
tendered.
§ 238-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-24
1:349
§ 238-25. Lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements, or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying or being
situated, wholly or in part, within the boundaries of the Borough, which
lands, tenements, hereditaments or interest therein are described in or
conveyed by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax
imposed, assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time
when the tax under this article is due and payable and continue until
discharged by payment, or in accordance with the law, and the Solicitor is
authorized to file a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of
Westmoreland County, in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal
Claims and Tax Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements
and amendments.
§ 238-26. Recovery of unpaid taxes.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 238-27. Enforcement.
The Secretary of the Borough is charged with the enforcement and
collection of the tax and is empowered to promulgate and enforce
reasonable regulations for enforcement and collection of the tax. The
regulations which have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department
of Revenue under 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into and made a
part of this article.
§ 238-28. Effective date.
This article and tax shall become effective on January 1, 1987, and shall
continue in force on a calendar-year basis without annual reenactment.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 238-24 IRWIN CODE § 238-28
1:350
ARTICLE III
Business Privilege Tax
[Adopted 11-30-1988 by Ord. No. 761 (Ch. 24, Part 2, of the 1993
Code)]
§ 238-29. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Business Privilege Tax Ordinance.
§ 238-30. Definitions; word usage.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Irwin.
BUSINESS — Any activity carried on or exercised for gain or for profit
in the Borough, including, but not limited to, the sale of merchandise or
other tangible personalty, the performance of services, and the rental of
personalty and/or realty.
CALENDAR YEAR — The period beginning January 1 through December 31,
inclusive.
MANUFACTURING — The application of labor and skill to material whereby
the original article is changed into a new, different, and useful article.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, association,
firm or corporation. Whenever used in any clause prescribing or imposing
a penalty, the term "person," as applied to associations, shall mean the
partners or members thereof, and, as applied to corporations, the officers
thereof.
TAX ADMINISTRATOR — The person duly appointed by the Council of the
Borough of Irwin to administer the within tax.
TAXPAYER — Any person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this
article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 through December 31, inclusive.
WHOLESALE DEALER — Any person who sells to dealers in or vendors of
goods, wares, and merchandise and to no other persons.
§ 238-31. Levy of tax; rate; computation of volume of business;
exemptions.
There is hereby levied for the tax year 1989 (and annually thereafter) a tax
for general revenue purposes on the privilege of doing business as herein
defined in the Borough, as follows:
A. Rate and basis of tax. The rate of the tax on each and every dollar of the
whole or gross volume of business transacted within the territorial
§ 238-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-31
1:351
limits of the Borough shall be one mill. "One mill" shall mean $1 per
every $1,000 of gross volume of business.
B. Computation of volume of business.
(1) Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
has commenced his business before the beginning of the full
calendar year prior to the tax year shall compute his annual
estimated gross volume of business upon the actual gross amount
of business transacted by him during the prior calendar year.
(2) Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
has commenced or who commenced his business before the
beginning of the tax year but after the beginning of the full
calendar year prior to the tax year shall compute his estimated
annual gross volume of business for the tax year upon the gross
amount of business transacted by him during the prior calendar
year, taking the monthly average during said period and
multiplying the same by 12. In the event that he shall be in business
fewer than 90 days in the prior calendar year, he shall be permitted
to use sufficient days in the calendar year in which the tax year
begins to equal 90 successive days after commencement of
business, to take a monthly average thereon, and to multiply the
same by 12.
(3) Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
has commenced or commences his business subsequent to the
beginning of the tax year, if there shall be less than three months
from the commencement of his business to the end of the tax year,
shall compute his annual gross volume of business upon the actual
gross amount of business transacted by him during the tax year; if
there shall be more than three months from the commencement of
his business to the end of the tax year, he shall compute his
estimated gross volume of business for such tax year upon the
gross amount of business transacted by him during the period from
the commencement of his business to the end of the tax year, taking
the monthly average during the first three months of business and
multiplying the same by the number of months from the
commencement of business to the end of the tax year.
(4) Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
engages in a business which is temporary, seasonal, or itinerant in
nature shall compute the estimated gross amount of business to be
transacted by him for the period said person engages in such
temporary, seasonal, or itinerant business within the Borough by a
method to be determined by the Tax Administrator.
(5) The Tax Administrator is hereby authorized to accept payment
under protest of the amount of business privilege tax claimed by
the Borough in any case where the taxpayer disputes the validity or
amount of the Borough's claim for tax. If it is thereafter judicially
§ 238-31 IRWIN CODE § 238-31
1:352
determined by a court of competent jurisdiction that the Borough
has been overpaid, the amount of the overpayment shall be
refunded to the taxpayer. The provisions of this section shall apply
to instances in which the facts are the same as those in like cases
litigated before a court of competent jurisdiction.
C. Persons, businesses and receipts exempted/excluded.
(1) Persons and businesses. Persons employed for a wage or salary, the
noncommercial activities of nonprofit corporations or associations
organized for religious, charitable or education purposes, agencies
of the government of the United States or of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, and the business of any political subdivision, or of
any authority created or organized under and pursuant to any Act
of Assembly, are exempt from the provisions of this article.
(2) Pre-exemption by commonwealth. No such tax shall be assessed
and collected on a privilege, transaction, subject or occupation
which is subject to a tax or license fee by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and which tax or license fee has been held by a court
of competent jurisdiction to be the basis for exemption from the
imposition of a business privilege tax by a political subdivision.
(3) Utilities. No such tax shall be assessed and collected on the gross
receipts from utility service of any person or company whose rates
of service are fixed and regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission; or on any public utility service rendered by any such
person or company or on any privilege or transaction involving the
rendering of any such public utility service.
(4) Commonwealth tax on tangible property. No such tax shall be
assessed and collected on the privilege of employing such tangible
property as is subject to a tax by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, except on sales of admission to places of amusement
or on sales or other transfers of title or possession of property.
(5) Production and manufacture. No such tax shall be assessed and
collected on goods, articles and products, or on by-products of
manufacture, or on minerals, timber, natural resources and farm
products manufactured, produced or grown in the Borough, or on
the preparation or processing thereof for use or market, or on any
privilege, act, or transaction relating to the business of
manufacturing, the production, preparation or processing of
minerals, timber, and natural resources or farm products by
manufacturers, by producers, and by farmers with respect to the
goods, articles, and products of their own manufacture, production,
or growth, or any privilege, act, or transaction relating to the
business of processing by-products of manufacture, or on the
transportation, loading, unloading, or dumping or storage of such
goods, articles, products, or by-products.
§ 238-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-31
1:353
(6) Trade-in allowance. No such tax shall be assessed and collected on
the dollar volume of business transacted by wholesale and retail
dealers derived from the resale of goods, wares, and merchandise
taken by any such dealer as a trade-in or as part payment for other
goods, wares, and merchandise, except to the extent that the resale
price exceeds the trade-in allowance.
(7) Contractors performing building or construction work outside the
Borough.
(a) Contractors with field offices. Borough contractors or
subcontractors engaged in the performance of building and
construction contracts at a point outside the territorial limits of
the Borough may exclude from the measure of the tax the
receipts derived therefrom, provided that a bona fide field
office was established and maintained on the premises of the
project during the performance of the contract to such an
extent as to constitute doing local business at the situs of the
job.
(b) Alteration and repairs. The provisions of this section shall
apply only to contractors engaged in the erection of complete
new buildings or in the complete altering and remodeling of
old buildings. They do not apply to contractors who engage in
alteration and repair jobs, such as a roofer repairing the roof of
a building situated outside the Borough.
(c) Architects, engineers, consultants, and technicians. The
provisions of this subsection do not apply to architects,
engineers, consultants, and technicians rendering professional
services outside the Borough.
(d) Qualifications for exclusion. In order to qualify for exclusion
hereunder, the contractor must show that he established a
place of business at the situs of the job by maintaining a bona
fide field office thereat with machinery and equipment for use
in the fulfillment of the contract, together with the
performance of such other functions so as to constitute doing
local business at the situs of the job.
(8) Brokers and agents with out-of-Borough branch offices.
(a) Where a Borough general agent or broker of an insurance, real
estate, or other firm establishes and maintains a bona fide
branch office outside the Borough, the commissions
attributable to such branch office may be excluded from gross
receipts. Commissions will be deemed attributable to the
Borough, and hence subject to inclusion in the measure of the
tax, if they result from the efforts of brokers, subagents, or
employees who work in, from, or are attached to the Borough
office.
§ 238-31 IRWIN CODE § 238-31
1:354
(b) In order to qualify for exclusion hereunder, the agent or broker
must show that he established and maintained a bona fide
place of business outside the Borough by owning or leasing
realty thereat, together with the performance of such other
functions so as to clearly constitute doing local business at
such location.
(9) Businesses with out-of-Borough branch offices, stores, etc.
(a) Where a Borough business establishes and maintains a bona
fide branch office, store, or other place of business outside the
Borough, the receipts attributable to such branch offices or
stores may be excluded from the gross volume of business.
Receipts will be deemed attributable to the Borough, and
hence subject to including in the measure of the tax, if they
result from the efforts of persons who work in, from, or are
attached to the Borough place of business.
(b) In order to qualify for exclusion hereunder, the taxpayer must
show that he established and maintained a bona fide place of
business outside the Borough by owning or leasing realty
thereat, together with the performance of such other functions
so as to clearly constitute doing local business at such location.
D. Determination of gross or whole volume business. The gross or whole
volume of business upon which the tax hereunder is computed shall
include the gross consideration credited or received for or on account
of sales made, services performed, personalty or realty rented, and
commissions earned, subject only to allowable deductions and
exemptions. Where the gross or whole volume of business cannot be
subjected to the tax imposed by this article by reason of the provisions
of the Constitution of the United States or of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any other provision of law, the Tax Administrator, with
the approval by resolution of the Borough Council, shall promulgate
rules and regulations and methods of allocation and evaluation so that
only the gross or whole volume of business which is properly
attributable and allocable to doing business in the Borough shall be
taxed hereunder.
E. Partial exemptions/exclusions. Where the gross or whole volume of
business in its entirety cannot be subjected to the tax imposed by this
article by reason of the provisions of the Constitution of the United
States or of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other provision
of law, the Tax Administrator, with the approval by resolution of the
Council of the Borough, shall promulgate rules and regulations and
methods of allocation and evaluation so that only that part of the gross
or whole volume of business which is properly attributable and
allocable to doing business in the Borough shall be taxed hereunder.
F. Rate when same tax is imposed by two taxing bodies. If any person is
liable for the same tax on the same subject imposed under the Local Tax
§ 238-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-31
1:355
§ 238-32. Returns.
Enabling Act, 1965, P.L. 1257, No. 511, as amended,73 and/or the Home
Rule Charter and Optional Plans Law, 1972, P.L. 814, No. 64, as
amended,74 to the Borough and one or more noncoterminous political
subdivisions of the commonwealth, then, in that event, the tax shall be
apportioned by such percentage as may be agreed upon by the political
subdivisions, but in no event shall the combined taxes of both political
subdivisions exceed the maximum rate of tax as fixed by the Enabling
Act permitting the imposition of such taxes.
G. Records. The taxpayer, to obtain the allowable exemptions, exclusions,
and deductions, shall keep books and records of his business so as to
show clearly, accurately and separately the amount of such sales,
services, and rentals which he is entitled to deduct from the gross or
whole volume of business as hereinbefore provided.
H. The obligation to pay the tax, as provided hereunder, shall not apply to
any person or taxpayer who shall have less than $5,000 of whole or
gross volume of business transacted within the territorial limits of the
Borough; provided, however, each person shall file his annual return as
provided for in § 238-32 of this article, notwithstanding the fact that no
taxes may be owing.
A. Every return shall be made upon a form furnished by the Tax
Administrator. Every person making a return shall certify the
correctness thereof by affidavit and attach thereto a copy of the
appropriate form or schedule from their federal income tax return for
their prior calendar or fiscal year(s) to substantiate the gross or whole
volume of business reported. Where exemptions or exclusions are
claimed, substantiation of the nature and amount of such deductions
taken shall be attached to the return.
B. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who commenced
his business on or before January 1 of the full calendar year prior to the
beginning of any tax year shall, on or before the 15th day of May of the
tax year, file with the Tax Administrator a return setting forth his name,
his business, business address, and such other information as may be
necessary in arriving at the actual gross amount of business transacted
by him during the preceding calendar year and the amount of the tax
due.
C. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who has
commenced his business before the beginning of any tax year shall,
within 105 days from the date of commencing such business if said onehundred-
five-day period ends after May 15th of the tax year, and if prior
thereto, on May 15th of the tax year, file with the Tax Administrator a
return setting forth his name, his business, business address, and such
73.Editor's Note: See also 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
74.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2901 et seq.
§ 238-31 IRWIN CODE § 238-32
1:356
§ 238-33. Licensing requirements.
On or after the effective date of this article, any person desiring to conduct
or to continue to conduct any business, as herein defined, within the
Borough shall file with the Tax Administrator an application for the issuance
other information as may be necessary in arriving at the estimated or
actual gross amount of business transacted by him, as calculated in
§ 238-31 hereof, and the amount of the tax due.
D. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who commences
business subsequent to the beginning of any tax year shall, within 105
days from the date of commencing such business if said one-hundredfive-
day period ends after May 15th of the tax year, and if prior thereto,
on May 15th of the tax year, file with the Tax Administrator a return
setting forth his name, his business, business address, and such other
information as may be necessary in arriving at the estimated or actual
gross amount of business transacted by him, as calculated under
§ 238-31 of this article, and the amount of the tax due.
E. Every person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this article
who engages in a business which is temporary, seasonal, or itinerant by
its nature shall, at the time application is made for the business
privilege license, file a return with the Tax Administrator setting forth
his name, his business, business address, and such other information as
may be necessary in arriving at the estimated gross amount of business
transacted by him, as calculated under § 238-31 of this article, and the
amount of the tax due.
F. Any person going out of or ceasing to do business in the Borough shall,
within 15 days from the date of ceasing to do business, file a return with
the Tax Administrator showing the actual gross amount of business
transacted by such person during the tax year in which said person
ceased doing business and pay the tax due, as computed thereon, at the
rate herein provided for at the time of filing said return. If such tax has
been previously paid based upon estimated gross receipts, the taxpayer
shall be entitled to a refund of any excess taxes paid for the tax year in
which business was terminated.
G. Payment of tax and penalties for late payment. The tax levied pursuant
to this article shall be due and payable on the date on which the
taxpayer is required to file a return, as set forth hereinabove, and, if the
same is not paid on that date, a penalty of 10% shall be added thereto,
plus interest at the rate of 1% per month of the unpaid tax for each
month or fraction thereof during which the tax remains unpaid. Total
amounts due of less than $1 need not be paid.
H. Receipt. The Tax Administrator shall, upon payment to him of tax levied
pursuant to this article, give the person paying the same a receipt
therefor, if requested. If a receipt via return mail is desired, a stamped,
self-addressed envelope shall be furnished by the taxpayer.
§ 238-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-33
1:357
of a business privilege license. Such license shall be valid only for the
person to whom it is issued and shall not be transferable or assignable to
any other person.
§ 238-34. Posting of license.
The license shall be conspicuously posted in the place of business for
which such license is issued. A licensee maintaining more than one place
of business within the Borough shall obtain one license for all his places of
business and shall post such license at his principal place of business.
§ 238-35. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No.
791; 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 961]
Any person who conducts or engages in any business subject to the tax
imposed by this article, without having first secured a business privilege
license, or who fails to file a complete tax return, inclusive of all necessary
federal and state tax forms and schedules necessary to substantiate the
same, and as required by the provisions of this article or who willfully files
a false return or who fails to maintain such records and books of account
as shall enable him to make a true and correct return in accordance with
the provisions of this article or any person subject to (or supposed to be
subject to) the tax imposed by this article who refuses to allow the Tax
Administrator or his duly appointed deputies to examine the books, papers,
and records of such person, or who fails to comply with any other provisions
of this article, shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $600 for each
offense, plus costs, and, in default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned
for not more than 30 days.
§ 238-36. Continuing offense.
Each day on which any person violates this article shall be considered as a
separate offense and shall be punishable as such as hereinbefore provided.
§ 238-37. Duties of Tax Administrator.
A. The Tax Administrator is charged with the duty of collecting and
receiving the taxes, fines, interest and penalties imposed by this article.
It shall be his duty to keep a record showing the amount received by
him from each person paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
B. The Tax Administrator and his duly appointed deputies, under the
direction of the Borough Council, are hereby empowered, with the
approval by resolution of the Borough Council, to prescribe, adopt and
promulgate rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to
the administration and enforcement of this article, including the
administration and enforcement of this article, including provisions for
the reexamination and correction of returns, and of payments alleged
or found to be incorrect, or as to which an overpayment is claimed or
found to have occurred, and charged with enforcing the provisions of
§ 238-33 IRWIN CODE § 238-37
1:358
§ 238-38. Confidential nature of returns.
Any information gained by the Tax Administrator or his duly appointed
deputies, or any other official, agent or employee of the Borough, as a result
of any return, examination, investigation, hearing, or verifications required
or authorized by this article shall be confidential, except in accordance with
proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law.
§ 238-39. Suit for collection.
this article and any rules and/or regulations promulgated pursuant
hereto.
C. In the event any person subject to the tax imposed by this article
neglects or refuses to make a return, then, and in such case, the Tax
Administrator or his duly appointed deputies shall assess said person
on such an amount of whole or gross volume of business as the Tax
Administrator or his deputies deem reasonable and appropriate. In all
cases of assessment, the Tax Administrator or his deputies shall give
the person assessed a notice, in which shall be stated the nature of
business conducted and the amount of tax imposed or levied.
D. Any person subject to the tax imposed by this article shall maintain
such records and books of account as will enable him to make a true
and accurate return in accordance with the provisions of this article.
Such records must disclose, in detail, gross receipts and other data
pertaining to the taxpayer's gross or whole volume of business and
must be sufficiently complete to enable the Tax Administrator or his
duly appointed deputies to verify all transactions. The Tax
Administrator or his deputies are hereby authorized to examine the
books, papers, and records of any person subject to or supposed to be
subject to the tax imposed by this article, in order to verify the accuracy
of any return made or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax due.
A. The Tax Administrator or his duly appointed deputies shall have the
power, in the name of the Borough, to institute proceedings against any
person who violates the provisions of this article.
B. If, for any reason, the tax is not paid when due and suit is brought for
the recovery of such tax, the person liable therefor shall, in addition, be
liable for the costs of collection and the interest and penalties herein
imposed.
§ 238-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-39
1:359

ARTICLE IV
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 12-12-2007 by Ord. No. 884]
§ 238-40. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Irwin Local
Services Tax Ordinance."
§ 238-41. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
BOROUGH OF IRWIN or BOROUGH — The area within the corporate limits
of the Borough of Irwin.
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency designated
by the Borough of Irwin to collect and administer the tax herein imposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation, as this term is defined in Section 13
(relating to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of
December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, Section 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as
amended.75
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited-liability
corporation, limited-liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the Borough of Irwin.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession or other activity, as this term is defined in Section 13 (relating
to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of December
31, 1965, P.L. 1257, Section 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.76
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, carried on
or performed within the corporate limits of the Borough of Irwin for which
75.Editor's Note: Section 13 of the Local Tax Enabling Act (53 P.S. § 6913) was repealed
7-2-2008 by P.L. 197, No. 32, § 17, effective 6-30-2012. For current provisions, see 53 P.S.
§ 6924.501 et seq.
76.Editor's Note: Section 13 of the Local Tax Enabling Act (53 P.S. § 6913) was repealed
7-2-2008 by P.L. 197, No. 32, § 17, effective 6-30-2012. For current provisions, see 53 P.S.
§ 6924.501 et seq.
§ 238-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-41
1:361
compensation is charged or received, whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 238-42.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
§ 238-42. Imposition of tax; use of funds.
For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and assessed,
commencing January 1, 2008, upon the privilege of engaging in an
occupation with a primary place of employment within the Borough of
Irwin during the tax year. Each natural person who exercises such privilege
for any length of time during any tax year shall pay the tax for that
year in the amount of $52, assessed on a pro rata basis, in accordance
with the provisions of this article. This tax may be used solely for the
following purposes, as the same may be allocated by the Borough Council
from time to time: emergency services, which shall include emergency
medical services, police services and/or fire services; road construction and/
or maintenance; reduction of property taxes; or property tax relief through
implementation of a homestead and farmstead exclusion in accordance with
53 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 85, Subchapter F (relating to the homestead property
exclusion).77 The Borough shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived
from the tax for emergency services. This tax is in addition to all other
taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the Borough of Irwin.
The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar year,
irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a person
may be employed.
§ 238-43. Exemptions; refunds.
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the Borough is less than $12,000 for any calendar
year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of the tax for
that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are exempt from
payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total one-hundred-percent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
77.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8581 et seq.
§ 238-41 IRWIN CODE § 238-43
1:362
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the Borough and
with the person's employer affirming that the person reasonably
expects to receive earned income and net profits from all sources
within the Borough of less than $12,000 in the calendar year for
which the exemption certificate is filed. In the event the Borough
utilizes a tax collection officer, it shall provide a copy of the
exemption certificate to that officer. The exemption certificate shall
have attached to it a copy of all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2
forms from employment within the Borough for the year prior to
the fiscal year for which the employee is requesting to be exempted
from the tax. Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until
otherwise instructed by the Borough or except as required by
Subsection B(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax from the
person during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar
year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall
ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to
employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a
form at the time of hiring. The exemption certificate form shall be
the uniform form provided by the Borough.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the Borough that the person has received earned
income and net profits from all sources within the Borough equal to
or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or that the person is
otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that calendar year, or
upon an employer's payment to the person of earned income within
the Borough in an amount equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that
calendar year, an employer shall withhold the local services tax
from the person under Subsection B(3).
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per-payroll
amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld
per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that
calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
§ 238-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-43
1:363
§ 238-44. Duty of employers to collect.
withholding of the tax under this subsection is subsequently
severed in that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any
outstanding balance of tax due, and the Borough may pursue
collection under this article.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or
exempting any employee from a local services tax.
C. Refunds. The Borough Manager, in consultation with the Collector and
DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of refund claims
for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption, which
procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the general municipal
law relating to refunds of overpayments and interest on overpayments.
Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or 75 days after the
last day the employer is required to remit the tax for the last quarter of
the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject to interest. No
refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a calendar year that do
not exceed $1. The Borough Manager or the Collector shall determine
eligibility for exemption and provide refunds to exempt persons.
A. Each employer within the Borough of Irwin, as well as those employers
situated outside the Borough of Irwin but who engage in business
within the Borough of Irwin, is hereby charged with the duty of
collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or
performing for him within the Borough of Irwin and making a return
and payment thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer is hereby
authorized to deduct this tax from each employee in his or her employ,
whether said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and
whether or not all such services are performed within the Borough of
Irwin.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the combined rate
of the tax levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest onehundredth
of a dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payrollperiod
basis for each payroll period in which the person is engaging in
an occupation, except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For
purposes of this subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate
annual rate of the tax levied by the school district and the Borough.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
§ 238-43 IRWIN CODE § 238-44
1:364
§ 238-45. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her
to an employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer
shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
§ 238-46. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the Collector on or before the thirtieth day following the
end of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 238-47. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of
employment within the Borough of Irwin shall be required to comply with
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed. The Borough shall provide a taxpayer a
receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the Borough if the failure to
withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by the
employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of § 238-43B of
this article and this section and remits the amount so withheld in
accordance with this article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
§ 238-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-47
1:365
this article and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the Collector on or
before the thirtieth day following the end of each quarter.
§ 238-48. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
§ 238-49. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the Borough of Irwin but who perform services of
any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
Borough of Irwin do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents
of the Borough of Irwin. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the Borough of Irwin and an employee of a nonresidential employer
may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed person,
and in the event his or her tax is not paid, the Borough shall have the option
of proceeding against either the employer or employee for the collection of
this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 238-50. Administration and enforcement.
A. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person
working in more than one political subdivision during a payroll period,
the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in the
following order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or
her principal office or is principally employed;
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar
year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes
prima facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
A. The Collector shall be appointed by resolution of the Borough Council.
It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive payments of
this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount received by
him from each employer or self-employed person, together with the
date the tax was received.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
§ 238-47 IRWIN CODE § 238-50
1:366
§ 238-51. Suits for collection.
§ 238-52. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his or her custody and control setting forth the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his or her employment or whoever fails or
refuses to file any return required by this article shall be guilty of a violation
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600, and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to
enforce the penalty herein prescribed may be instituted against any person
in charge of the business of any employer who shall have failed or who
refuses to file a return required by this article.
§ 238-53. Construal of provisions.
subject to Borough Council approval, to prescribe, adopt and
promulgate rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to
the administration and enforcement of this article, including provisions
for the examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this
article, the examination and correction of any return made in
compliance with this article and any payment alleged or found to be
incorrect or as to which overpayment is claimed or found to have
occurred. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall
have the right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Westmoreland
County as in other cases provided.
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with
interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax, and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of
such tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery
of this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
Borough of Irwin to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the Borough under the
§ 238-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-53
1:367
Constitution of the United States and the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 238-53 IRWIN CODE § 238-53
1:368
ARTICLE V
Local Economic Revitalization Tax Exemption
[Adopted 7-8-2009 by Ord. No. 888; amended in its entirety
4-14-2010 by Ord. No. 893]
§ 238-54. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings set forth below:
ASSESSMENT AGENCY — The Tax Assessment Office of Westmoreland
County, Pennsylvania.
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS — The Board of Commissioners of
Westmoreland County.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Council of the Borough of Irwin.
ECONOMIC INVESTMENT AREA — Those areas within Westmoreland
County, the boundaries of which have been or will hereafter be fixed by
a municipal governing body or bodies pursuant to Act 76 of 1977,78 as
amended and supplemented, in which improvements to deteriorated
property are eligible for a tax exemption, including the following areas
listed on Exhibit A, attached hereto and expressly made a part hereof.79
ECONOMIC INVESTMENT PROPERTY — Any industrial, commercial, or
other business property owned by an individual, association or corporation
and located in an economic investment area, or any such property which
has been the subject of an order by a government agency requiring the unit
to be vacated, condemned or demolished by reason of noncompliance with
laws, ordinances or regulations.
IMPROVEMENT — Repair, construction or reconstruction, including
alterations and additions, having the effect of rehabilitating a deteriorated
property so that it becomes habitable or attains higher standards of safety,
health, economic use or amenity, or is brought into compliance with laws,
ordinances or regulations governing such standards. Ordinary upkeep and
maintenance shall not be deemed an improvement.
LOCAL TAXING AUTHORITY — The County of Westmoreland, the Norwin
School District and the Borough of Irwin.
§ 238-55. Deteriorated area.
A. Any industrial, commercial or other business property owned by an
individual, association or corporation, as set forth on Exhibit A,
attached hereto and expressly made a part hereof,80 is hereby
determined to be a deteriorated area, as that term is defined and used
in the Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance Act;81 and further,
78.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 4722 et seq.
79.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Borough offices.
80.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 238-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-55
1:369
§ 238-56. Exemption schedule.
The actual amount of taxes exempted shall be subject to the following
limitations:
said area is hereby designated as a deteriorated area within the
Borough of Irwin.
B. The amount of assessment to be exempted from real property taxes
shall be limited to that portion of the additional assessment attributable
to the actual cost of new construction or improvements to real property
within the designated deteriorated area.
C. The exemption shall be limited to that assessment attributable to the
actual cost of new construction or improvements for which an
exemption has been requested in the manner set forth below, and for
which a separate assessment has been made by the assessment agency.
No tax exemption shall be granted if the property owner does not
secure the necessary and proper permits from all applicable
governmental bodies and agencies applicable to the construction and
improvements of the property.
D. In any case, after the effective date of this article, where deteriorated
property is damaged, destroyed or demolished by any cause or for any
reason and the assessed valuation of the property affected has been
reduced as a result of the said damage, destruction or demolition, the
exemption from real property taxation authorized by this article shall
be limited to that portion of new assessment attributable to the actual
cost of improvements or construction that is in excess of the original
assessment that existed prior to damage, destruction or demolition of
the property.
A. Said exemption shall commence on the date that the improvement(s) to
said property is occupied or when the occupancy permit has been
issued, whichever occurs first, and at which time said improvement(s)
shall be exempt as follows under either Schedule A or Schedule B, with
the applicable schedule to be elected by the owner upon submission of
the application for exemption:
(1) Schedule A:
(a) Exemption for the first year: 100%.
(b) Exemption for the second year: 100%.
(c) Exemption for the third year: 100%.
(d) Exemption for the fourth year: 0%.
(e) Exemption for the fifth year: 0%.
81.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 4722 et seq.
§ 238-55 IRWIN CODE § 238-56
1:370
(2) Schedule B:
(a) Exemption for the first year: 100%.
(b) Exemption for the second year: 80%.
(c) Exemption for the third year: 60%.
(d) Exemption for the fourth year: 40%.
(e) Exemption for the fifth year: 20%.
(3) The schedule elected by the owner upon submission of the
application for exemption shall be the same for all taxing
authorities (i.e., local, county and school).
B. The exemption from taxes granted under this article shall be upon the
property exempted and shall not terminate upon the sale or exchange of
the property.
C. Procedure for obtaining exemption.
(1) Any person desiring tax exemption pursuant to this article shall
notify each local taxing authority granting such exemption, in
writing, on a form provided by each such taxing authority, at the
time the person secures the necessary permits for new
construction or new improvements to the property in the
deteriorated area.
(2) A copy of each completed exemption request shall be forwarded to
the assessment agency by the local taxing authority.
(3) Upon completion of the new construction or improvement, the
taxpayer shall notify the local taxing authority and the assessment
agency. The assessment agency shall then assess separately the
new construction or improvement for the purpose of calculating the
amount of assessment eligible for tax exemption in accordance
with the limits established by this article and shall notify the
taxpayer and the local taxing authorities of the reassessment and
amounts of the assessment eligible for exemption.
(4) The assessments for cost of new construction and improvements to
be exempted and the schedule of taxes exempted existing at the
time of the initial request for tax exemption shall be applicable to
that exemption request, and subsequent amendments to this
article, if any, shall not apply to requests initiated prior to the
adoption of such amendments.
(5) Appeals from the reassessment and from the amount found to be
eligible for the exemption may be taken by the local taxing
authorities or by the taxpayer as provided by law.
§ 238-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-57
1:371
§ 238-57. Termination.
Unless sooner repealed by the Borough of Irwin, this article shall
automatically expire and terminate 15 years following the effective date
hereof; provided, however, that any taxpayer who has received or applied
for the exemption granted by this article prior to the expiration date herein
provided shall, if said exemption is granted, be entitled to the full exemption
authorized herein.
§ 238-58. When effective.
A. This article shall only take effect if identical ordinances and/or
resolutions are adopted and enacted by all local taxing authorities
having authority to levy real estate taxes on property in the
deteriorated area; and if all such local taxing authorities adopted and
enacted such ordinances and/or resolutions, then the effective date of
this article shall be the effective date of the last enacted ordinance and/
or resolution.
B. This article shall continue in effect, if and only if all local tax authorities
shall keep and maintain in effect the ordinances and/or resolutions set
forth in Subsection A above. If any other taxing authority amends,
modifies, alters, changes or repeals any such ordinances and/or
resolutions, then and in that event such action shall automatically
repeal this article.
§ 238-57 IRWIN CODE § 238-58
1:372
ARTICLE VI
Per Capita Tax
[Added 11-8-2017 by Ord. No. 957]
§ 238-59. Authority.
A per capita tax for general revenue purposes is levied and assessed
pursuant to and under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of
1965, December 31, P.L. 1257, as amended (53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.).
§ 238-60. Tax imposed.
§ 238-61. Payment.
The tax herein assessed and levied shall be payable to the Tax Collector in
the Borough and shall be payable contemporaneously with real estate taxes
assessed and levied by the Borough.
§ 238-62. Collection.
The per capita tax shall be collected by the duly elected or appointed Tax
Collector of the Borough of Irwin in the manner prescribed by the Local
Tax Collection Law of 1945, as amended and supplemented. The said Tax
Collector shall exercise all of the powers and shall have all the duties
provided for in the Local Tax Collection Law.
§ 238-63. Discount and penalty.
All taxes paid within two months of the due date of the tax shall be entitled
to a two-percent discount, which shall be deducted by the Tax Collector. All
taxes unpaid for a period of four months after the due date shall be subject
to a ten-percent penalty, which shall be added by the Tax Collector.
§ 238-64. Exemptions.
A. A per capita tax is hereby imposed for general revenue purposes at the
rate of $10, or such lesser rate as provided in Subsection B herein, per
annum on each resident or inhabitant of the Borough of Irwin over 18
years of age. The taxes imposed under this article shall be for the
purpose of providing additional revenue to cover increased costs of the
Borough.
B. It is the intent of this section that the entire burden of the per capita tax
imposed herein shall not exceed the limitations prescribed in the Local
Tax Enabling Act of 1965, December 31, P.L. 1257, as amended (53 P.S.
§ 6924.101 et seq.), so that if any other political subdivision has
imposed or shall hereafter impose the same tax, then the tax levied by
the Borough under the authority of the said Act shall during the time
such duplication of the tax exists, except as hereinafter otherwise
provided, be 1/2 of the rate, and such 1/2 rate shall become effective
without any action on the part of the Borough.
§ 238-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-64
1:373
§ 238-65. Enforcement.
The tax imposed by this article shall be recoverable as other debts of like
character are recovered.
§ 238-66. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons who shall violate this article shall, upon conviction
thereof in a summary proceeding before a District Judge, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and in default
of payment of such fine and costs be imprisoned for a period not to exceed
30 days, or both.
§ 238-67. Severability.
If any sentence, clause, section or part of this article is for any reason found
to be unconstitutional, illegal, invalid or void, such unconstitutionality,
illegality, invalidity or nullity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this article. It is hereby
declared as the intent of the Borough that this article would have been
adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal, invalid or void provision,
sentence, clause, section or part thereof had not been included herein.
§ 238-68. Effective date.
This article shall become effective January 1, 2018, and shall remain in
effect and continue in force thereafter from year to year on a calendar year
basis without annual reenactment unless amended or repealed.
A. Any taxpayer who would otherwise be subject to the tax herein levied
shall be exempt from the payment of this tax if said taxpayer's total
income from all sources is less than $12,000.
B. Any taxpayer requesting an exemption must submit an exemption
application to the Tax Collector on a form to be supplied by the
Borough. The Borough may request such information and data as may
be necessary to ascertain the validity of the exemption request. Failure
to supply requested information will disqualify a taxpayer from claiming
an exemption. Such application must be verified by a sworn statement
as to its validity. The exemption application must be submitted on an
annual basis by the first day of October (for exemption from the next
year's tax) and shall not be considered as continuing from year to year.
§ 238-64 IRWIN CODE § 238-68
1:374
ARTICLE VII
Occupation Residence Tax
[Added 11-8-2017 by Ord. No. 956]
§ 238-69. Definitions.
§ 238-70. Imposition of tax.
A. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall have, for
the purpose of this article, the meanings herein indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form
or unincorporated enterprise owned by two or more persons.
BUSINESS — Includes any enterprise, activity, profession or
undertaking of any nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted
for profit, whether by an individual, copartnership, association or other
entity.
CORPORATION — Any corporation or joint-stock association organized
under the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any other state, territory or foreign country or
dependency.
EMPLOYER — Any individual, copartnership, association, corporation,
governmental body or unit or agency or any other entity who or that
employs one or more persons.
INDIVIDUAL or PERSON — Includes a natural person, copartnership,
association, firm or fiduciary. Whenever used in any clause prescribing
and imposing a penalty, the term "individual" or "person," as applied
to associations, shall mean the partners or members thereof and, as
applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
NONRESIDENT — An individual, copartnership, association or other
entity domiciled outside the Borough of Irwin.
RESIDENT — An individual, copartnership, association or other entity
domiciled in the Borough of Irwin.
B. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and the neuter.
A. An annual tax for general revenue purposes is hereby levied, said tax
being an occupational residence tax at the rate of $10 per annum on
each person, individual or resident or inhabitant of the Borough of
Irwin, Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania, who is engaged in any
occupation, trade or profession whose gross earnings are $12,000 or
more.
B. It is the intent of this section that the entire burden of the per capita tax
imposed herein shall not exceed the limitations prescribed in the Local
Tax Enabling Act of 1965, December 31, P.L. 1257, as amended (53 P.S.
§ 6924.101 et seq.), so that if any other political subdivision has
§ 238-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-70
1:375
§ 238-71. Authority to collect tax.
Taxes herein levied, assessed and imposed shall be payable to the Borough
of Irwin or to a collector approved by Council of the Borough of Irwin to
collect said tax. The person or persons so appointed as receiver of said tax
shall collect and receive all such taxes, furnish a receipt for their payment
and keep a record of the amount received from each individual taxpayer
under this article and the date of said receipt.
§ 238-72. Payment of tax.
The tax herein assessed and levied shall be payable to the Tax Collector in
the Borough and shall be payable contemporaneously with real estate taxes
assessed and levied by the Borough.
§ 238-73. Collection at source.
The per capita tax shall be collected by the duly elected or appointed Tax
Collector of the Borough of Irwin in the manner prescribed by the Local
Tax Collection Law of 1945,82 as amended and supplemented. The said
Tax Collector shall exercise all of the powers and shall have all the duties
provided for in the Local Tax Collection Law.
§ 238-74. Enforcement; rules and regulations.
The Manager of the Borough of Irwin or any other person designated by
Council of the Borough of Irwin is hereby charged with the enforcement of
the provisions of this article and is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt,
promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter or
thing pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the provisions of
this article, including provision for the examination of employment records.
§ 238-75. Discount and penalty.
All taxes paid within two months of the due date of the tax shall be entitled
to a two-percent discount, which shall be deducted by the Tax Collector. All
taxes unpaid for a period of four months after the due date shall be subject
to a ten-percent penalty, which shall be added by the Tax Collector.
imposed or shall hereafter impose the same tax, then the tax levied
by the Borough under the authority of the said Act shall during the
time such duplication of the tax exists, except as hereinafter otherwise
provided, be 1/2 of the rate, and such 1/2 rate shall become effective
without any action on the part of the Borough.
C. This occupational residence tax shall be and is in addition to all other
taxes levied and assessed by the Borough of Irwin.
82.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
§ 238-70 IRWIN CODE § 238-76
1:376
§ 238-76. Right of collection.
The tax assessed, levied and imposed hereunder shall be collected from
each individual or person subject to said tax, notwithstanding the fact that
the name of any such person or individual shall not appear on the list
of individuals or persons subject to taxation with said Borough of Irwin
furnished to the Collector and, further, notwithstanding the fact that no
notice, by mail or otherwise, shall have been given to such individual or
person of the fact that he or she is liable for payment of said tax. The name
of any such individual or person shall be added to the duplicate of said
Collector in the manner now provided by law for per capita taxes imposed
by Boroughs.
§ 238-77. Collection of unpaid taxes.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with all interest and penalties,
shall be recovered by said Collector and the Borough Solicitor as other
taxes and other debts of like amounts are recovered.
§ 238-78. Violations and penalties.
Any individual or person convicted before any District Justice or other
Magistrate of competent jurisdiction for violating any of the provisions or
requirements of this article, including the failure, neglect or refusal to pay
said tax, penalties and interest imposed by this article, shall be subject to
a fine or penalty not exceeding $600 and costs for each such offense or to
undergo imprisonment in any correctional facility or lockup for not more
than 30 days for the nonpayment of such fine or penalty and costs within 10
days from the imposition thereof. Such fine or penalty shall be in addition to
any other penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
§ 238-79. Applicability.
This article shall not apply to any individual or person as to whom or which
it is beyond the legal power of the Borough of Irwin, under the laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to impose the tax, duties or obligations
herein provided.
§ 238-80. Severability.
If any sentence, clause, section or part of this article is for any reason found
to be unconstitutional, illegal, invalid or void, such unconstitutionality,
illegality, invalidity or nullity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this article. It is hereby
declared as the intent of the Borough that this article would have been
adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal, invalid or void provision,
sentence, clause, section or part thereof had not been included herein.
§ 238-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-81
1:377
§ 238-81. Effective date.
This article shall become effective January 1, 2018, and shall remain in
effect and continue in force thereafter from year to year on a calendar year
basis without annual reenactment unless amended or repealed.
§ 238-81 IRWIN CODE § 238-81
1:378
Chapter 242
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 95.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
230.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 242-1. Location restrictions.
Hereafter, all shade and ornamental trees planted in the sidewalk area
shall be placed no closer than 25 feet apart, and in all cases where any
such trees are now or shall hereafter be placed closer together than herein
provided, any superfluous trees shall be subject to removal by the owner
of the property abutting such portion of the sidewalk area within 30 days'
notice by the Manager.
§ 242-2. Prohibited trees.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons hereafter to plant any willow
or Carolina poplar tree at any location in the Borough. Any such tree, now
or hereafter growing at any location in the Borough, shall, within 30 days'
notice from the Borough, be removed, to the satisfaction of the Manager, by
the owner of the property upon which the same may be growing.
§ 242-3. Trimming requirements.
All shade and other trees growing upon or along any street, alley or
sidewalk, or inside the property line of any lot fronting on any street or
alley, the branches of which overhang the street, alley or sidewalk, shall be
kept trimmed so that no portion thereof shall be less than 14 feet above the
surface of the street or alley or less than 10 feet above the surface of the
sidewalk; any such trees shall be subject to trimming within 10 days' notice
by the Manager.
§ 242-4. Removal by Borough; costs.
If any property owner shall fail or neglect to remove or cause to be removed
any such tree as required by §§ 242-1 and 242-2 of this chapter within 30
days of notice or shall fail or neglect to trim any tree as required by § 242-3
of this chapter within 10 days of notice, the Borough shall have authority to
cause such trees to be removed or such trimming to be done at the expense
of the property owner, with an additional amount of 10% thereof, which may
be in addition to any fine or penalty under § 242-5 of this chapter.
§ 238-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-5
1:379
§ 242-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No.
791]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs
and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 248
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junked vehicles — See Ch. 169, Art. II. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 225.
§ 242-5 IRWIN CODE § 242-5
1:380
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 248-1. Definitions; word usage.
§ 248-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances, as parts of ordinances, as amendments to ordinances, or as
amendments to this chapter, except where the law specifically authorizes
less formal action.
§ 248-3. Continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately before the enactment of
this chapter, are intended as a continuation of those earlier ordinances and
regulations, and not as new enactments. Nothing in this chapter shall affect
any act done or liability incurred or any suit or prosecution pending or
to be instituted under any of those repealed or superseded ordinances or
regulations.
§ 248-4. Temporary and emergency regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
articles to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code (the Act of June 17,
1976, P.L. 162, No. 81), as amended,83 except that, in this chapter, the
word "street" may be used interchangeably with the word "highway"
and shall have the same meaning as the word "highway" as defined in
the Vehicle Code.
B. The term "legal holidays," as used in this chapter, shall mean and
include New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
D. Although the streets in the Borough run generally in a northeastsouthwest
and a northwest-southeast direction, for the purpose of this
chapter, Main Street and the streets running parallel or generally
parallel to Main Street shall be deemed to run in a north-south
direction, and Pennsylvania Avenue and the streets parallel or generally
parallel to Pennsylvania Avenue shall be deemed to run in an east-west
direction.
83.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 248-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-4
1:381
§ 248-5. Experimental regulations.
The Borough Council may, from time to time by resolution, designate places
upon and along the highways in the Borough where, for a period of not more
than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions and
restrictions shall be in force and effect and shall designate such locations by
proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions and restrictions
shall be effective as if they had been specified in this chapter. No person
shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any such regulation,
prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move, remove, destroy or
deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made by authority of this
section. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set forth in the law or
elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature and, in case of a
violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law or elsewhere
in this chapter, to a fine of not more than $25, together with costs of
prosecution, provided the purpose of this section is to allow for the test and
experimental determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent
changes in the ordinances of the Borough relative to traffic and parking.
§ 248-6. Restrictions during construction, maintenance or special
events.
A. The Mayor or his designated representative shall have the following
powers to regulate traffic and parking temporarily and in time of
emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations.
(2) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or
prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not
more than 72 hours.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Police Department in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any
person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any
such regulations, or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface
any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such
regulation, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such
nature and, in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than
$25, together with costs of prosecution.
A. The Borough Council shall have authority to close any street or specific
part of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or station police
officers at each end of the closed portion while construction or
maintenance work is under way or a special event is being conducted
§ 248-4 IRWIN CODE § 248-6
1:382
§ 248-7. Use of streets by processions and assemblages.
on the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle upon any such closed portion.
B. The Borough Council shall have authority to establish a restricted
traffic area upon any street where construction or maintenance work is
under way and to station flagmen at each end of the restricted portion.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such
restricted traffic area at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign
directing that vehicle to stop or is signaling that vehicle, by a flag or
other device, not to proceed.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25, and costs.
A. For the purpose of this section, the words "assemblage" and
"procession" shall have the following meanings:
ASSEMBLAGE — A gathering of people without vehicles which
interferes with the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any
street.
PROCESSION — A group of individuals, vehicles, animals and/or
objects moving along a street in a way that interferes with the normal
movement of traffic. A procession shall not include a funeral caravan or
military convoy.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
assemblage unless the person organizing or conducting the assemblage
first obtains a permit from the Mayor, which shall be issued without fee.
Application for the permit shall be made at least one week in advance of
the day on which the assemblage is proposed to be held, but in any case
where a state-designated highway is proposed to be used, application
shall be made at least three weeks in advance of the proposed date. The
permit shall state the place where and the date when the assemblage is
to be held, the hour when the assemblage may convene and the hour by
which it shall have been completely dispersed. It shall be unlawful for
any person to hold or to participate in any assemblage unless the permit
has been granted, or at any time or place other than that authorized by
the permit.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
procession unless the person organizing or conducting the procession
first obtains a permit from the Mayor, which shall be issued without fee.
Application for the permit shall be made at least two weeks in advance
of the day when the procession is proposed to be held, but in any case
where a state-designated highway is proposed to be used, application
shall be made at least three weeks in advance of the proposed date. The
permit shall specify the date on which the procession is to be held, the
route to be followed by the procession, the hour when and place where
participants may commence to assemble and form before the
§ 248-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-7
1:383
§ 248-8. Authority of police officers.
The police officers of the Borough are hereby authorized to direct traffic on
the highways of the Borough and at intersections thereof and to otherwise
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 248-9. Speed-timing devices.
§ 248-10. Littering prohibited. [Added 9-12-2001 by Ord. No. 838]
A sign designating "No Littering" shall be placed on Caruthers Lane at the
Barnes Lake Road intersection. Violation of this section shall result in fines
and penalties as set forth in Chapter 158, Littering, § 158-2.
procession is under way, the time when the procession may commence
to move along its route, and the time by which the end of the procession
shall have reached the end of the route of the procession and the
procession shall have been disbanded. It shall be unlawful for any
person to hold or to participate in any procession unless the permit
shall have been granted or under any conditions as to time or route or
otherwise than those stated in the permit.
D. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25, and costs.
A. The Borough Police Department is hereby authorized to use all speedtiming
devices for the determination of speed of a motor vehicle as are
approved or will be approved by the Department of Transportation of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in accordance with 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 3368.
B. This section authorizes the use of said devices upon all highways within
the Borough, be they Borough, county or state highways, and does also
hereby elect to exercise all powers granted to local authorities under
the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 6101 et seq. (1977), as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or
reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 248-7 IRWIN CODE § 248-10
1:384
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 248-11. Speed limits on certain streets.
§ 248-12. Speed limits on bridges and elevated structures.
A. Maximum speed limits are established on portions of specified streets,
as follows, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle, on
any part of a street where a maximum speed limit applies, at a higher
speed than the maximum prescribed for that part of the street:
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
All streets not
listed
25
Brush Hill Road From Pennsylvania Avenue
to north Borough line
30
Pennsylvania
Avenue
Lombard Street and
Orchard Street (school
zone)
15
Route 30 Between east Borough line
and west Borough line
40
Western Avenue First Street and Third
Street
15
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
A. Maximum speed limits are established, as follows, on certain bridges
and elevated structures, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive
a vehicle on any such bridge or elevated structure at a higher speed
than the maximum prescribed for that bridge or elevated structure:
Bridge or Elevated
Structure Location
Maximum Speed
Limit
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
§ 248-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-13
1:385
§ 248-13. Speed limits for certain vehicles on hazardous grades.
§ 248-14. Speed limits in parks.
§ 248-15. Traffic signals.
A. The following are declared to be hazardous grades, and, upon any such
hazardous grade, no person shall drive a vehicle, having a gross weight
in excess of that referred to for that grade, in the direction stated for
that grade, at a speed in excess of that established in this section for
that grade, and, if so stated for a particular grade, the driver of every
such vehicle shall stop the vehicle before proceeding downhill:
Street Between
Direction
of Travel
Maximum
Gross
Weight
Maximum
Speed
Limit
Required to
Stop Before
Proceeding
Downhill
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 for each mile in excess of five miles per hour over
the maximum speed limit.
A. A speed limit of 15 miles per hour is established on all streets and
roadways in the public parks maintained and operated by the Borough,
except in the following locations, where the lower maximums, as
specified, shall apply:
Park Street Location
Maximum Speed
Limit
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
A. At the following locations, traffic signals as indicated below shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected), and traffic at those
locations shall be directed by those signals:
Location Type of Signal
Main Street and Pennsylvania Avenue
(intersection)
Traffic control signal
Main Street and Third Street (intersection) Traffic control signal
Route 30, Ash Street and Colony Drive
(intersection)
Traffic control signal
§ 248-13 IRWIN CODE § 248-15
1:386
§ 248-16. Prohibited turns on red signal.
§ 248-17. One-way streets.
Location Type of Signal
Route 30, Tenth Street and Fairwood Drive Traffic control signal
B. Any driver of a vehicle who disobeys the directions of any traffic signal
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25, and costs.
A. The following are established as intersections where drivers of vehicles
headed in the direction or directions indicated are prohibited from
making a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street into another
one-way street) on a steady red signal:
Intersection Vehicles Traveling On Facing
(Reserved)
B. Any driver of a vehicle who violates any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25, and costs.
A. The following are established as one-way streets, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street other
than in the direction established for traffic on that street:
Street From To
Direction of
Travel
Chestnut Street Sixth Street Pennsylvania
Avenue
South
Depot Street Pennsylvania
Avenue
Second Street North
Fourth Street Oak Street Walnut Street East
Horsechestnut
Street
Cedar Street Spruce Street West
Main Street Second Street Pennsylvania
Avenue
South
Maple Street Second Street Fifth Street South
Mulberry Avenue Walnut Street Main Street West
Oak Street Pennsylvania
Avenue
Second Street North
Oak Street Pennsylvania
Avenue
Sweden Avenue South
Police Avenue Main Street Western Street West
Second Street Main Street Oak Street West
§ 248-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-17
1:387
§ 248-18. Prohibited turns.
§ 248-19. Right turns only.
§ 248-20. U-turns prohibited.
Street From To
Direction of
Travel
Syrian Alley
[Added
7-10-2013 by
Ord. No. 917]
Route 993 Station Alley South
Syrian Street Water Avenue First Street South
Walnut Street Fourth Street Maple Street North
Western Street Second Street Main Street North and east
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25, and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, of the type indicated,
traveling upon the first-named street at any of the following
intersections, in the direction or directions indicated in each case, to
make a left turn and/or a right turn into the second-named street, as
indicated, at any time when such a turn is prohibited by this section:
Vehicles
Traveling
On
Direction
of Travel
Not to
Make Into When
Type of
Vehicle
Applicable
To
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25, and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon the firstnamed
street at any of the following intersections, in the direction or
directions indicated in each case, to make other than a right turn, at
any time stated, both left turns and straight-across traffic being
prohibited:
Vehicles
Traveling On
Direction of
Travel Times
Not to Make Left
Turn Into or Travel
Straight Across
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25, and costs.
§ 248-17 IRWIN CODE § 248-20
1:388
§ 248-21. No-passing zones.
§ 248-22. Through highways.
§ 248-23. Stop intersections.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon any of
the following portions of streets, in the direction or directions indicated
for that street, to make a U-turn:
Street Portion Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25, and costs.
A. The following are established as no-passing zones, and it shall be
unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to overtake or pass another
vehicle or to drive on the left side of the roadway in any no-passing
zone:
Street
Direction of
Travel Between
Pennsylvania Avenue East and west East Borough line and west
Borough line
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25, and costs.
A. The following highways are established as through highways, thus
authorizing stop or yield signs to be erected facing traffic approaching
every intersection with the through highway, except for those
intersections with traffic signals, or with exceptions or modifications as
indicated below. Every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop or yield
sign authorized by this section shall stop the vehicle or yield right-ofway
as required by § 3323(b) or (c) of the Vehicle Code,84 as the case
may be, and shall not proceed into or across the through highway until
he has followed all applicable requirements of that section of the law.
Highway Between
Route 30 East Borough line and west Borough line
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25, and costs.
A. The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by § 248-22) are established as stop
intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
84.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(b) or (c).
§ 248-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-23
1:389
second-named street (the intersecting or through street) on the firstnamed
street (the stop street) in the direction or directions indicated
for that intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the
intersection on the first-named or stop street, in the direction indicated
in each case, shall stop the vehicle as required by § 3323(b) of the
Vehicle Code85 and shall not proceed into or across the second-named
or intersecting or through street until he has followed all applicable
requirements of that section of the law.
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street
Direction of
Travel
Adele Drive Caruthers Lane East
Ash Street (4-way) Ninth Street North and south
Beatty Avenue Fairwood Drive West
Beech Street Eighth Street South
Beech Street Pennsylvania Avenue North
Brush Hill Road
(3-way)
Pennsylvania Avenue South
Carroll Drive Adele Drive North
Caruthers Lane Chaucer Drive East and west
Center Street Brush Hill Road East
Chaucer Drive
(3-way)
Caruthers Lane —
Cherokee Street Highland Avenue West
Chestnut Street
(4-way)
Pennsylvania Avenue North and south
Conley Drive Caruthers Lane East
Cypress Street Eight Street North and south
Cypress Street Ninth Street North and south
Cypress Street Tenth Street South
Depot Street Fifth Street North
Depot Street Second Street North
Depot Street Sixth Street North
Depot Street Third Street North
Depot Street Water Avenue North
Eighth Street Ash Street East and west
Eighth Street Beech Street East
Eighth Street Cedar Street East and west
Eighth Street Chestnut Street West
85.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(b).
§ 248-23 IRWIN CODE § 248-23
1:390
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street
Direction of
Travel
Eighth Street Elm Street East and west
Eighth Street Green Street East and west
Eighth Street
(4-way)
Lombard Street East and west
Eighth Street Spruce Street East and west
Fifth Street (3-way)
[Added 2-13-2019
by Ord. No. 979]
Main Street East and west
Fifth Street Oak Street East and west
First Street Main Street East
Fourth Street Main Street East and west
Fourth Street Oak Street West
Fourth Street Walnut Street East
Grandview Avenue Penglyn Street East and west
Grant Avenue Cedar Street East and west
Grant Avenue Lombard Street East and west
Green Street Grant Avenue North
Green Street (3-way) Ninth Street South
Locust Street Eighth Street North and south
Locust Street Grant Avenue North and south
Locust Street Sherman Avenue North
Lombard Street Eighth Street North and south
Lombard Street
(3-way)
Ninth Street North and south
Main Street Fifth Street South
Main Street Pennsylvania Avenue South
Maple Street Fifth Street South
Maple Street Fourth Street South
Maple Street Pennsylvania Avenue South
Maple Street Sixth Street North and south
Maple Street Third Street South
Melrose Avenue Brush Hill Road West
Melrose Avenue Penglyn Street East and west
Michael Avenue Cherokee Street West
Ninth Street (4-way) Ash Street East and west
Ninth Street Cedar Street East and west
§ 248-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-23
1:391
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street
Direction of
Travel
Ninth Street Green Street East
Ninth Street (3-way) Lombard Street West
Ninth Street (3-way) Spruce Street East and west
Ninth Street Vine Street West
Oakmont Street Route 30 North
Oak Street (3-way) Fifth Street North
Oak Street Fourth Street North
Oak Street Second Street North
Oak Street Sixth Street North
Oak Street Third Street North
Orchard Street Eighth Street North and south
Palmetto Street Grant Avenue South
Pennsylvania Avenue
(3-way)
Brush Hill Road East and west
Pennsylvania Avenue
(4-way) [Added
9-12-2018 by Ord.
No. 971]
Cedar Street East and west
Pennsylvania Avenue
(4-way)
Chestnut Street East and west
Pennsylvania Avenue
(4-way)
Spruce Street East and west
Poplar Street Ninth Street North and south
Second Street Main Street East
Second Street Oak Street West
Sherman Avenue Cedar Street West
Sherman Avenue Palmetto Street East
Sixth Street Main Street West
Sixth Street Oak Street East
Sixth Street Walnut Street East and west
Sixth Street Walnut Street North and south
Spruce Street Eighth Street North and south
Spruce Street Fairview Avenue North
Spruce Street
(3-way)
Ninth Street South
Spruce Street Pennsylvania Avenue North and south
Spruce Street Tenth Street South
§ 248-23 IRWIN CODE § 248-23
1:392
§ 248-24. Yield intersections.
Stop Street
Intersection or Through
Street
Direction of
Travel
Sweetbriar Drive Fairwood Drive West
Tenth Street Ash Street East and west
Tenth Street (3-way) Greene Street East and west
Tenth Street Lombard Street East and west
Tenth Street (3-way) Vine Street East and west
Third Street (3-way) Oak Street East and west
Vine Street Eighth Street North and south
Vine Street Pennsylvania Avenue North and south
Vine Street Sixth Street North
Vine Street Tenth Street South
Walnut Street Fifth Street North and south
Walnut Street Pennsylvania Avenue South
Walnut Street Sixth Street North and south
Walnut Street Third Street North
Warden Street Pennsylvania Avenue South
Warden Street Sixth Street North
Water Avenue Main Street East and west
Western Street Fifth Street South
Western Street First Street North
Western Street Fourth Street South
Western Street Main Street East
Western Street Police Avenue South
Willow Street Eighth Street North and south
Willow Street Ninth Street South
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25, and costs.
A. The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by § 248-22) are established as yield
intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the through street) on the first-named street (the
yield street) in the direction or directions indicated for that
intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection on
the first-named or yield street, in the direction indicated in each case,
shall slow down or stop the vehicle as required by § 3323(c) of the
§ 248-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-24
1:393
§ 248-25. Operation of motor vehicles on public lands.
§ 248-26. Rotary traffic islands.
§ 248-27. Play highways.
Vehicle Code86 and then yield the right-of-way as required by that
subsection of the Vehicle Code.
Yield Street Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Caruthers Lane
Bridge
Caruthers Lane North
Route 30 Tenth Street West
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25, and costs.
A. No motor vehicle, including a motorcycle, pedalcycle or minibike, shall
be operated on any property owned by the Borough or any other public
agency or instrumentality within the Borough without the permission of
the property owner and a permit from the Mayor of the Borough.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25, and costs.
A. The following locations are designated as rotary traffic islands, and
every vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only
to the right of the island:
(Reserved)
B. Any person who drives a vehicle otherwise than to the right of any
rotary traffic island shall be guilty of a violation of this section and,
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25, and costs.
A. The following areas upon the streets in the Borough are established as
play highways:
Street Between Days Hours
(Reserved)
B. The Mayor is authorized to designate as play highways, whenever he
deems that action advisable, and for whatever period of time directed
by him, any part of any street in the Borough, where sledding and
coasting shall be permitted. That play highway shall be set apart for the
purpose under the direction of the Mayor.
86.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(c).
§ 248-24 IRWIN CODE § 248-27
1:394
§ 248-28. Snowmobile roads.
C. No person shall drive any motor vehicle upon any play highway at any
time when that street shall be designated as a play highway, except in
case of emergency, with special permission of the Mayor or of the police
officer in charge, who shall first clear that play highway of all persons
using it for the purpose for which it was set aside. Any person who
violates any provision of this subsection shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following roads and streets within the Borough are designated as
special snowmobile roads:
Street or Road Between
Used by
Snowmobiles
Only When
Closed to
Vehicular
Traffic
Shared with
Vehicular
Traffic
(Reserved)
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile on any
highway, street or road in the Borough other than as provided above,
provided nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from
operating a snowmobile on any other street in the Borough:
(1) As authorized by § 772187 of the Vehicle Code for emergency and
bridge crossings and for direct crossing of streets or two-lane
highways.
(2) For special snowmobile events where authorized in advance and
the street is blocked off as provided in § 7723 of the Vehicle Code.88
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
subject to the penalties prescribed in § 7752(a) of the Vehicle
Code.89
87.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7721.
88.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7723.
89.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7752(a).
§ 248-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-28
1:395

ARTICLE III
Restrictions on Size, Weight and Type of Vehicle and Load
[Amended 9-8-2010 by Ord. No. 895]
§ 248-29. Vehicle weight limits.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to drive any vehicle or
combination having a gross weight in excess of the following maximum
upon all those certain bridges and streets or parts of bridges, streets or
byways, as the case may be, except for local traffic on streets and
byways. The exception for local traffic does not apply to posted bridges.
Local traffic may not exceed the posted weight of any bridge without a
duly executed permit as per § 248-33 of this article. Local traffic is
determined by the following types of documents which constitute
evidence that the vehicle is, in fact, local:
(1) A bill of lading or shipping order which shows a destination within
the Borough of Irwin and on a posted highway, street, road, bridge
or byway;
(2) A certification by the owner or permittee or an official of a
permittee company on the company letterhead describing the
destination within the Borough of Irwin in which the activity of the
vehicle is engaged.
Street Name or
Bridge Location
Maximum
Weight
(tons)
Adele Drive Entire length 10
Ash Street From Route 30 to
Pennsylvania Avenue
8
Brown Alley Entire length 3
Carroll Drive Entire length 10
Caruthers Lane Entire length 8
Center Street Entire length 8
Chestnut Street From Tenth Street to
Pennsylvania Avenue
8
Church Alley Entire length 3
Colony Drive Entire length 10
Colony Drive Bridge Entire length 12
Depot Alley Entire length 5
Diamond Alley Entire length 3
Fairwood Drive Entire length 10
First Street Entire length 10
§ 248-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-29
1:397
Street Name or
Bridge Location
Maximum
Weight
(tons)
First Street Bridge Entire length Bridge closed
Horseshoe Alley Entire length 3
Lombard Street From Route 30 to
Pennsylvania Avenue
8
Main Street From Third Street to
Pennsylvania Avenue
10
Maple Street From Fifth Street to
Pennsylvania Avenue
3
Maple Street From Second Street to
Fifth Street
5
Mulberry Alley Entire length 3
Norwin Alley Entire length 3
Oak Street From Water Street to
Pennsylvania Avenue
10
Pennsylvania Avenue Entire length 10
Playground Alley Entire length 3
Police Alley Entire length 5
Second Street From Main Street to
Walnut Street
10
Spruce Street From Tenth Street to
Pennsylvania Avenue
8
Station Alley Entire length 3
Sweden Alley From Chestnut Street
to Cedar Street
3
Sweden Alley From Irwin Park to
Chestnut Street
5
Syrian Alley Entire length 3
Tenth Street From Route 30 to
Chestnut Street
8
Third Street From Main Street to
Western Alley
5
Walnut Street Entire length 8
Water Street From Oak Street to
Main Street
10
Western Alley Entire length 5
Wyandotte Street Entire length 8
§ 248-29 IRWIN CODE § 248-29
1:398
§ 248-30. Vehicle size limits.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to drive any vehicle or
combination in violation of the size restrictions described below upon all
those certain bridges and streets or parts of bridges, streets or byways, as
the case may be, except for local traffic:
Maximum
Street Name or
Bridge Location
Length
(feet)
Width
(feet)
Ash Street From Route 30 to Pennsylvania
Avenue
19 7
Caruthers Lane Entire length 19 7
Chestnut Street From Tenth Street to
Pennsylvania Avenue
25 8
First Street Entire length 19 7
Lombard Street From Route 30 to Pennsylvania
Avenue
19 7
Main Street From Third Street to
Pennsylvania Avenue
25 8
Oak Street From Water Street to
Pennsylvania Avenue
25 8
Pennsylvania
Avenue
Entire length 25 8
Second Street From Main Street to Walnut
Street
25 8
Spruce Street From Tenth Street to
Pennsylvania Avenue
19 7
Tenth Street From Route 30 to Chestnut
Street
25 8
B. In addition, the following shall also be regarded as local traffic for
purposes of the provisions of this article:
(1) Emergency vehicles;
(2) Vehicles and combinations of governmental agencies or utilities or
their contractors engaged in construction or maintenance on a
posted highway or in a location which can be reached only via a
posted highway, road, street, bridge or byway;
(3) Vehicles and combinations going to and coming from a residence or
commercial establishment located on a posted highway, road,
street, bridge or byway within the Borough of Irwin which can be
reached only via a posted highway, road, street, bridge or byway.
§ 248-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-30
1:399
Maximum
Street Name or
Bridge Location
Length
(feet)
Width
(feet)
Third Street From Main Street to Western
Alley
25 8
Wyandotte Street Entire length 19 7
§ 248-31. Truck and bus traffic.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to drive a vehicle other than a
passenger car on any of the following streets or parts of streets, except for
local traffic:
Street Name or Bridge Location
Adele Drive Entire length
Ash Street From Route 30 to Pennsylvania Avenue
Brown Alley Entire length
Carroll Drive Entire length
Caruthers Lane Entire length
Center Street Entire length
Chestnut Street From Tenth Street to Pennsylvania Avenue
Church Alley Entire length
Colony Drive Entire length
Colony Drive Bridge Entire length
Depot Alley Entire length
Diamond Alley Entire length
Fairwood Drive Entire length
First Street Entire length
First Street Bridge Entire length
Horseshoe Alley Entire length
Lombard Street From Route 30 to Pennsylvania Avenue
Main Street From Third Street to Pennsylvania Avenue
Maple Street From Fifth Street to Pennsylvania Avenue
Maple Street From Second Street to Fifth Street
Mulberry Alley Entire length
Norwin Alley Entire length
Oak Street From Water Street to Pennsylvania Avenue
Pennsylvania Avenue Entire length
Playground Alley Entire length
§ 248-30 IRWIN CODE § 248-31
1:400
Street Name or Bridge Location
Police Alley Entire length
Second Street From Main Street to Walnut Street
Spruce Street From Tenth Street to Pennsylvania Avenue
Station Alley Entire length
Sweden Alley From Chestnut Street to Cedar Street
Sweden Alley From Irwin Park to Chestnut Street
Syrian Alley Entire length
Tenth Street From Route 30 to Chestnut Street
Third Street From Main Street to Western Alley
Walnut Street Entire length
Water Street From Oak Street to Main Street
Western Alley Entire length
Wyandotte Street Entire length
§ 248-32. Violations and penalties.
§ 248-33. Permits for vehicles exceeding weight limitations.
A. Any person operating a vehicle or combination on a road, street, bridge
or byway in violation of the prohibition or restriction imposed under any
section of this article, or any amendments thereto, is guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a
minimum fine no less than $75. In addition, any subject person
convicted of operating a vehicle in excess of a posted weight, upon
conviction, shall be fined no less than $150, plus $150 for each 500
pounds, or part thereof, in excess of 3,000 pounds over the maximum
allowable weight. In the event where the operation of over-postedweight
vehicles have caused damage to Borough streets, bridges, or
other infrastructure, the penalty shall include the cost of repairing any
and all damages, including, but not limited to, construction,
advertising, bidding, engineering and inspection.
B. In addition, in the event any engineering report or the Borough officials
determine that any hazardous traffic condition or any safety factors
exist on any street within the Borough of Irwin, Borough officials may
restrict the weight and size of the vehicles, as herein referred to; then,
in that event, any person or persons in violation of the prohibition as
imposed in this article, or any amendment thereto, is guilty of a
summary offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $500.
A. No motor vehicle, trailer or combination thereof or other transportable
item in excess of a duly authorized and posted weight restriction shall
be operated on any roadway, bridge or portion thereof, identified
§ 248-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-33
1:401
pursuant to the provisions of this article, subject to a weight limitation
or restriction without the owner and/or operator thereof having first
obtained a permit for such activity, to be issued under the terms of this
section.
B. Permits to be issued by the Borough Manager or Code Enforcement
Officer shall include the following:
(1) A Type 1 permit, which authorizes use of a particular posted
highway, bridge or portion thereof by an over-posted-weight
vehicle. It is valid only when carried in the over-posted-weight
vehicle.
(2) A Type 2 permit, which authorizes use of a particular posted
highway, bridge or portion thereof by any number of over-postedweight
vehicles being driven to or from a common destination. This
permit will be issued only upon request of the permittee when the
Borough Manager shall determine that it is not feasible to issue a
Type 1 permit for each vehicle. Such original permit must be
posted and maintained at the point of common destination, with a
copy in each vehicle.
(3) A Type 3 permit, which authorizes use of a number of specified
posted highways, bridges or portions thereof by an over-postedweight
vehicle. This permit will be issued only if the Borough
Manager determines that damage to the posted sections will be
minimal due to the limited number of moves by the vehicle and the
short-term use of said posted section. Such permit is valid only
when carried in the over-posted-weight vehicle.
C. A permittee shall be required to provide financial security in a form
acceptable to the Borough of Irwin to assure compliance with the
excess maintenance agreement required under Subsection E hereof.
The amount of security shall be as follows:
(1) Type 1 and 2 permits shall include:
(a) Six thousand dollars per linear mile for unpaved highways to
be maintained at a level consistent with the type of highway.
(b) Twelve thousand five hundred dollars per linear mile for paved
highways to be maintained at a level consistent with the type of
highway.
(c) Fifty thousand dollars per linear mile for any highway to be
maintained below a level consistent with the type of highway.
(d) The amount of security for bridge structures shall be
determined by the Borough Engineer or other official as
designated by the Borough of Irwin.
(2) Type 3 permits shall require a fixed security of $10,000 for the
entire municipality.
§ 248-33 IRWIN CODE § 248-33
1:402
D. The Manager of the Borough of Irwin shall, after consultation with the
Borough Engineer, fix the financial security to be required for traveling
in excess of posted weight over any bridge subject to a restriction
pursuant to this chapter.
E. The issuance of any permit to exceed a posted weight limit or limits
shall be conditioned on the agreement of the permittee to accept
financial responsibility for excess maintenance of the posted highway,
bridge or portion thereof to be used by the permittee at the sole
discretion of the Borough of Irwin. Such agreement shall provide for the
work to be performed by the Borough of Irwin.
F. The Borough of Irwin shall, from time to time by resolution, adopt and
authorize a permit form and a schedule of fees to be imposed for the
issuance of permits hereunder.
G. Any person or entity who shall operate a vehicle in excess of a duly
authorized and posted weight restriction without first having obtained a
permit for the same under the provisions of this section shall, in
addition to the fines and penalties set forth in this chapter, be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to
pay a fine of not less than $500 nor more than $2,000, together with
costs of prosecution, for each offense. Each day of operation in excess
of a posted weight limit and each posted roadway in question shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 248-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-33
1:403

ARTICLE IV
Parking Regulations
§ 248-34. Parking within marked spaces.
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual
vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines
bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this article for any person
to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 248-35. Parking prohibited at all times. [Amended 1-10-1996 by
Ord. No. 802]
Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Street Side Between
Ash Street Both Route 30 and Pennsylvania Avenue
Beatty Drive Both Entire length
Cedar Street East Fairview Avenue and Tenth Street
Center Street South Brush Hill Road and Wyandotte Street
Chestnut Street Both Pennsylvania Avenue and Tenth Street
Chestnut Street West A point 40 feet north of a point
opposite the north line of Way Avenue
and a point 30 feet south of a point
opposite the south line of Way Avenue
Depot Alley Both Pennsylvania Avenue and Second
Street
Fairview Avenue Both Cedar Street and Redwood Street
Fairview Avenue North Pine Street and Cedar Street
Fifth Street North Main Street and Western Street
First Street North Main Street and west Borough line
First Street South Entire length
Fourth Street North Walnut Street and Oak Street
Grant Avenue North Cedar Street and Pine Street
Grant Avenue South Orchard Street and Cedar Street
Greene Street East Pennsylvania Avenue and Tenth Street
Greene Street West A point 30 feet north of Eighth Street
and Eighth Street
Greene Street West Grant Avenue and Pennsylvania
Avenue
Greene Street
[Added 7-10-2013
by Ord. No. 917]
West Pennsylvania Avenue and Eighth
Street
§ 248-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-35
1:405
Street Side Between
Lombard Street West Grant Avenue and Pennsylvania
Avenue
Main Street [Added
7-10-2013 by Ord.
No. 917]
300 Block "Compact car parking only" space
moved back one space
Main Street East A point 18 feet north of Mulberry
Avenue and a point 35 feet south of
Mulberry Avenue
Main Street East A point 84 feet north of Pennsylvania
Avenue and Pennsylvania Avenue
Main Street East A point 57 feet north of Sixth Street
and Sixth Street
Main Street West The post office driveway and a point
15 feet south of the post office
driveway
Main Street West A point 152 feet north of Third Street
and a point 88 feet north of Third
Street
Main Street West Water Avenue and First Street
Main Street West Western Street and Pennsylvania
Avenue
Maple Street East Second Street and Fifth Street
Maple Street
[Added 7-10-2013
by Ord. No. 917]
West Intersection at Fourth Street to 100
feet south
Ninth Street North Lombard Street and Cedar Street
Ninth Street South Cedar Street and Vine Street
Ninth Street South Elm Street and Ash Street
Oak Street East Third Street and a point 48 feet east
Oak Street East Water Avenue and Second Street
Oak Street West Third Street and a point 46 feet north
Oak Street West Third Street and Pennsylvania Avenue
Oak Street
Extension [Added
7-10-2013 by Ord.
No. 917]
East From Pennsylvania Avenue for a
distance of 65 feet and also a distance
of 10 feet from Sweden Alley
Oak Street
Extension [Added
7-10-2013 by Ord.
No. 917]
West Between Pennsylvania Avenue and
Sweden Alley
Palmetto Street Both Sherman Avenue and Grant Avenue
§ 248-35 IRWIN CODE § 248-35
1:406
Street Side Between
Park Alley Both Sherman Avenue and Grant Avenue
Pennsylvania Avenue Both Cedar Street and Locust Street
Pennsylvania Avenue Both East Borough line and Cypress Street
Pennsylvania Avenue Both Lombard Street and Chestnut Street
Pennsylvania Avenue Both Oak Street and west Borough line
Pennsylvania Avenue North Cedar Street and Chestnut Street
Pennsylvania Avenue
[Added 7-10-2013
by Ord. No. 917]
North Chestnut Street and Walnut Street
Pennsylvania Avenue South Chestnut Street to Oak Street
Pine Street East Fairview Avenue and Pennsylvania
Avenue
Route 30 South East Borough line and a point 50 feet
west of Colony Drive
Second Street North Walnut Street and Oak Street
Sherman Avenue Both Palmetto Street and Locust Street
Sherman Avenue North Locust Street and Cedar Street
Short Avenue South Pine Street and Spruce Street
Sixth Street Both Pine Street and Warden Street
Sixth Street North Cherry Street and the eastern
boundary line of school property
Sixth Street South Spruce Street and Main Street
Spruce Street West Pennsylvania Avenue and Tenth Street
Sweden Avenue South Chestnut Street and Main Street
Sweetbrier Street Both Entire length
Tenth Street Both Route 30 and Chestnut Street
Tenth Street [Added
7-10-2013 by Ord.
No. 917]
North Ash Street to Cypress Street
Tenth Street North Lombard Street and a point 52 feet
west
Tenth Street South Lombard Street and Cedar Street
Third Street East Borough line and Main Street
Third Street North Maple Street and a point 30 feet east
Third Street North Maple Street and a point 30 feet west
Vine Street West Pennsylvania Avenue and Tenth Street
§ 248-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-35
1:407
Street Side Between
Walnut Street East A point 50 feet north of a point
opposite the north line of Diamond
Avenue and a point 50 feet south of a
point opposite the south line of
Diamond Avenue
Walnut Street East Third Street and Fourth Street
Warden Street East Sixth Street and Pennsylvania Avenue
Warden Street West A point 30 feet north of Pennsylvania
Avenue and Pennsylvania Avenue
Water Avenue Both Oak Street and the west Borough line
Western Street Both First Street and Main Street
Willow Street East Pennsylvania Avenue and Eighth
Street
§ 248-36. Parking prohibited certain days and hours.
Parking shall be prohibited in the following locations at all times on the days
and between the hours indicated in this section as follows:
Street Side Between Days Hours
Grant Avenue North Greene Street
and Fir Street
Monday to
Friday
8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Lombard Street East Grant Avenue and
Pennsylvania
Avenue
Monday to
Friday
8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Main Street
[Added
7-10-2013 by
Ord. No. 917]
Per signs posted, no on-street parking during sweeping
hours
Pennsylvania
Avenue
North Orchard Street
and Greene
Street
Monday to
Friday
8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Second Street South Maple Street and
Oak Street
Monday to
Friday
8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
§ 248-37. Parking of trucks, buses and other vehicles. [Amended
7-14-1998 by Ord. No. 820; 12-9-1998 by Ord. No. 821; 3-10-1999 by
Ord. No. 825]
A. The parking of any large truck or other large commercial transit
vehicle, on or within any residential street, alley, roadway, right-of-way,
driveway, lawn or other location within the Borough of Irwin, at any
time is hereby prohibited.
§ 248-35 IRWIN CODE § 248-37
1:408
§ 248-38. Parking time limited. [Amended 9-12-2001 by Ord. No.
838]
No person shall park a vehicle, or allow it to remain parked, for longer than
the time indicated, in any of the following locations, at any time on the days
and between the hours indicated:
B. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
COMMERCIAL TRANSIT VEHICLE — Any bus or other vehicle used
primarily for public transportation, including, but not limited to,
ambulances, emergency vehicles and fire trucks.
LARGE TRUCK — A tractor-trailer with more than six wheels, any truck
or commercial vehicle with three axles or more, with or without a
detachable trailer, including a tractor and the trailer portion thereof.
C. Penalties for violation. Any person who violates any provision of this
section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $100 per day, and costs of prosecution, provided it shall be the
duty of the police officers and of parking enforcement personnel of the
Borough to report to appropriate officials all violations of any provision
of this article, indicating in each case the section violated; the license
number of the vehicle involved in the violation; the location where the
violation took place; and any other facts that might be necessary in
order to secure a clear understanding of the circumstances attending
the violation. The police officer of other person making the report shall
also attach to or place upon every such vehicle a notice stating that the
vehicle was parked in violation of this article. The notice shall contain
instructions to the owner or driver of the vehicle that a fine in the
amount of $100 per day will be imposed, upon conviction, for each and
every day that the vehicle remains parked and in violation of this
section. Further, each and every day that the vehicle remains parked
within the Borough in violation of this section shall constitute a
separate offense subjecting the violator to a separate and continuing
penalty consistent with this subsection for each and every day the
violation continues. The penalties set forth in this subsection apply
exclusively to this section, as applied to the prohibition of parking large
trucks or other commercial transit vehicles within the Borough as set
forth in this section.
§ 248-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-38
1:409
Street Side Between
Time
Limit
(hours) Days Hours
Cedar
Street
West Fairview Avenue
and Sherman
Avenue
2 Monday
to Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 7:00
p.m.
Cherry Alley
(dead-end
alley)
— Fifth Street and
Sixth Street
(Baptist Alley)
— — —
Chestnut
Street
East Sixth Street and
Pennsylvania
Avenue
2 Monday
to Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 7:00
p.m.
Fifth Street Both Walnut Street and
Oak Street
2 Monday
to Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 7:00
p.m.
Greene
Street
Both North Borough line
and Grant Avenue
2 Monday
to Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 7:00
p.m.
Main Street East Sixth Street and a
point 84 feet north
of Pennsylvania
Avenue
2 Monday
to Friday
All times
Oak Street — At Fourth Street
intersection on the
northeast corner,
from said point to
corner
— — —
Oak Street East Fifth Street and a
point 78 feet north
of Pennsylvania
Avenue
2 Monday
to Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 7:00
p.m.
Oak Street Left Pennsylvania
Avenue to a point
100 feet north of
Pennsylvania
Avenue
— — —
Oak Street West Water Avenue and
Second Street
2 Monday
to Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 7:00
p.m.
Pennsylvania
Avenue
North Cherry Street and
Oak Street
2 Monday
to Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 7:00
p.m.
§ 248-38 IRWIN CODE § 248-38
1:410
Street Side Between
Time
Limit
(hours) Days Hours
Pennsylvania
Avenue
South Cedar Street and
Chestnut Street
2 Monday
to Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 7:00
p.m.
Sherman
Alley and
Dairy Alley
— All, except for one
residential parking
space located
behind 715 Pine
Street
— — —
Third Street North Oak Street and
Walnut Street
2 Monday
to Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 7:00
p.m.
§ 248-39. Special purpose parking zones. [Amended 1-10-1996 by
Ord. No. 802]
The following are established as special purpose parking zones, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow it to remain parked
in any such zone, except as specifically provided for that zone:
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Main Street East 50 feet north of Fourth
Street and Fourth Street
Compact cars
Main Street West Between a point 72 feet
north of Fourth Street and
Fourth Street
Bus stop
Main Street West Between a point 84 feet
north of Pennsylvania
Avenue and Pennsylvania
Avenue
Bus stop
Oak Street East Between Fourth Street and
a point 30 feet south of
Fourth Street
Bus stop
Oak Street East Between a point 78 feet
north of Pennsylvania
Avenue and Pennsylvania
Avenue
Bus stop
Oak Street
Extension
[Added
7-10-2013 by
Ord. No. 917]
East From Station 1, plus 65
feet to Station 1, plus 30
feet
§ 248-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-39
1:411
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Pennsylvania
Avenue
514 Pennsylvania Avenue Handicapped
only parking
Pennsylvania
Avenue
North Between Bridge Street and
a point 52 feet east
Bus stop
Pennsylvania
Avenue
North Between Cherokee Street
and a point 26 feet east
Bus stop
Pennsylvania
Avenue
North Between Depot Street and
a point 49 feet west
Bus stop
Pennsylvania
Avenue
North Between Greene Street and
a point 16 feet west
Bus stop
Pennsylvania
Avenue
North Between Seminole Street
and a point seven feet east
Bus stop
Pennsylvania
Avenue
North Between Spruce Street and
a point 22 feet east
Bus stop
Pennsylvania
Avenue
South Between Ash Street and a
point 144 feet east
Bus stop
Pennsylvania
Avenue
South Between Beech Street and
a point 24 feet west
Bus stop
Pennsylvania
Avenue [Added
7-10-2013 by
Ord. No. 917]
South Between Cedar Street
intersection and a point 30
feet west
Compact cars
Pennsylvania
Avenue
South Between Greene Street and
a point 14 feet west
Bus stop
Pennsylvania
Avenue
South In front of 722
Pennsylvania Avenue
Handicapped
only parking
Police Avenue North Between Main Street and
Western Street
Municipal
purposes
Second Street North Between Depot Street and
Main Street
Bus stop
Second Street South Between Walnut Street and
Maple Street
Church vehicles
Short Street North In front of 707 Short Street Handicapped
only parking
Third Street 319 Third Street Handicapped
only parking
Third Street South Between Depot Street and
Main Street
Bus stop
§ 248-39 IRWIN CODE § 248-39
1:412
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Western Street West Last four spaces of South
Western Street lot
Police car
parking and
municipal
purposes
§ 248-40. Standing or parking on roadway for loading or unloading.
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle (other
than a pedalcycle) on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked
at the edge or curb of any street, except that standing or parking for the
purpose of loading or unloading persons or property shall be permitted
on the following named streets on Monday through Saturday, between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. and between the hours of 1:30 p.m. and
4:00 p.m., and for no longer than necessary for the loading or unloading:
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
§ 248-41. Angle parking.
§ 248-42. Permit parking areas. [Amended 9-12-2001 by Ord. No.
838; 12-11-2002 by Ord. No. 850; 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 961]
The following are established as permit parking areas:
A. Only angle parking shall be permitted on the following portions of
streets:
Street Side Between
Fourth Street
[Added 7-10-2013
by Ord. No. 917]
South Oak Street and Walnut Street; five
spaces
B. On all streets where angle parking is required, every vehicle parked at
the angle shall be parked with its front nearest the curb.
§ 248-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-42
1:413
Street Side Location Purpose Spaces
Monthly
Permit Fee
First Street South From Main
Street to First
Street Extension
Passenger
cars
10 No fee
Fourth
Street
[Added
7-10-2013
by Ord.
No. 917]
Both Between Maple
Street and
Walnut Street
Residential
permit
parking
No fee
Fourth
Street
South Between Maple
Street and Oak
Street
Passenger
cars
7 $25
Fourth
Street
West Western dead
end of Fourth
Street
Passenger
cars
3 $25
Main Street
lot
— Off Main Street
at Pennsylvania
Avenue, adjacent
to playground
parking area
Passenger
cars and
trucks with
trailers
30 $25
Maple
Street
[Added
7-10-2013
by Ord.
No. 917]
At No. 309 Residential
parking
1
Second
Street
— — Passenger
cars
26 $25
Third
Street
North Between Oak
Street and
Walnut Street
Passenger
cars
10 No fee
Walnut
Street
— From the
American Legion
exit drive to
Third Street
Residential
permit
parking
— —
Western
Street lot
— — Passenger
cars
22 $25
§ 248-43. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15, and costs, provided it
shall be the duty of the police officers and of parking enforcement personnel
of the Borough to report to the appropriate official all violations of any
§ 248-42 IRWIN CODE § 248-43
1:414
provision of this article, indicating, in each case, the section violated; the
license number of the vehicle involved in the violation; the location where
the violation took place; and any other facts that might be necessary in
order to secure a clear understanding of the circumstances attending the
violation. The police officer or other person making the report shall also
attach to or place upon every such vehicle a notice stating that the vehicle
was parked in violation of this article. The notice shall contain instructions
to the owner or driver of the vehicle that if he will report to the office of the
Mayor and police and pay the sum of $5 within five days after the time of the
notice, that act will save the violator from prosecution and from payment of
the fine and costs prescribed in the first sentence of this section.
§ 248-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-43
1:415

ARTICLE V
On-Street Metered Parking
§ 248-44. Parking meter zones.
Parking meter zones are established upon and along certain streets in the
Borough, as follows:
Street Side Portion Rate
Maximum
Parking Time
Fifth Street North Between Oak
Street and Main
Street
30 minutes for a
five-cent coin; 60
minutes for two
five-cent coins or
one ten-cent coin
2 hours
Fifth Street South Between Oak
Street and
Western Street
30 minutes for a
five-cent coin; 60
minutes for two
five-cent coins or
one ten-cent coin
2 hours
Fourth
Street
Both Between Oak
Street and
Western Street
30 minutes for a
five-cent coin; 60
minutes for two
five-cent coins or
one ten-cent coin
2 hours
Fourth
Street
South Main Street and a
point 35 feet west
30 minutes for a
five-cent coin; 60
minutes for two
five-cent coins or
one ten-cent coin
2 hours
Fourth
Street
[Added
7-10-2013
by Ord.
No. 917]
South Angled spaces 30 minutes for
each nickel; 60
minutes for each
dime
2 hours
Main Street East Between Fifth
Street and Sixth
Street
60 minutes for a
five-cent coin; 120
minutes for a tencent
coin
4 hours
Main Street East Between First
Street and Fifth
Street
30 minutes for a
five-cent coin; 60
minutes for two
five-cent coins or
one ten-cent coin
2 hours
§ 248-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-44
1:417
Street Side Portion Rate
Maximum
Parking Time
Main Street East Between Second
Street and Fifth
Street
30 minutes for a
five-cent coin; 60
minutes for two
five-cent coins or
one ten-cent coin
2 hours
Main Street East One red meter in
front of each of
the following
premises: Tony's;
Blue Duck; Irwin
Bank; and
Colonial Grill
15 minutes for a
five-cent coin
15 minutes
Main Street West Between Fifth
Street and
Western Street
60 minutes for a
five-cent coin; 120
minutes for a tencent
coin
4 hours
Main Street West One red meter in
front of each of
the following
premises: Union
Bank and Irwin
News
15 minutes for a
five-cent coin
15 minutes
Oak Street Both Between Second
Street and Third
Street
30 minutes for a
five-cent coin; 120
minutes for a tencent
coin
2 hours
Oak Street East Between Third
Street and Fourth
Street
60 minutes for a
five-cent coin; 120
minutes for a tencent
coin
4 hours
Oak Street West Between Third
Street and Fourth
Street
60 minutes for a
five-cent coin; 120
minutes for a tencent
coin
4 hours
Oak Street
[Amended
7-10-2013
by Ord.
No. 917]
West Between Fourth
Street and Fifth
Street
One hour for each
nickel; two hours
for each dime
Second
Street
North Between Oak
Street and Depot
Alley
30 minutes for a
five-cent coin; 60
minutes for two
five-cent coins or
one ten-cent coin
2 hours
§ 248-44 IRWIN CODE § 248-44
1:418
Street Side Portion Rate
Maximum
Parking Time
Second
Street
South Between Oak
Street and Main
Street
30 minutes for a
five-cent coin; 60
minutes for two
five-cent coins or
one ten-cent coin
2 hours
Third
Street
North Between Oak
Street and
Western Street
30 minutes for a
five-cent coin; 60
minutes for two
five-cent coins or
one ten-cent coin
2 hours
Third
Street
South Between Main
Street and
Western Street
30 minutes for a
five-cent coin; 60
minutes for two
five-cent coins or
one ten-cent coin
2 hours
§ 248-45. Operation of meters; parking time limits.
Parking meters shall be operated by the deposit of a coin in the meter, as
prescribed by § 248-48, and the parking rates for specified lengths of time,
as well as the maximum parking times prescribed in § 248-44, shall apply at
all times between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Mondays, Tuesdays
and Wednesdays, and between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on
Thursdays, Fridays and Saturdays in the parking meter zones listed in
§ 248-44; provided, however, the requirements of this article as to parking
time limit and as to deposit of coins in meters shall not apply on Borough
holidays.
§ 248-46. Placement and characteristics of parking meters.
Parking meters installed in the parking meter zones established by § 248-44
of this article shall be placed upon the curb or sidewalk and immediately
adjacent to the individual parking spaces described in § 248-47 of this
article. Each parking meter shall be placed or set so as to show that the
parking space adjacent to that meter is or is not legally occupied. Each
parking meter installed shall indicate by a proper legend the legal parking
time established by the Borough, and when the adjacent space is occupied
by a vehicle, the parking meter shall indicate on and by its dial and pointer
the duration of the period of legal parking and, on the expiration of that
period, shall indicate illegal parking or overparking.
§ 248-47. Parking within marked spaces.
Lines and/or markings shall be painted or placed upon the curb, sidewalk
or roadway adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of delineating
the parking space for which that meter shall be used. Every vehicle parked
at any parking meter shall be parked wholly within the lines or markings so
§ 248-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-47
1:419
placed and applicable to that meter. It shall be unlawful and a violation of
this article for any person to park a vehicle across any such line or marking
or to park a vehicle in such a position that the vehicle is not wholly within
the area designated by those lines or markings.
§ 248-48. Coin deposit in meter; overtime parking unlawful.
Whenever a vehicle is to be parked in any space adjacent to a parking meter,
at any time in the period of limited parking as prescribed by § 248-45 of
this article, the driver of the vehicle, upon entering the parking space, shall
immediately deposit, or cause to be deposited, in that parking meter, one or
more proper coins of the United States of America as specified in the legend
on the parking meter. Upon the deposit of the coin or coins, and placing
the meter in operation, the parking space may be lawfully occupied by the
vehicle for the time indicated on the meter. If any vehicle shall remain in
any such parking space for such length of time that the meter shall indicate
by proper signal that the lawful parking time has expired, that vehicle shall
be considered as having been parked overtime, and the parking of a vehicle
overtime shall be a violation of this article.
§ 248-49. Deposit of substitute for coin in meter.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit in any parking meter installed
under the provisions of this article any slug or other substitute for a coin of
the United States of America.
§ 248-50. Deposit of coin in meter to extend parking time beyond
legal limit.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to deposit or
cause to be deposited, in any parking meter installed under the provisions of
this article, any coin for the purpose of increasing or extending the parking
time of any vehicle beyond the legal parking time of 15 minutes in any
fifteen-minute parking meter zone, 1/2 hour in any half-hour parking meter
zone, one hour in any one-hour parking meter zone, or two hours in any twohour
parking meter zone.
§ 248-51. Parking at meter showing violation.
It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this article, for any person to permit
a vehicle to remain in a parking space adjacent to a parking meter installed
under this article, when that meter displays a signal indicating that the
vehicle has already been parked there beyond the period of time prescribed
for that parking space, or the time for which a coin or coins were deposited
in that meter for the parking of that vehicle.
§ 248-52. Tampering with meters.
It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this article, for any person to deface,
tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of
any parking meter installed under the provisions of this article, provided
§ 248-47 IRWIN CODE § 248-52
1:420
nothing in this section shall apply to the servicing or opening of parking
meters by officers, employees or police officers of the Borough under the
direction of the Mayor or Borough Council.
§ 248-53. Ticketing of unlawfully parked vehicles; fines. [Amended
12-10-2003 by Ord. No. 858]
§ 248-54. Violations and penalties.
§ 248-55. Exceptions.
A. It shall be the duty of the police officers and parking enforcement
personnel of the Borough, acting in accordance with the directions of
the Chief of Police, to report:
(1) The number of each parking meter that indicates that a vehicle
occupying the adjacent parking space is, or has been, parked in
violation of any provision of this article.
(2) The date and hour of the violation.
(3) The license number of the vehicle.
(4) Any other facts, the knowledge of which is necessary for a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending the violation.
B. The police officer or other person making the report shall also place on
or attach to the vehicle a notice to the owner or driver of the vehicle
that the vehicle was parked in violation of this article and instructing
the owner or driver that if he will report to the Irwin Police Department
and pay, for the use of the Borough, the sum of $5 by 10:00 p.m. on the
same day as the placing of the notice or will place the sum of $5,
enclosed within the envelope provided, in any of the special parking
fine boxes installed at various locations within the Borough within that
time limit, that act will save the violator from prosecution and from
payment of the fine prescribed in § 248-54A of this article. [Amended
12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 961]
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article, with the exception
of § 248-52, and who fails to pay the fine set forth in § 248-53 shall be
cited within 15 days of the violation and, upon conviction, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $15, and costs.
B. Any person who violates any provision of § 248-52 of this article shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600, and
costs, and, in default of payment of fine and costs, to imprisonment for
not more than 30 days.
A. By resolution, the Borough Council may temporarily suspend the
provisions of this article by requiring coin deposit in meters and
establishing a maximum parking time at meters.
§ 248-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-55
1:421
B. The Borough shall have authority to establish no-parking or special
purpose parking zones within any parking meter zone and to remove
parking meters from those areas as previously installed there, and the
provisions of this article shall not apply in those areas where no parking
or special purpose parking is in effect.
§ 248-55 IRWIN CODE § 248-55
1:422
ARTICLE VI
Off-Street Metered Parking
§ 248-56. Metered parking lots. [Amended 9-12-2001 by Ord. No.
838]
A. The following are established as the metered parking lots established
by this Borough:
Lot Location Rate
Maximum
Parking Time
Center Street South side — 30 minutes from
8:30 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and from
3:30 p.m. to 4:00
p.m., Monday to
Friday
Site No. 1
Second Street
parking lot
[Amended
7-10-2013 by
Ord. No. 917]
An area of
approximately
14,000 square
feet located on
the corner of
Second Street
and Main Street
30 minutes for
a five-cent coin;
60 minutes for
a ten-cent coin
2 hours
Site No. 2 Third
Street (Bank)
parking lot
An area of
approximately
9,475 square feet
located on the
corner of Third
Street and Main
Street
30 minutes for
a five-cent coin
or token; 1 hour
for a ten-cent
coin; 2 hours
for each $0.20
in coins
2 hours
Site No. 3 Fifth
Street parking
lot
An area of
approximately
7,624 square feet
located on the
corner of Fifth
Street and Main
Street
30 minutes for
a five-cent coin;
1 hour for a
ten-cent coin; 2
hours for each
$0.20 in coins
2 hours
Site No. 4 Third
Street (Library)
parking lot
An area of
approximately
6,900 square feet
located on the
corner of Third
Street and Depot
Street
30 minutes for
a five-cent coin
or token; 1 hour
for a ten-cent
coin; 2 hours
for each $0.20
in coins
2 hours
§ 248-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-56
1:423
§ 248-57. Placement and characteristics of parking meters.
Parking meters installed in the parking lots shall be placed immediately
adjacent to the individual parking spaces that shall be marked off and
maintained in the lots. For each parking meter, there shall be a clear
indication, through use of a directional arrow, or an identification as to
number with the parking space, to show which individual parking space it
serves. Each parking meter shall indicate by a proper legend the parking
rate and the maximum parking time established by § 248-56 of this article,
and, when the parking space is occupied and the parking meter put into
operation by the insertion of one or more coins, the parking meter shall
indicate on and by its dial and pointer the duration of legal parking and,
upon the expiration of that period, shall indicate illegal parking or
overparking.
§ 248-58. Handicapped parking.
The Borough Council, at its discretion, may provide, at convenient and
suitable locations in any one or more of the metered parking lots, reserved
parking spaces for handicapped and shall designate those spaces by
appropriate signs. It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this article, for
any person to park in any such reserved parking space any vehicle, unless
that vehicle bears or displays either a handicapped registration plate, a
handicapped parking placard, a disabled veteran registration plate, or a
disabled veteran placard.
§ 248-59. Parking within marked spaces.
Lines and/or markings shall be painted or placed upon the surface of the
metered parking lots, adjacent to each parking meter, for the purpose of
delineating the parking space for which that meter shall be used. Every
vehicle parked adjacent to any parking meter shall be parked wholly within
the lines or markings so placed and applicable to that meter. It shall be
unlawful and a violation of this article for any person:
Lot Location Rate
Maximum
Parking Time
Site No. 5
Fourth Street
parking lot
An area of
approximately
1,400 square feet
located on the
corner of Fourth
Street and Depot
Street
1 hour for
$0.10; 2 hours
for each $0.20
in coins
2 hours
B. The parking meters shall be in operation and the provisions of this
section shall be in force 24 hours a day, every day of the year, with the
exception of Sundays and legal holidays, on which days the parking lots
shall be open for public parking, free of charge, for unlimited periods of
time.
§ 248-56 IRWIN CODE § 248-59
1:424
§ 248-60. Manner of parking at meters.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any metered parking
lot:
§ 248-61. Coin deposit in meter; overtime parking unlawful.
Whenever a vehicle is to be parked in any metered parking lot, at any time
when the lot is open for use and the meters are to be in operation, the
driver of the vehicle, upon entering the parking space, shall immediately
deposit, or cause to be deposited, in the proper parking meter, one or more
proper coins of the United States of America as specified in the legend
on the parking meter. Upon the deposit of the coin or coins, and placing
the meter in operation, the parking space may be lawfully occupied by the
vehicle for the time indicated on the meter. If any vehicle remains in any
such parking space for such length of time that the meter indicates that the
lawful parking time has expired, that vehicle shall be considered as being
parked overtime, and the parking of a vehicle overtime shall be a violation
of this article, provided every hour that a vehicle remains parked at a meter
showing a violation shall constitute a separate violation of this article.
§ 248-62. Deposit of substitute for coin in meter.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit in any parking meter installed
under the provisions of this article any slug or other substitute for a coin of
the United States of America.
§ 248-63. Parking at meter showing violation.
It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this article, for any person to permit
a vehicle to remain in a parking space adjacent to a parking meter installed
under this article, when that meter displays a signal indicating that the
vehicle has already been parked there beyond the period of time prescribed
for that parking space, or the time for which a coin or coins were deposited
in that meter for the parking of that vehicle.
A. To park a vehicle across any such line or marking.
B. To park a vehicle in such a position that the vehicle shall not be within
the area so delineated by the lines or markings.
C. To park a vehicle elsewhere in any such lot than in an individual parking
space adjacent to a parking meter.
A. Otherwise than with the front of the parked vehicle nearest to the
parking meter applicable to that vehicle.
B. With any part of the vehicle touching the meter post or head or the
raised base or barrier on which meters are erected.
§ 248-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-64
1:425
§ 248-64. Tampering with meters.
It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this article, for any person to deface,
tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of
any parking meter installed under the provisions of this article, provided
nothing in this section shall apply to the servicing or opening of parking
meters by officers, employees or police officers of the Borough under the
direction of the Chief of Police or Borough Council.
§ 248-65. Use of metered parking lots restricted.
The metered parking lots established by this article shall be for the use
of passenger cars, passenger vans and pickup trucks only, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to park any other type of vehicle in any of those
lots.
§ 248-66. Ticketing of unlawfully parked vehicles; fines.
§ 248-67. Violations and penalties.
A. It shall be the duty of the police officers and parking enforcement
personnel of the Borough, acting in accordance with the direction of the
Chief of Police, to report:
(1) The number of each parking meter that indicates that a vehicle
occupying the adjacent parking space is, or has been, parked in
violation of any provision of this article.
(2) The date and hour of the violation.
(3) The license number of the vehicle.
(4) Any other facts, the knowledge of which is necessary for a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending the violation.
B. The police officer or other person making the report shall also place on
or attach to the vehicle a notice to the owner or driver of the vehicle
that the vehicle was parked in violation of this article and instructing
the owner or driver that if he will report to the office of the Chief of
Police and pay, for the use of the Borough, the sum of $1 by 10:00 p.m.
after the time of the notice or will place the sum of $1, enclosed within
the envelope provided, in any of the special parking fine boxes installed
at various locations within the Borough within that time limit, that act
will save the violator from prosecution and from payment of the fine
prescribed in § 248-67A of this article.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article, with the exception
of § 248-64, and who fails to pay the fine set forth in § 248-66 shall be
cited within 15 days of the violation and, upon conviction, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $15, and costs.
§ 248-64 IRWIN CODE § 248-67
1:426
B. Any person who violates any provision of § 248-64 of this article shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600, and
costs, and, in default of payment of fine and costs, to imprisonment for
not more than 30 days.
§ 248-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-67
1:427

ARTICLE VII
Off-Street Unmetered Parking
§ 248-68. Unmetered parking lots.
The following are established as the unmetered parking lots operated by the
Borough:
Lot Location
Maximum
Parking
Time
Days in
Operation
Hours in
Operation
Playground
parking lot
South of Main
Street permit
parking lot
— — —
§ 248-69. Handicapped parking.
The Borough Council, at its discretion, may provide, at convenient and
suitable locations in one or more of the unmetered parking lots, reserved
parking spaces for handicapped and shall designate those spaces by
appropriate signs. It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this article, for
any person to park in any such reserved parking space any vehicle, unless
that vehicle bears or displays either a handicapped registration plate, a
handicapped parking placard, a disabled veteran registration plate, or a
disabled veteran placard, provided all provisions, requirements and
restrictions contained in the other sections of this article shall apply to
vehicles lawfully parked in reserved parking spaces for handicapped.
§ 248-70. Parking restrictions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle, or to allow a vehicle to
remain parked, in any unmetered parking lot:
§ 248-71. Use of unmetered parking lots restricted.
The unmetered parking lots established by § 248-68 of this article shall be
for the use of passenger cars, passenger vans and pickup trucks only, and it
shall be unlawful for any person to park any other kind or class of vehicle in
any such lot.
§ 248-72. Manner of parking.
Every vehicle parked in an unmetered parking lot shall be parked wholly
within the lines bounding or marking the individual parking space assigned
to that vehicle and shall be parked headed into the parking space. It shall
be unlawful for any person:
A. For longer than the maximum parking time prescribed by § 248-68 of
this article.
B. At any time when the lot is not in operation and is closed to public use.
§ 248-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-72
1:429
§ 248-73. Parking on rental basis only.
The parking spaces in the unmetered parking lots shall be available for
parking on a monthly rental basis only. The rental fee shall be fixed by
Borough Council pursuant to a resolution and shall be for a calendar month
or the part of a calendar month remaining after the rental arrangements
are made. The rental fee shall be paid in advance to the Borough Secretary,
for the use of the Borough, and after the first month shall be automatically
renewable until the renter notifies the Borough that he wishes to terminate
the rental arrangements. At any time, however, the Borough may, by
amending § 248-68 of this article, discontinue provision of a specific
unmetered parking lot or a portion of the parking spaces in any such lot, or
may change any unmetered parking lot, or part of an unmetered parking lot,
to a metered parking lot or to metered parking spaces. The rental parking
spaces shall be assigned by the Borough Secretary. The name of the renter
of a parking space and/or the numbers and/or letters on the registration tag
of the vehicle entitled to be parked there shall be posted by the Borough at
the rental space or shall be painted on the surface of that parking space.
§ 248-74. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-13-1994 by Ord.
No. 796]
A. To park a vehicle in a space not rented by him.
B. To park a vehicle otherwise than as required by this section.
C. To park a vehicle elsewhere than in an individual parking space, the
prohibited areas including, but not limited to, the access and exit
driveways and turning and maneuvering spaces.
A. All notices placed upon or attached to any motor vehicle as a result of a
parking violation under this section shall instruct the owner or driver
that if he/she will report to the office of the Chief of Police and pay, for
the use of the Borough, the sum of $5 by 10:00 p.m. on the same day as
the placing of the notice or will place the sum of $5, enclosed within the
envelope provided, in any of the special parking fine boxes installed at
various locations within the Borough within that time, that act will save
the violator from prosecution and from payment of the fine prescribed
in Subsection B below.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this article and who fails to
pay the fine set forth in this section shall be cited within 15 days of the
violation and, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $15, and costs.
§ 248-72 IRWIN CODE § 248-74
1:430
ARTICLE VIII
Removal and Impoundment of Illegally Parked Vehicles
§ 248-75. Statutory authority; applicability.
This article is enacted under authority of § 6109(a)(22) of the Vehicle Code90
and gives authority to the Borough to remove and impound those vehicles
which are parked in a tow-away zone and in violation of parking regulations
of this chapter. Vehicles which have been abandoned (as defined by the
Vehicle Code) or which are parked in such a manner as to interfere with
traffic or pose a hazard to others may be towed under the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
§ 248-76. Authority to remove and impound.
The Borough shall have authority to remove and impound, or to order
the removal and impounding, of any vehicle parked overtime or otherwise
illegally, provided that the circumstances of its parking were within the
conditions stated in § 248-75 of this article, provided no such vehicle shall
be removed or impounded except in strict adherence to the provisions of
this article or the provisions of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
§ 248-77. Tow-away zones. [Amended 9-12-2001 by Ord. No. 838]
The following designated streets and/or parking lots are hereby established
as tow-away zones. Signs shall be posted to place the public on notice
that their vehicles may be towed for violation of the Borough parking
regulations:
Street Side Between Parking Lot
Pennsylvania Avenue Both From Beech Street to
the Borough municipal
corporation line at the
easterly most limit
§ 248-78. Storage garages; bonding; towing and storage charges.
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this article shall be done only
by approved storage garages that shall be designated from time to time
by Borough Council. Every such garage shall submit evidence to Borough
Council that it is bonded or has acquired liability insurance in an amount
satisfactory to Borough Council as sufficient to indemnify owners of
impounded vehicles against loss or damage to those vehicles while in the
custody of the garage keeper for the purpose of towing or storage. The
approved storage garage shall submit to Borough Council its schedule of
charges for towing and storage of vehicles under this article, and, when the
schedule is approved by Borough Council, those charges shall be adhered
to by the approved storage garage; no different schedule of charges shall
90.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6109(a)(22).
§ 248-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-78
1:431
be demanded of or collected from any person whose vehicle is removed
or impounded under this article by any approved storage garage. Borough
Council shall delete from its list of approved storage garages any garage
that makes any unapproved charge in connection with any vehicle removed
or impounded under this article.
§ 248-79. Payment of towing and storage charges.
The payment of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or
driver of any vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation
of the provision of this chapter for which the vehicle was removed or
impounded.
§ 248-80. Reclamation costs.
In order to reclaim his vehicle, the owner shall pay towing and storage
costs, plus a fee of $25, of which $10 shall be transferred to the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation by the garage to which the
vehicle was taken.
§ 248-81. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Borough shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded under
this article and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the owners or
the agents of the owners of those vehicles with information as to the place
of storage of the vehicle.
§ 248-82. Restrictions upon removal.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article or the Vehicle
Code if, at the time of the intended removal, the owner or the person for the
time being in charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a willingness
and intention to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 248-83. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $50, together with all costs
of disposing of the vehicle under provisions of the Vehicle Code, 75 P.S.
§ 7301 et seq. (1977), as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or
reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 248-84. Unclaimed vehicles.
If, after a period of 15 days, the vehicle in storage remains unclaimed, a
report shall be filed with PennDOT, in accordance with § 7311 of the Vehicle
Code,91 by the person having legal custody of the vehicle. If the vehicle
has not been claimed after 30 days, the vehicle may be transferred to a
licensed salvor, who will then be responsible for filing the proper reports
91.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7311.
§ 248-78 IRWIN CODE § 248-84
1:432
and disposing of the vehicle in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
73 of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.), as
amended.
§ 248-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-84
1:433

ARTICLE IX
Snow and Ice Emergencies
§ 248-85. Declaration of snow and ice emergency.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards
of snow and ice on the snow emergency routes named in § 248-87 of this
article, the Mayor or his representative may, in his discretion, declare a
snow and ice emergency (designated in this article as a "snow emergency").
Information on the existence of a snow emergency shall be given by the
Borough through radio, newspaper or other available media, and
information on the termination of the emergency may be given by use of the
same media.
§ 248-86. Restrictions on snow emergency routes.
After any snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful, at any time
during the continuance of the emergency, for any person:
§ 248-87. Snow emergency routes designated.
The following are designated as snow emergency routes:
Street Between
(Reserved)
§ 248-88. Violations and penalties.
A. To park a motor vehicle or to allow that vehicle to remain parked
anywhere on any snow emergency route designated in § 248-87 of this
article.
B. To drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route, unless
that vehicle is equipped with snow tires or chains.
A. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 248-85 of this article, a person shall park a motor vehicle or allow a
motor vehicle to remain parked anywhere upon a snow emergency
route, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15, and
costs.
B. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 248-85 of this article, a person shall drive a motor vehicle upon a snow
emergency route without having that vehicle equipped with snow tires
or chains, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article and,
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25, and costs.
§ 248-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-88
1:435

ARTICLE X
Pedalcycles and Nonmotorized Vehicles
§ 248-89. Riding and parking pedalcycles on sidewalks.
§ 248-90. Use of pushcarts.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or to park a pedalcycle on the
sidewalk along the following portions of the streets in the Borough:
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $5, and costs.
A. The word "pushcart," as used in this section, shall mean a vehicle,
including a pedalcycle, propelled solely by human power, and used or
intended for use for the display, transport, exhibit or sale of goods,
wares or merchandise.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to propel a pushcart upon any
sidewalk in any business district except as necessary to move the
pushcart to a location from which it is to be loaded or unloaded or from
which goods, wares or merchandise are to be sold or dispensed under
permit from Borough Council as provided in Subsection C of this
section.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a pushcart upon any sidewalk
except for the purpose of selling or dispensing from that pushcart
goods, wares or merchandise to passersby under permit from Borough
Council. Every such permit shall be issued to the person making
application for the permit, upon payment of a fee, which shall be for the
use of the Borough, set by the Borough Council pursuant to a
resolution. The permit shall be granted to the applicant, upon payment
of the fee, and upon his signing an agreement with Borough Council
that he shall be bound by the conditions imposed by Borough Council
and made a part of the permit, dealing with the following matters:
(1) Restricting or limiting the parking of the pushcart to one or more
stated locations upon the sidewalk and to stated days and hours at
each location.
(2) Stating requirements to be adhered to in connection with the
disposal of garbage and refuse resulting from the operations
carried on.
(3) Requiring that there be no violation of any law, ordinance or
regulation pertaining to health, sanitation and the handling of food
or drink.
§ 248-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-90
1:437
§ 248-91. Skates, skateboards, coasters, sleds and other toy
vehicles. [Amended 10-10-2001 by Ord. No. 839]
D. Any person who violates any provision of this section, or any condition
of any permit granted under this section, shall be guilty of a summary
offense and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25,
and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on a sled upon any sidewalk in
the Borough, or upon any roadway, unless that roadway is on a portion
of a street blocked off for sledding by authority of § 248-5 of Article I or
§ 248-27 of Article II of this chapter, provided nothing in this subsection
shall prevent a pedestrian from pulling a sled, with or without a rider,
upon a sidewalk.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in roller-skating, rollerblading,
skateboarding or in the riding of a two-wheeled scooter or to
ride upon or propel any coaster or other toy upon:
(1) Any street, except in order to cross the roadway.
(2) Any sidewalk located in a business district, except that nothing in
this subsection shall prevent a pedestrian from pulling a coaster or
other toy vehicle, with or without a rider, upon a sidewalk.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $5, and costs.
§ 248-90 IRWIN CODE § 248-91
1:438
ARTICLE XI
Pedestrian Regulations
§ 248-92. Pedestrians to obey traffic control signs.
At all locations in the Borough where official traffic control signals are
installed, pedestrians, except where directed otherwise by pedestrian
control signals installed under § 248-93 of this article, shall obey the
directions of those traffic control signals as follows:
§ 248-93. Pedestrian control signal locations.
§ 248-94. Locations where pedestrian crossing in unmarked
crosswalks restricted.
Except when authorized by a police officer or other appropriately attired
person authorized to direct, control or regulate traffic, it shall be unlawful
for any pedestrian to cross the roadway at any of the following streets at
the intersection with that street indicated:
A. When facing a green signal, a pedestrian may proceed across the
roadway within a crosswalk.
B. When facing a steady yellow signal, a pedestrian shall not start to cross
the roadway.
C. When facing a steady red signal, a pedestrian shall not enter the
roadway.
A. At the following locations, official pedestrian control signals shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected):
Street Intersection Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
B. Every pedestrian facing a steady or flashing "Don't Walk" signal shall
obey the directions of that signal as follows:
(1) When facing a steady "Don't Walk" signal, a pedestrian shall not
start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal, but any
pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the "Walk"
signal should proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the "Don't
Walk" signal is showing.
(2) When facing a flashing "Don't Walk" signal, a pedestrian shall not
start to cross the roadway in the direction of the indication, but any
pedestrian who has partly completed crossing during the "Walk"
indication should proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone.
C. Any pedestrian who fails to obey the directions of a "Don't Walk" signal,
as indicated above, shall be guilty of an offense and a violation of this
article.
§ 248-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-94
1:439
Street Intersection Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
§ 248-95. Locations where pedestrians may cross only in crosswalk.
[Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 791]
§ 248-96. Violations and penalties.
Any pedestrian who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
$5, and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian:
(1) To cross any roadway in a business district within the Borough
except in a crosswalk.
(2) To cross the roadway, in any of the following portions of streets in
the Borough, except in a crosswalk:
Street Between
(Reserved)
B. Provided, nothing in this section shall permit any pedestrian to cross in
a crosswalk at any location where that crossing is prohibited by
§ 248-93 of this article.
§ 248-94 IRWIN CODE § 248-96
1:440
ARTICLE XII
Boot Devices
[Added 9-11-1996 by Ord. No. 807]
§ 248-97. Statutory authority; applicability.
This article is enacted under authority of § 6109(a)(22) of the Vehicle Code92
and gives authority to the Borough of Irwin to place a locking boot device
on the wheel of those vehicles which are delinquent in payment of traffic
tickets for violation of parking regulations of this chapter.
§ 248-98. Definition of "delinquent."
For purposes described in § 248-97 of this article, "delinquent" shall mean
the failure of the owner of a vehicle to pay parking tickets issued by the
Borough of Irwin Police Department, if the police have issued 20 or more
tickets to that owner and that vehicle.
§ 248-99. Authority to boot.
The Borough of Irwin shall have authority to boot any vehicle that is
delinquent in the payment of traffic tickets, provided no such vehicle shall
be booted except in strict adherence to the provisions of this article or the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.93
§ 248-100. Reclamation costs.
In order to reclaim one's vehicle, the owner shall pay the tickets outstanding
on the vehicle, plus any outstanding court costs and/or storage costs, plus a
fee of $25.
§ 248-101. Records of booted vehicles.
The Borough of Irwin shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles booted
under this article and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the
owner or agent of the owner of those vehicles with information as to the
steps necessary for the owner to reclaim the vehicle.
§ 248-102. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $50, together with all costs
of disposing of the vehicle under the provisions of the Vehicle Code, 75 P.S.
§ 7301 et seq., as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted
by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
92.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6109(a)(22).
93.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 248-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-103
1:441
§ 248-103. Unclaimed vehicles.
If, after a period of 15 days, the booted vehicle remains unclaimed, a report
shall be filed with PennDOT in accordance with § 7311 of the Vehicle Code,94
by the person having legal custody of the vehicle. If the vehicle has not been
claimed after 30 days, the vehicle may be impounded and/or transferred to
a licensed salvor, who will then be responsible for filing the proper reports
and disposing of the vehicle in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
73 of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq., as
amended.
94.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7311.
§ 248-103 IRWIN CODE § 248-103
1:442
Chapter 252
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES IN RIGHT-OFWAY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 110.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 225.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
230.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 252-1. Purposes; findings of fact; intent.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to establish uniform standards for the
design, permitting, maintenance, and use of wireless communications
facilities within the rights-of-way of the Borough of Irwin. The Borough
of Irwin recognizes the importance of wireless communications and
their attendant facilities in providing high-quality communications
service to the Borough's residents, businesses, and emergency
management and response organizations. The Borough of Irwin also
has a responsibility to protect the public, to enhance public safety, and
to minimize the adverse visual and dangerous effects of such facilities
through the standards set forth in this chapter.
B. It is the Borough of Irwin's intent to:
(1) Accommodate the need for wireless communications facilities in
the rights-of-way of the Borough while regulating their activities so
as to ensure the provision for necessary services;
(2) Provide for the managed development of wireless communications
facilities in the rights-of-way of the Borough in a manner that
enhances the benefits of wireless communications and
accommodates the needs of Borough residents, persons utilizing
the rights-of-way, and wireless carriers in accordance with federal
and state laws and regulations;
(3) Establish procedures for the design, location, siting, construction,
installation, maintenance and removal of wireless communications
facilities in the Borough rights-of-way;
(4) Address new wireless technologies, including, but not limited to,
distributed antenna systems, data collection units, cable Wi-Fi and
other wireless communications facilities;
(5) Minimize the adverse effects and the number of such facilities
through proper design, location, siting, screening, material, color
and finish and by requiring that competing providers of wireless
communications services co-locate their commercial
communications antennas and related facilities on existing towers;
§ 248-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-1
1:443
§ 252-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AMATEUR RADIO ANTENNA — An antenna used for the transmission or
reception of wireless signals by amateur radio operators.
ANTENNA — Any system of wires, rods, discs, panels, flat panels, dishes,
whips, or other similar devices used for the transmission or reception
of wireless signals. An antenna may include an omnidirectional antenna
(rod), directional antenna (panel), parabolic antenna (disc) or any other
wireless antenna. An antenna shall not include tower-based wireless
communications facilities as defined below.
CO-LOCATION — The mounting of one or more WCFs, including antennas,
on an existing tower-based WCF or on any structure that already supports
at least one non-tower WCF.
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEMS (DAS) — A network of spatially
separated antenna sites connected to a common source that provides
wireless service within a geographic area or structure.
EMERGENCY — A condition that:
FCC — Federal Communications Commission.
HEIGHT OF A TOWER-BASED WCF — The vertical distance measured
from the ground level, including any base pad, to the highest point on a
tower-based WCF, including antennas mounted on the tower and any other
appurtenances.
MONOPOLE — A WCF or site which consists of a single pole structure,
designed and erected on the ground or on top of a structure, to support
communications antennas and connecting appurtenances.
NON-TOWER WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (NON-TOWER
WCF) — All non-tower wireless communications facilities, including, but
not limited to, antennas and related equipment. Non-tower WCFs shall not
include support structures for antennas or any related equipment that is
mounted to the ground or at ground level.
RELATED EQUIPMENT — Any piece of equipment related to, incidental to,
or necessary for the operation of a tower-based WCF or non-tower WCF. By
way of illustration, not limitation, "related equipment" includes generators
and base stations.
(6) Promote the health, safety and welfare of the Borough's residents.
Constitutes a clear and immediate danger to the health, welfare, or
safety of the public; or
A.
Has caused or is likely to cause facilities in the rights-of-way to be
unusable and result in loss of the services provided.
B.
§ 252-1 IRWIN CODE § 252-2
1:444
STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — Camouflaging methods applied to wireless
communications towers, antennas and other facilities which render them
more visually appealing or blend the proposed facility into the existing
structure or visual backdrop in such a manner as to render it minimally
visible to the casual observer. Such methods include, but are not limited
to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, building-mounted
antennas painted to match the existing structure and facilities constructed
to resemble trees, shrubs, and light poles.
SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGE or SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE — A modification
to an existing wireless communications facility substantially changes the
physical dimensions of a tower or base station if it meets any of the
following criteria:
TOWER — A structure that is intended for transmitting or receiving
television, radio, or telephone communications, excluding those used
exclusively for dispatch communications. This definition not shall include
tower-based wireless communications facilities.
TOWER-BASED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (TOWERBASED
WCF) — Any structure that is used for the purpose of supporting
one or more antennas, including, but not limited to, self-supporting lattice
towers, guy towers and monopoles, utility poles and light poles. DAS hub
facilities are considered to be tower-based WCF.
WBCA — Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act (53 P.S.
§ 11702.1 et seq.).
WIRELESS — Transmissions through the airwaves including, but not limited
to, infrared line of sight, cellular, PCS, microwave, satellite, or radio signals.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WCF) — The antennas, nodes,
control boxes, towers, poles, conduits, ducts, pedestals, electronics and
other equipment used for the purpose of transmitting, receiving,
distributing, providing, or accommodating wireless communications
services.
For tower-based WCF in the rights-of-way, it increases the height of the
facility by more than 10% or 10 feet, whichever is less;
A.
For those tower-based WCFs in the public rights-of-way, it protrudes
from the edge of the structure by more than six feet;
B.
It involves installation of more than the standard number of new
equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four
cabinets;
C.
It entails any excavation of deployment outside the current site of the
tower-based WCF; or
D.
It does not comply with conditions associated with prior approval of
construction or modification of the tower-based WCF unless the
noncompliance is due to an increase in height, increase in width, or
addition of cabinets.
E.
§ 252-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-2
1:445
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY APPLICANT (WCF APPLICANT)
— Any person that applies for a wireless communications facility building
permit, zoning approval and/or permission to use the public right-of-way
(ROW) or other Borough-owned land or property.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A freestanding structure, such as
a tower-based wireless communications facility or any other support
structure that is constructed primarily to support the placement or
installation of a wireless communications facility if approved by the
Borough.
§ 252-3. General requirements for wireless communications
facilities.
A. The following regulations shall apply to all WCFs in the rights-of-way:
(1) WCFs in the right-of-way (hereinafter "ROW") are permissible
following the application for and issuance of a right-of-way access
permit. Said permit may only be issued a) to a public utility, as
defined by the Public Utility Code, and b) if the terms and
conditions of this chapter are satisfied.
(2) Right-of-way access permit.
(a) No work shall be conducted unless and until a right-of-way
access permit is issued by the Borough.
(b) No permit shall be granted under this chapter until the person
or entity desiring the same made an application for the permit
and paid all necessary fees and costs, in the amount as
established, from time to time, by resolution of the Borough
Council. Such application shall comprise an agreement by the
applicant that the applicant agrees to adhere to all the terms of
this chapter and that any failure to do so shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
(c) No permit shall be granted until the applicant has provided a
bond or other financial security in the amount prescribed by
the Borough Engineer, based upon the extent of the work and
the character of the right-of-way disturbance, including any
opening or excavation of the right-of-way. Such security shall
guarantee that the permit holder shall be responsible for
maintaining the portion of the disturbed right-of-way by and
the restored surface for a period of 12 months after the
completion of the resurfacing of the right-of-way.
(3) Co-location. WCFs in the ROW shall be co-located on existing poles,
such as existing utility poles or light poles. If co-location is not
technologically feasible, the WCF applicant shall locate its nontower
WCF on existing poles or freestanding structures that do not
already act as wireless support structures with the Borough's
approval. The applicant shall provide the Borough with an entire,
§ 252-2 IRWIN CODE § 252-3
1:446
complete, and executed agreement with the owner of such existing
pole and/or structure evidencing the applicant's permission to colocate.
(a) Tower-based WCF in right-of-way. If co-location on any existing
pole or structure is not available, the applicant may request the
construction of a new tower-based WCF in the right-of-way.
The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed towerbased
WCF cannot be accommodated by co-location on an
existing or approved structure or building. The right-of-way
access permit may be denied if the applicant has not made a
good faith effort to mount the commercial communications
antenna(s) on an existing pole or structure. The WCF applicant
shall demonstrate that it contacted the owners of tall
structures, buildings, and towers within a 1/4 mile radius of the
site proposed, sought permission to install an antenna on those
structures, buildings, and/or towers and was denied for one of
the following reasons:
[1] The proposed antenna and related equipment would
exceed the structural capacity of the existing building,
structure or tower, and its reinforcement cannot be
accomplished at a reasonable cost.
[2] The proposed antenna and related equipment would cause
radio frequency interference with other existing
equipment for that existing building, structure, or tower
and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable
cost.
[3] Such existing buildings, structures, or towers do not have
adequate location, space, access, or height to
accommodate the proposed equipment or to allow it to
perform its intended function.
[4] A commercially reasonable agreement could not be
reached with the owner of such building, structure, or
tower.
(b) Engineer certification. Prior to the Borough's issuance of a
permit authorizing construction and erection of a tower-based
WCF, a structural engineer registered in Pennsylvania shall
issue to the Borough a written certification of the proposed
WCF's ability to meet the structural standards offered by either
the Electronic Industries Association or the
Telecommunication Industry Association and certify the proper
construction of the foundation and the erection of the
structure. This certification shall be provided with the
application or at a minimum be made as a condition attached to
any approval given such that the certification be provided prior
to issuance of any permits.
§ 252-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-3
1:447
(c) Additional antennas. As a condition of approval for all towerbased
WCF in the rights-of-way, the WCF applicant shall
provide the Borough with a written commitment that it will
allow other service providers to co-locate antennas on towerbased
WCF where technically and economically feasible. The
owner of a tower-based WCF shall not install any additional
antennas without obtaining the prior written approval of the
Borough, subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(d) Signs. All tower-based WCFs shall post a sign in a readily
visible location identifying the name and phone number of a
party to contact in the event of an emergency. The only other
signage permitted on the WCF shall be that required by the
FCC or any other federal or state agency.
(e) Lighting. No tower-based WCF shall be artificially lighted,
except as required by law. If lighting is required, the WCF
applicant shall provide a detailed plan for sufficient lighting,
demonstrating as unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as is
permissible under state and federal regulations. The WCF
applicant shall promptly report any outage or malfunction of
FAA-mandated lighting to the appropriate governmental
authorities and to the Borough Code Enforcement Officer.
(f) Noise. Tower-based WCFs shall be operated and maintained so
as not to produce noise in excess of applicable noise standards
under state law and the Borough Code, except in emergency
situations requiring the use of a backup generator, where such
noise standards may be exceeded on a temporary basis only.
(g) Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an
application for a tower-based WCF is filed with the Borough,
the Borough shall notify the WCF applicant in writing of any
information that may be required to complete such application.
All applications for tower-based WCFs shall be acted upon
within 150 days of the receipt of a fully completed application
for the approval of such tower-based WCF, and the Borough
shall advise the WCF applicant in writing of its decision. If
additional information was requested by the Borough to
complete an application, the time required by the WCF
applicant to provide the information shall not be counted
toward the one-hundred-fifty-day review period.
(h) FCC license. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based
WCF over 40 feet in height shall submit a copy of its current
FCC license, including the name, address, and emergency
telephone number for the operator of the facility.
(4) Prohibited on certain structures. Non-tower WCFs may not be
located on single-family detached residences, single-family
attached residences, or any residential accessory structure.
§ 252-3 IRWIN CODE § 252-3
1:448
(5) Noncommercial usage exemption. Borough residents utilizing
satellite dishes and antennas for the purpose of maintaining
television, phone, radio and/or Internet connections at their
respective residences shall be exempt from the design regulations
enumerated in this chapter. This exemption shall include amateur
radio operators.
(6) WCFs located in the right-of-way, whether tower-based or nontower,
shall not be greater than 10 feet taller than the existing
utility poles, lights or buildings within a one-block radius of the
WCF. In accordance with industry standards, all WCF applicants
must submit documentation to the Borough justifying the total
height of the WCF. Such documentation shall be analyzed in the
context of such justification on an individual basis. The Borough
may require a reduction in height if the proposed height is not
justified.
(7) Nonconforming wireless support structures. Non-tower WCFs shall
be permitted to co-locate upon nonconforming tower-based WCF
and other nonconforming structures existing on the effective date
of this chapter. Co-location of WCFs upon existing tower-based
WCFs is encouraged even if the tower-based WCF is
nonconforming as to use within a zoning district.
(8) Public safety communications. WCFs shall not interfere with public
safety communications or the reception of broadband, television,
radio or other communications services enjoyed by occupants of
nearby properties.
(9) Timing of approval for co-location applications in the rights-of-way.
The following time frames shall apply to applications for co-located
WCFs:
(a) Applications for co-located non-tower WCFs that do not
substantially change the dimensions of the underlying wireless
support structure or that otherwise do not fall under the
Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act. Within 30
calendar days of the date that an application for a non-tower
WCF is filed with the Borough, the Borough shall notify the
WCF applicant in writing of any information that may be
required to complete such application. Within 90 calendar days
of receipt of a complete application, the Borough shall make its
final decision on whether to approve the application and shall
advise the WCF applicant in writing of such decision.
(b) Applications for co-locations that do substantially change the
dimensions of the underlying wireless support structure or that
otherwise fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband
Collocation Act. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an
application for a non-tower WCF is filed with the Borough, the
Borough shall notify the WCF applicant in writing of any
§ 252-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-3
1:449
information that may be required to complete such application.
Within 60 calendar days of receipt of a complete application,
the Borough shall make its final decision on whether to
approve the application and shall advise the WCF applicant in
writing of such decision.
(10) Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based WCF
greater than 40 feet in height shall provide the Borough with a
certificate of insurance evidencing general liability coverage in the
minimum amount of $5,000,000 per occurrence and property
damage coverage in the minimum amount of $5,000,000 per
occurrence covering the tower-based WCF. Each person and/or
entity that owns or operates a tower-based WCF 40 feet or less in
height or any non-tower WCF shall provide the Borough with a
certificate of insurance evidencing general liability coverage in the
minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence and property
damage coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per
occurrence covering each WCF.
(11) Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a WCF shall, at
its sole cost and expense, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the
Borough of Irwin, its elected and appointed officials, employees
and agents, at all times against any and all claims for personal
injury, including death, and property damage arising in whole or in
part from, caused by or connected with any act or omission of the
person, its officers, agents, employees or contractors arising out of,
but not limited to, the construction, installation, operation,
maintenance or removal of the WCF. Each person that owns or
operates a WCF shall defend any actions or proceedings against
the Borough in which it is claimed that personal injury, including
death, or property damage was caused by the construction,
installation, operation, maintenance or removal of a WCF. The
obligation to indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include, but
not be limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries,
liabilities, damages, reasonable attorneys' fees, reasonable expert
fees, court costs and all other costs of indemnification.
(12) Maintenance. To the extent permitted by law, the following
maintenance requirements shall apply:
(a) The WCF shall be fully automated and unattended on a daily
basis and shall be visited only for maintenance or emergency
repair.
(b) Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the upkeep of
the facility in order to promote the safety and security of the
Borough's residents.
(c) All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing less than the
best available technology for preventing failures and
accidents.
§ 252-3 IRWIN CODE § 252-3
1:450
B. The following regulations shall apply to all co-located non-tower WCF
that do not substantially change the physical dimensions of the wireless
support structure to which they are attached and/or fall under the
Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act:
(1) Building permit required, excepted from the right-of-way access
permit. WCF applicants proposing the modification of an existing
tower-based WCF shall obtain a building permit from the Borough.
In order to be considered for such permit, the WCF applicant must
submit a permit application to the Borough in accordance with
applicable permit policies and procedures. The Borough shall issue
a determination on the building permit within 90 days of the date of
the receipt of a completed application.
(2) Related equipment. Ground-mounted related equipment greater
than three cubic feet shall not be located within 50 feet of a lot in
residential use or zoned residential.
(3) Permit fees. The Borough may assess appropriate and reasonable
permit fees directly related to the Borough's actual costs in
reviewing and processing the application for approval of a nontower
WCF.
C. The following regulations shall apply to all non-tower WCFs that do
substantially change the wireless support structure to which they are
attached, all tower-based WCFs, and/or that otherwise do not fall under
the Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act:
(1) Right-of-way access permit required. Any WCF applicant proposing
the construction of a new non-tower WCF or tower-based WCF, or
the modification of an existing non-tower WCF, shall first obtain a
right-of-way access permit from the Borough. New constructions,
modifications, and replacements that do fall under the WBCA shall
be not subject to the permit process. The right-of-way access
permit application shall demonstrate that the proposed facility
complies with all applicable provisions in the Borough of Irwin
Code.
(2) Permit fees. The Borough may assess appropriate and reasonable
permit fees directly related to the Borough's actual costs in
reviewing and processing the application for approval of a nontower
WCF, as well as related inspection, monitoring and related
costs.
(3) Inspection. The Borough reserves the right to inspect any WCF to
ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and any
other provisions found within the Borough Code or state or federal
law. The Borough and/or its agents shall have the authority to enter
the property upon which a WCF is located at any time, upon
reasonable notice to the operator, to ensure such compliance.
§ 252-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-3
1:451
§ 252-4. Design requirements.
(4) Retention of experts. The Borough may hire any consultant(s) and/
or expert(s) necessary to assist the Borough in reviewing and
evaluating the application for approval of the WCF and, once
approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential violations of
the terms and conditions of these WCF provisions. The WCF
applicant and/or owner of the WCF shall reimburse the Borough for
all costs of the Borough's consultant(s) in providing expert
evaluation and consultation in connection with these activities.
A. WCF installations located above the surface grade in the public ROW,
including, but not limited to, those on streetlights and joint utility poles,
shall consist of equipment components that are no more than six feet in
height and that are compatible in scale and proportion to the structures
upon which they are mounted. All equipment shall be the smallest and
least visibly intrusive equipment feasible.
B. The WCF shall employ the most current stealth technology available in
an effort to appropriately blend into the surrounding environment and
minimize aesthetic impact. Antennas and related equipment shall be
treated to match the supporting structure and may be required to be
painted, or otherwise coated, to be visually compatible with the support
structure upon which they are mounted.
C. All WCFs shall be designed, constructed, operated, maintained,
repaired, modified and removed in strict compliance with all current
applicable technical, safety and safety-related codes, including but not
limited to the most recent editions of the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) Code, National Electrical Safety Code, and National
Electrical Code. Any WCF shall at all times be kept and maintained in
good condition, order and repair by qualified maintenance and
construction personnel, so that the same shall not endanger the life of
any person or any property in the Borough of Irwin.
D. All WCF structures shall be designed to withstand the effects of wind
gusts of at least 100 miles per hour in addition to the standard designed
by the American National Standards Institute as prepared by the
engineering departments of the Electronics Industry Association, and
Telecommunications Industry Association (ANSI/TIA-222, as amended).
E. All WCFs shall comply with all federal and state laws and regulations
concerning aviation safety.
F. A WCF shall not, by itself or in conjunction with other WCFs, generate
radio frequency emissions in excess of the standards and regulations of
the FCC, including, but not limited to, the FCC Office of Engineering
Technology Bulletin 65 entitled "Evaluating Compliance with FCC
Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio Frequency Electromagnetic
Fields," as amended.
§ 252-3 IRWIN CODE § 252-5
1:452
§ 252-5. Time, place and manner.
The Borough shall determine the time, place, and manner of construction,
maintenance, repair and/or removal of all non-tower WCF in the ROW based
on public safety, traffic management, physical burden on the ROW, and
related considerations. For public utilities, the time, place, and manner
requirements shall be consistent with the police powers of the Borough and
the requirements of the Public Utility Code.
§ 252-6. Equipment location.
WCFs and related equipment shall be located so as not to cause any physical
or visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise
create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists or to otherwise
inconvenience public use of the ROW as determined by the Borough. In
addition:
§ 252-7. Relocation or removal of facilities.
A. In no case shall ground-mounted related equipment, walls, or
landscaping be located within 18 inches of the face of the curb or within
an easement extending onto a privately owned lot.
B. Ground-mounted related equipment that cannot be placed underground
shall be screened, to the fullest extent possible, through the use of
landscaping or other decorative features to the satisfaction of the
Borough. Said related equipment, together with required screening,
shall not obstruct the public right-of-way.
C. Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened to blend in with
the surrounding area to the satisfaction of the Borough.
D. Any graffiti on any wireless support structures or any related
equipment shall be removed at the sole expense of the owner.
E. Any proposed underground vault related to the WCF shall be reviewed
and approved by the Borough.
A. Within 60 days following written notice from the Borough, or such
longer period as the Borough determines is reasonably necessary or
such shorter period in the case of an emergency, an owner of a WCF in
the ROW shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove,
relocate, change or alter the position of any WCF when the Borough,
consistent with its police powers and applicable Public Utility
Commission regulations, has determined that such removal, relocation,
change or alteration is reasonably necessary under the following
circumstances:
(1) The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
Borough or other public improvement in the right-of-way;
§ 252-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-7
1:453
§ 252-8. Reimbursement for ROW use.
In addition to permit fees as described in this section, every WCF in the
ROW is subject to the Borough's right to fix annually a fair and reasonable
fee to be paid for use and occupancy of the ROW. Such compensation
for ROW use shall be directly related to the Borough's actual ROW
management costs, including, but not limited to, the costs of the
administration and performance of all reviewing, inspecting, permitting,
supervising and other ROW management activities by the Borough. The
owner of each WCF shall pay an annual fee to the Borough to compensate
the Borough for the Borough's costs incurred in connection with the
activities described above.
§ 252-9. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable, and if any section or part of
this chapter is adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid
or unenforceable, the remainder of this chapter shall remain in full force
and effect.
(2) The operations of the Borough or other governmental entity in the
right-of-way;
(3) Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement; or
(4) An emergency as determined by the Borough.
B. In the event that use of a WCF is discontinued, the owner shall provide
written notice to the Borough of its intent to discontinue use and the
date when the use shall be discontinued. Unused or abandoned WCFs
or portions of WCFs shall be removed as follows:
(1) All abandoned or unused WCFs and accessory facilities shall be
removed within two months of the cessation of operations at the
site unless a time extension is approved by the Borough.
(2) If the WCF or accessory facility is not removed within two months
of the cessation of operations at a site, or within any longer period
approved by the Borough, the WCF and/or associated facilities and
equipment may be removed by the Borough and the cost of removal
assessed against the owner of the WCF.
§ 252-7 IRWIN CODE § 252-9
1:454
Chapter 260
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 34.
Animals — See Ch. 88.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 105.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 110.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 135.
Sewers — See Ch. 200.
Sexually oriented businesses — See Ch. 204.
Solid waste — See Ch. 212.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 220.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 225.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
230.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 234.
Trees — See Ch. 242.
§ 252-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-9
1:455

Part 1
Overview
ARTICLE I
Title, Purpose and Jurisdiction
§ 260-1. Title.
An ordinance regulating the location, height, bulk, erection, construction,
alteration, razing and size of structures; the percentage of lot which may
be occupied; the size of yards, courts and other open spaces; the density
and distribution of population; the intensity of land use or bodies of water
for commerce, industry, residence, recreation, public activities or other
purposes; the uses of land, the protection of historic resources; and
providing for the administration, enforcement and amendment of this
chapter in accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
§ 260-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Irwin Borough Zoning Ordinance."
§ 260-3. Purpose.
A. The regulations of the Zoning Ordinance are made in accordance with
the following community objectives:
(1) To enhance the Borough's community atmosphere while developing
a balance of residential, recreational, commercial, and industrial
land uses.
(2) To lessen congestion on the streets and highways;
(3) To secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers;
(4) To promote health and general welfare;
(5) To provide adequate light and air;
(6) To prevent the overcrowding of land;
(7) To avoid undue congestion of population;
(8) To facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewer,
schools, parks, and other public requirements;
(9) To protect and enhance the value of land;
(10) To encourage, yet control, new development and growth within the
Borough.
B. Such regulations are also made with reasonable consideration to the
character of the districts hereinafter set forth and their suitability for
§ 260-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-3
1:457
§ 260-4. Community objectives.
This article shall serve as the statement of community development
objectives for the Borough of Irwin Zoning Ordinance as required by Section
606 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247 of 1968, as
amended). The Zoning Ordinance reflects the policy goals of the Borough
as stated in the following community development objectives and has been
developed as a legislative and administrative tool of the Borough to
implement these objectives. The overall goal of the Borough of Irwin Zoning
Ordinance is to enhance the Borough's residents' community atmosphere
while developing a balance of residential, recreational, commercial and
industrial uses consistent with the adopted Borough of Irwin
Comprehensive Plan, as amended.
particular uses and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and
encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the Borough.
A. Land use objectives.
(1) Preserve neighborhoods.
(2) Assure infrastructure and land use planning is coordinated.
(3) Encourage land use patterns that preserve and set aside green and
open space.
B. Housing objectives.
(1) Permit the development of mixed-use residential districts.
(2) Promote open space within residential districts.
(3) Promote pedestrian-friendly residential districts.
C. Economic objectives.
(1) Encourage the development of businesses.
(2) Establish a strong diverse tax base.
D. Infrastructure and community facilities objectives.
(1) Assure infrastructure and land use planning are coordinated.
(2) Promote the development of public and/or private recreational
activities throughout the Borough.
(3) Advocate standards that assure public safety.
(4) Assure development costs are not passed on to the citizens.
E. Natural resources and preservation objectives.
(1) Promote the development of outdoor recreational activities.
§ 260-3 IRWIN CODE § 260-4
1:458
§ 260-5. Applicability.
§ 260-6. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying this chapter, the Borough holds these
provisions to be the minimum requirements for promotion of health, safety,
morals and general welfare of the Borough of Irwin. Any use permitted
subject to the regulations prescribed by the provisions of this chapter
shall conform with all regulations for the zoning district in which it is
located and to all other pertinent regulations of the chapter. This chapter
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, annul, supersede or cancel any
easements, covenants, restrictions or reservations contained in deeds or
other agreements, but if the ordinance imposes more stringent restrictions
upon the use of buildings and land than are contained in the deeds or
agreements, the provisions of the chapter shall control.
§ 260-7. Repealer.
The Borough of Irwin Zoning Ordinance of 1979 and its amendments are
hereby repealed and replaced by the provisions of the Borough of Irwin's
Zoning Ordinance of 2014, as amended.
(2) Encourage high quality redevelopment.
(3) Assure redevelopment does not adversely impact our environment.
(4) Encourage redevelopment of compatible land uses.
(5) Encourage redevelopment of safe land uses.
(6) Assure redevelopment meets state and federal requirements.
(7) Encourage traffic patterns that contribute to less congestion.
A. The provisions, regulations, limitations, and restrictions of this chapter
shall apply to all structures, buildings, uses, signs, fences, walls,
parking lots, driveways and land and their accessory structures,
buildings, uses and signs. Nothing in this chapter shall require any
change in plans or construction of a building for which a building
permit has been issued by the Borough prior to the effective date of the
chapter, and which is completed within the time limits of the permit or
applicable extensions thereof.
B. This chapter shall not apply to any existing or proposed building or
extension thereof, used or to be used by a public utility corporation. The
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission shall, after a public hearing,
decide that the present or proposed situation of the building in question
is reasonably necessary for the convenience or welfare of the public.
[Amended 3-8-2017 by Ord. No. 949]
§ 260-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-7
1:459

ARTICLE II
Vocabulary
§ 260-8. Word usage.
§ 260-9. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONMENT — The relinquishment of property or cessation of the use
of the property by the owner or lessee without any intention of transferring
rights to the property to another owner or of resuming the nonconforming
use of the property for a period of one year.
ABUTTING — Having a common border with or being separated from such
a common border with by a right-of-way, alley or easement.
ACCESS — The way or means by which pedestrians or vehicles approach,
enter or exit property.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A subordinate structure
detached from but located on the same lot as a principal structure. The
use of an accessory structure must be accessory to the use of the principal
structure.
ACCESSORY USE — A use, whether of land or of a structure, which is a
subordinate use. The use must be an accessory use to the principal use of
the structure.
ADDITION — Any increase in gross floor area of a structure or use,
including those in which the building footprint is not enlarged.
ADJACENT — See "abutting."
ADULT BOOKSTORE/VIDEO STORE — Any commercial establishment in
which more than 5% of the inventory offered for sale or rental to the public
consists of books, publications, films or other media which depict nudity or
sexual conduct, as defined herein.
A. In the construction of this chapter, the definitions contained below shall
be observed and applied, except when the context indicates otherwise.
Words not defined shall be observed and applied according to their
dictionary definitions.
B. Words used in the present tense shall include the future. The words
"occupied" and "used" shall be construed as though followed by the
words "or intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." The
word "including" shall be construed as though followed by the words
"but not limited to." Words used in the singular shall include the plural,
and the plural shall include the singular. The words "shall" and "will"
are always mandatory, while the word "may" implies discretionary
power.
§ 260-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-9
1:461
ADULT BUSINESS — An adult bookstore/video store, adult live theater,
adult movie theater or movie house, or adult nightclub, as defined herein.
ADULT DAY-CARE FACILITY — A facility that provides supervised care
and assistance primarily to persons who are over age 60, mentally and/or
physically disabled, and who require such daily assistance because of their
limited physical and mental capacities. This use may involve occasional
overnight stays but shall not primarily be a residential use. The facility shall
comply with all state and federal regulations and must meet all inspection
and licensing requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Aging.
ADULT LIVE THEATER — Any commercial establishment which features on
a regular basis live shows for public viewing, in which all or some of the
performers are displaying nudity or engaging in sexual conduct, as defined
herein.
ADULT MOVIE THEATER OR MOVIE HOUSE — Any movie theater,
including mini theaters, which on a regular continuing basis shows films
rated "X" by the Motion Picture Association of America, or any movie
theater which presents for public viewing on a regular continuing basis socalled
"adult films" depicting sexual conduct, as defined herein.
ADULT NIGHTCLUB — Any establishment which serves food and/or
beverages, including private clubs, whether or not the consumption of
alcoholic beverages is allowed on the premises; which offers entertainment,
either live or recorded, which exhibits nudity or sexual conduct, as defined
herein; or which provides service by waitpersons who exhibit nudity or
sexual conduct, as defined herein.
AGRICULTURE — The cultivation, tilling or use of land for the purpose of
producing crops therefrom, or of horticulture, animal husbandry, and all
uses permissible under the common definition of "farm."
ALTERATION — Any rearrangement, reconstruction, conversion, division or
exterior enlargement of any structure.
AMATEUR RADIO ANTENNA — An antenna used for the transmission or
reception of wireless signals by amateur radio operators.[Added 3-8-2017
by Ord. No. 949]
AMENDMENT — A modification, change or revision in the current
ordinances.
AMENDMENT, REZONING — An amendment to the Zoning Map to effect a
change of the designated land use district on a parcel of land.
AMENDMENT, TEXT — An amendment or revision to the text of this
chapter.
ANIMAL CLINIC/VETERINARIAN OFFICE — An establishment or business
maintained and operated by a veterinarian or veterinarians for the
examination, prophylaxis, surgery, diagnosis and treatment of diseases or
injuries of animals, including indoor or outdoor boarding of animals,
provided that said veterinarian or veterinarians are duly licensed under the
laws of the State of Pennsylvania.
§ 260-9 IRWIN CODE § 260-9
1:462
ANIMAL GROOMING SERVICE — Any place or establishment whose
primary service offered is to be a place where house pets are bathed,
clipped or combed for the purpose of enhancing their aesthetic value and/
or health, and for which a fee is charged. House pets shall not include those
animals or reptiles prohibited by any other Borough ordinance.
ANIMAL SALES AND GROOMING — Retail sales of domestic and/or exotic
animals; bathing and trimming services, conducted entirely within an
enclosed building with no outdoor use.
ANIMAL, LARGE — Animals, including but not limited to horses, donkeys,
burros, llamas, bovines, goats, sheep, bison, camels and other animals or
livestock of similar size and type, except inherently dangerous mammals
and inherently dangerous reptiles. Horses, mules, donkeys, burros, llamas,
bison and camels under one year in age, bovines under 10 months in age,
and goats, sheep and swine under three months in age shall not be included
when calculating the density of large animals.
ANIMAL, SMALL — Animals or fowl other than a household pet, large
animal, inherently dangerous mammals or inherently dangerous reptiles,
including but not limited to chickens, guinea hens, geese, ducks, turkeys,
pigeons, emu, ostriches (struthious), kangaroos, rabbits, mink, chinchilla,
nutria, gnawing animals in general, and other animals or fowl of similar
size and type. Small animals or fowl under three months in age shall not
be included when computing intensity of small animals or fowl. Young
or miniature large animals are not included in this definition and are
considered large animals.
ANTENNA — Any system of wires, rods, discs, panels, flat panels, dishes,
whips, or other similar devices used for the transmission or reception
of wireless signals. An antenna may include an omnidirectional antenna
(rod), directional antenna (panel), parabolic antenna (disc) or any other
wireless antenna. An antenna shall not include tower-based wireless
communications facilities as defined below.[Amended 3-8-2017 by Ord.
No. 949]
APARTMENT — See "dwelling, multifamily."
APPEARANCE — A form prepared by the Board asking the person's name
and address, whom he is representing, and whether or not he desires a copy
of any final decision in the case at hand, so that the Board may determine a
person's interest in the matter at hand and also have an official record of to
whom a copy of any final decision must be sent.
APPLIANCE REPAIR ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment involved
primarily in the repair and maintenance of large and small household
appliances.
APPLIANCE, FURNITURE AND FURNISHINGS SALES AND SERVICE —
Stores engaged primarily in selling the following products and related
services, including incidental repair services: draperies, floor coverings,
furniture, glass and chinaware, home appliances, home furnishings, home
sound systems, interior decorating materials and services, large musical
instruments, including but not limited to pianos, cellos and harps, movable
§ 260-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-9
1:463
spas and hot tubs, office furniture, other household electrical and gas
appliances, outdoor furniture, refrigerators, etc.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has
filed an application for development, including his heirs, successors and
assigns.
AREA, BUILDABLE — See "buildable area."
ASSISTED CARE NURSING FACILITY — A residential care facility that
provides twenty-four-hour nonmedical care for more than six persons 18
years of age or older, or emancipated minors, with chronic life-threatening
illness, in need of personal services, protection, supervision, assistance,
guidance or training essential for sustaining the activities of daily living
or for the protection of the individual. This classification includes group
homes, residential care facilities for the elderly, adult residential facilities,
and other facilities licensed by the State of Pennsylvania.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY — A long-term residence facility exclusively
for persons with physical and/or mental limitations (normally persons 60
years or older), and which shall include common dining, social and
recreational features, special safety and convenience features designed for
the needs of the elderly, and the provisions of social services for residents,
which must include at least two of the following: meals, transportation,
housekeeping, linen services and organized social services. Also called
"retirement home" or "convalescent home."
ATTIC — The space between the ceiling beams of the top story and the roof
rafters.
AUTO PARTS STORE — Stores that sell new or refurbished automobile
parts, tires and accessories. May also include minor parts installation. Does
not include tire recapping establishments or businesses dealing exclusively
in used parts.
AUTOMOBILE GAS STATION — A building or structure used for the retail
sale of fuel and lubricants for motor vehicles. A gas station shall not include
vehicle repair, oil change or lubrication, automobile laundry, or any other
service to motor vehicles, nor shall it include a bulk fuel distribution facility.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR — Any activity involving the general repair,
rebuilding or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles or trailers; collision
servicing, including body, frame or fender straightening or repair; overall
painting or paint shop; vehicle rust-proofing and similar activities.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION — A structure or structures and space
combined and used solely for servicing motor vehicles with the usual
operating commodities, such as gasoline, oil, batteries, tires and other
minor accessories, or services, such as hand washing, waxing and
lubricating, and in connection with which there is no major repair or
refinishing of motor vehicles, except that the repair of tires, lights, changing
of batteries, or minor automobile repairs and adjustments shall be
permitted.
§ 260-9 IRWIN CODE § 260-9
1:464
AUTOMOBILE WASH ESTABLISHMENT — A building, or portions thereof,
the purpose of which is to manually or automatically wash vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE, TRUCK, MOTORCYCLE AND RECREATION VEHICLE
SALES — Retail establishments selling and/or renting automobiles, trucks,
vans, motorcycles, mobile homes, recreation vehicles, and/or boats. May
also include repair shops and the sales of parts and accessories incidental
to vehicle dealerships. Does not include the sale of auto parts/accessories
separate from a vehicle dealership; bicycle and moped sales; tire recapping
establishments; businesses dealing exclusively in used parts or service
stations.
AWNING — An architectural projection that provides weather protection,
identity or decoration and is wholly supported by the building to which it is
attached. An awning is comprised of a lightweight rigid skeleton structure
over which a covering is attached.
BAKERY, RETAIL — An establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale
of baked products for consumption off site. The products may be prepared
either on or off site.
BANK, SAVINGS AND LOAN; FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS — Financial
institutions, including banks and trust companies, credit agencies, holding
(but not primarily operating) companies, lending and thrift institutions,
other investment companies, securities/commodity contract brokers and
dealers, security and commodity exchanges, vehicle finance (equity) leasing
agencies.
BANQUET FACILITIES — A location serving food to persons attending
private parties that does not include restaurant services to the general
public.
BARS AND NIGHTCLUBS — Any bar, cocktail lounge, discotheque, or
similar establishment, which may also provide live entertainment (music
and/or dancing, comedy, etc.) in conjunction with alcoholic beverage sales.
These facilities do not include bars that are part of a larger restaurant.
Includes bars, taverns, pubs and similar establishments where any food
service is subordinate to the sale of alcoholic beverages. May also include
the brewing of beer as part of a brewpub or microbrewery.
BASEMENT — A portion of a building located totally below, or partly below
and partly above, grade, where the vertical distance from grade to the floor
below is greater than the vertical distance from grade to ceiling.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT — A use which is subordinate to
the main use of the dwelling unit as a single-family residence, which offers
sleeping accommodations to transient tenants in 10 or fewer rooms for rent,
at the innkeeper's residence in which the innkeeper resides while renting
the rooms to transient tenants and serves breakfast at no extra cost to its
transient tenants.
BEEKEEPING — A private or commercial activity where hives are kept on a
lot or parcel.
§ 260-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-9
1:465
BILL BOARD or BILLBOARD — Any commercial sign (see definition) for
hire or lease for general advertising purposes, including any display by
painting, posting or affixing on any surface a picture, emblem, words,
figures, numbers or lettering.
BOARD — The Zoning Hearing Board, which should be the body granted
jurisdiction under a land use ordinance and this chapter to render final
adjudications.
BOARDINGHOUSE — Also referred to as a lodging house, rooming house,
fraternity house, sorority house or dormitory. A dwelling having one kitchen
and used for the purpose of providing lodging, or lodging and meals, for pay
or compensation of any kind on a weekly or longer basis to more than two
persons other than members of the family occupying such dwelling.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Irwin.
BUFFER ZONE — A strip of land abutting exterior boundaries of a lot
(including any right-of-way line) and reserved solely for plant material or
fencing (if otherwise permitted), to be used as a visual, sound or privacy
barrier.
BUILDABLE AREA — The developable area of a lot is the space remaining
after the minimum yard and open space requirements of this chapter have
been complied with.
BUILDING — An independent and detached structure having a roof
supported by columns or walls, or resting on its own foundation and utilized
for housing, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or activity
sites. "Building," as used in this chapter, shall include but shall not be
limited to mobile homes, garages, greenhouses and other accessory
buildings.
BUILDING AREA — The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at
the main grade level of the principal building and all accessory buildings,
exclusive of uncovered porches, patios, terraces and steps.
BUILDING FRONT — The line of the face of the building nearest the front
lot line.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance of a building measured from
the average grade level at the front line of the building to the highest point
of the roof if the roof is flat or mansard or to the average level between
the eaves and the highest point of the roof if the roof is of any other type.
Height calculation shall not include chimneys, spires, towers, elevator and
mechanical penthouses, radio antennas, and similar projections.
BUILDING LINE — The line of that face of the building nearest the front
line of the lot. This face includes porches, whether enclosed or not, patios
and similar construction, but excludes steps.
BUILDING, MAIN OR PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the
principal use of the lot upon which it is situated.
BUILDING MATERIALS STORES AND YARDS — Retail establishments
selling lumber and other large building materials, where most display and
§ 260-9 IRWIN CODE § 260-9
1:466
sales occur indoors. (Includes paint, wallpaper, glass and fixtures.) Includes
stores selling to the general public, even if contractor sales account for a
major proportion of total sales. Includes incidental retail ready-mix concrete
operations, except where excluded by a specific zoning district.
Establishments primarily selling electrical, plumbing, heating and airconditioning
equipment and supplies are classified in "wholesaling and
distribution." Hardware stores are listed in the definition of "general retail
stores" even if they sell some building materials, as long as there is no
outdoor lumberyard.
BUILDING, NONCONFORMING — A building or part of a building
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or extent-of-use
provisions in a zoning ordinance or amendment heretofore or hereafter
enacted, where such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of
such ordinance or amendment or prior to the application of such ordinance
or amendment to its location by reason of annexation. Such nonconforming
structures include, but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
BUILDING PERMIT — The written authority as issued by the appropriate
officer of the Borough attesting that all requirements of the Pennsylvania
Uniform Construction Code (UCC) have been met, thereby permitting work
to commence in construction, moving, alteration or use of a structure in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
BUILDING SETBACK — The distance between the lot line and the nearest
point of any building or structure, including such things as a building fascia
and soffit, overhangs and bay windows, provided, however, the distance
shall be measured from the street right-of-way on any lot line abutting a
public street or private road.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line situated at ground level, being
parallel to the lot line or street right-of-way line, which defines the actual
distance of the nearest point of a building or structure from a street or
property line.
BUILDING SETBACK, MINIMUM — The line situated at ground level,
parallel to the street right-of-way line or property line, which defines the
part of a lot within which no part of a building or structure shall project or
be located except as otherwise provided by this chapter.
BUILDING WALL — An exterior load-bearing or non-load-bearing vertical
structure that encompasses the area between the final grade elevation and
eaves of the building and is used to enclose the space within the building.
A porch, balcony or stoop is part of the building structure and may be
considered as a building wall.
BUILD-TO LINE — An alignment established a certain distance from the
front property line to a line along which the building shall be built.
BULK REQUIREMENTS — Standards that control the height, density and
location of structures.
BUSINESS — Engagement in the purchase, sale, barter or exchange of
goods, wares, merchandise or services; the maintenance or operation of
§ 260-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-9
1:467
offices; or recreational and amusement enterprises for profit. See also
"establishment."
CALIPER — The diameter of a tree measured at 4.5 feet above the top of
the root ball. In the case of a multi-stem tree, the caliper is determined by
the average of the stems.
CANOPY — An architectural projection that provides weather protection,
identity or decoration and is supported by the building to which it is
attached and at the outer end by not less than one stanchion. A canopy is
comprised of a rigid structure over which a covering is attached. See also
"sign" and "awning."
CANOPY TREE — A deciduous tree, either single-stemmed or multistemmed
(clump form), which has a caliper of at least two to 2.5 inches at
planting and is of a species which, at maturity, can be expected to reach a
height of at least 30 feet.
CAR WASHING AND DETAILING — Permanent, drive-through, self-service
and/or attended car washing establishments, including fully mechanized
facilities. May include detailing services. Temporary car washes are fundraising
activities, typically conducted at a commercial business, where
volunteers wash vehicles by hand and the duration of the event is limited to
one day.
CARPORT — A usable covered space of not less than 10 feet by 20 feet
for storage of private automobiles, located independently on the lot so as
to meet the requirements of this chapter for an accessory building or, if
attached to the main building, to meet all requirements applicable to the
main building.
CEMETERY — Land used for the permanent burial of the dead and
dedicated for cemetery purposes, including crematories, columbarium and
mausoleums.
CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER — A child-care facility in which seven or more
children who are not related to the operator receive child care. Such
a facility must meet all licensing requirements of the Pennsylvania
Department of Welfare.
CHURCH/PLACE OF WORSHIP — A building where persons regularly
assemble for religious worship and/or study, which is maintained and
controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship, together
with all accessory buildings and uses customarily associated with the
primary purpose. Includes church, synagogue, temple, mosque or other
such place for worship and religious activities.
CLEAR VISION TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections or street and driveway intersections defined by lines of sight
between points at a given distance from the intersection of street and/or
driveway lines.
CLEAR-CUTTING — Removal of an entire stand of trees, shrubs and other
vegetation.
§ 260-9 IRWIN CODE § 260-9
1:468
CLUB or LODGE — An association of persons with limited or restricted
membership operating structures for the use of members and their guests.
CO-LOCATION — The mounting of one or more WCFs, including antennas,
on an existing tower-based WCF or on any structure that already supports
at least one non-tower WCF.[Added 3-8-2017 by Ord. No. 949]
COMMERCIAL BUSINESS — Engaging in a business, enterprise, activity
or other undertaking related to or connected with trade and traffic or
commerce in general.
COMMUNITY CENTER — A service building within a land development
containing civic and recreational facilities.
COMPARABLE USES — Any legal land use that is not specifically listed
in the Table of Land Uses95 but is determined by the Zoning Officer to be
comparable to at least one use listed in the table. Comparable uses shall
be permitted upon approval of a special exception by the Zoning Hearing
Board according to the provisions included in this chapter.
CONCRETE, GYPSUM AND PLASTER PRODUCTS — Manufacturing
establishments producing bulk concrete, concrete building block, brick and
all types of precast and prefab concrete products. Also includes ready-mix
concrete batch plants, lime manufacturing, and the manufacture of gypsum
products, including plasterboard. A retail ready-mix concrete operation as
an incidental use in conjunction with a building materials outlet is defined
under "building materials stores and yards."
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district by the
Borough Council pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and Article VI of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.96
CONSISTENCY — An agreement or correspondence between matters being
compared which denotes a reasonable, rational, similar connection or
relationship.
CONVENIENCE STORE, NEIGHBORHOOD — Any retail establishment with
a floor area of less than 3,000 square feet offering for sale a limited
line of groceries and household items intended for the convenience of the
neighborhood. No gasoline fuel sales are permitted on site.
CONVERSION DWELLING — A building containing more than one dwelling
unit, which was created by dividing a single-family dwelling into two or
more dwellings.
COUNCIL — The Borough Council of Irwin Borough.
COUNTY — Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania.
COVENANT — A restriction on the use of land set forth in a written
document or plat. The restriction runs with the land and is binding upon
subsequent owners of the property.
95.Editor's Note: Table 1, the Table of Permitted and Special Exception Uses, is attached to
this chapter.
96.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10601 et seq.
§ 260-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-9
1:469
DAY-CARE CENTER or NURSERY SCHOOL — A state-licensed facility which
provides nonmedical care, protection and supervision to more than 14
children less than 18 years of age on a less than twenty-four-hour basis.
A commercial or nonprofit child day-care facility includes infant centers,
preschools, sick-child centers, and school-age day-care facilities. These may
be operated in conjunction with business, school or church facilities or as
an independent land use.
DECISION — Final adjudication of any board or other body granted
jurisdiction under any land use ordinance or this chapter to do so, either by
reason of the grant of exclusive jurisdiction or by reason of appeals from
determinations. All decisions shall be appealable to the court of common
pleas of the county and judicial district wherein the Borough lies.
DECK — A structure without a roof, directly adjacent to a principal building,
which is elevated at least six inches above grade.
DENSITY — The total number of dwelling units situated on or to be
developed on a lot divided by the total lot area. The total lot area shall
be calculated by taking the gross acreage and subtracting surface water,
undevelopable lands (e.g., wetlands) and the area in rights-of-way for
streets and roads.
DENSITY BONUS — The granting of allowance of additional density in
a development in exchange for the provision by the developer of other
desirable amenities from a public perspective (e.g., public open spaces,
plazas, art, landscaping, etc.), as approved in writing by the Zoning Hearing
Board.
DETERMINATION — Final action by an officer, body or agency charged with
the administration of any land use ordinance or applications thereunder,
except the following:
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or land development.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved land,
including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction, conversion,
structural alteration, relocation, enlargement or use of any structure or
parking area; any mining, excavation, dredging, filling, grading, drilling or
any land disturbance; or any use or extension of the use of the land.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development, including a
planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants
A. The Borough Council.
B. The Zoning Hearing Board.
The Planning Commission, only if and to the extent the Planning
Commission is charged with final decision on preliminary or final plans
under the subdivision and land development or planned residential
development ordinances. Determinations shall be appealable only to
the boards designated as having jurisdiction for such appeal.
C.
§ 260-9 IRWIN CODE § 260-9
1:470
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity
of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities,
common open space and public facilities.
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEMS (DAS) — A network of spatially
separated antenna sites connected to a common source that provides
wireless service within a geographic area or structure.[Added 3-8-2017 by
Ord. No. 949]
DISTRICT COMMUNITY FACILITIES — Areas within the Borough as
delineated on the Official Zoning Map, which illustrates the locations where
community facilities such as public buildings, public recreational uses and
related structures and uses are permitted in accordance with this chapter.
DISTRICT or ZONE — One of the several divisions into which this chapter
divides the Borough for the purpose of regulating land use.
DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY — A commercial facility which provides a
service directly to a motor vehicle or where the customer drives a motor
vehicle onto the premises and to a window or mechanical device through
or by which the customer is serviced without exiting the vehicle. This shall
not include the selling of fuel at a gasoline filling station or the accessory
functions of a car wash facility such as vacuum cleaning stations.
DRIVEWAY — A form of access, which is not a street but extends from a
street to provide vehicular access to a residential lot.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion thereof intended to be used
as a permanent residence by one or more individuals or a single family,
whether owner-occupied or leased or otherwise rented, including singlefamily
dwellings, garden dwellings, townhouses, conversion dwellings and
mobile homes, but not including hotels, motels or any establishments for
transient residents.
DWELLING, COMBINED-USE — A residential dwelling unit located on the
second or higher floors of a building whose principal use is commercial and
is located on the first floor.
DWELLING, DUPLEX — An attached building (e.g., duplex) designed for
occupancy by two families living independently of each other, where both
dwellings are located on a single lot.
DWELLING, MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure that is transportable
in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis, designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities, and constructed to the federal mobile home construction and
safety standards and rules and regulations promulgated by the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development and to the rules
and provisions and restrictions of any laws passed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, County of Westmoreland or the Borough of Irwin.
DWELLING, MIXED-USE — A building containing primarily residential uses
with subordinate amounts of commercial uses that are usually located on
the ground floor. In most cases, the commercial uses shall be located in the
front of the building facing the primary street frontage.
§ 260-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-9
1:471
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A freestanding building containing three or
more dwelling units, whether they have direct access to the outside or
access to a common building entrance.
DWELLING, OVER-STORE — A building which contains a nonresidential
use on the ground floor and a dwelling unit on the second floor above the
commercial use. The residential use on the second floor shall be subordinate
in use to the nonresidential use. If the residential use contains more gross
floor area than the nonresidential use, it shall be considered as a mixed-use
dwelling.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A freestanding residential building
designed for and/or occupied exclusively by one living unit that includes
one kitchen and permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, sanitation
and parking. This classification includes manufactured homes which are
transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode is
eight body feet or more in width, or 40 body feet or more in length or,
when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built
on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities,
and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems
contained therein.
EMERGENCY — A condition that:
ESSENTIAL SERVICE — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public utilities, municipal departments or commissions
of facilities, including buildings necessary for the furnishing of adequate
services for the public health, safety or general welfare.
EVERGREEN TREE — A tree, either single-stemmed or multi-stemmed
(clump form), which is a minimum of six feet tall at planting and is of a
species which at maturity can be expected to reach a height of at least 20
feet.
FACADE — That portion of any exterior elevation on the building extending
from grade to top of the parapet, wall or eaves and the entire width of the
building elevation.
FACADE, PRINCIPAL — Exterior walls of a building which are adjacent to or
front on a public street, park or plaza. There may be more than one principal
facade on a building.
FAMILY — One or more persons who live together in one dwelling unit
and maintain a common household. May consist of a single person or
of two or more persons, whether or not related by blood, marriage or
adoption. For purposes of this chapter, "family" shall not include, nor shall
Constitutes a clear and immediate danger to the health, welfare, or
safety of the public; or
A.
Has caused or is likely to cause facilities in the rights-of-way to be
unusable and result in loss of the services provided. [Added 3-8-2017
by Ord. No. 949]
B.
§ 260-9 IRWIN CODE § 260-9
1:472
it be interpreted to include or encompass, a group care facility or similar
functions or activities which supply room or board, or room and board,
to one or more persons who are residents by virtue of receiving services,
such as health, social rehabilitative, general supervision or similar services,
functions or activities, irrespective of whether or not they are provided
by governmental agencies, their licensed or certified agents, responsible
nonprofit social service agencies or corporations, profit-oriented
organizations or private individuals.
FAMILY CHILD-CARE HOME — A private residence where care, protection
and supervision are provided for a fee at least twice a week to no more than
six children at one time, including the children of the provider. Care must
be for less than 24 hours per day. Such a facility must meet all the licensing
requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare.
FAST FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — A specific operation separate and distinct
from any other operation in the location occupied and in the kind of fast
order food sold, and which has as its primary business the sale to the public
of fast order food for consumption on or off the premises, and does not meet
all of the following conditions:
FAST FOOD ORDER — Food which is: a) primarily intended for immediate
consumption rather than for use as an ingredient in or component of meals;
b) available upon a short waiting time; and c) packaged or presented in such
a manner that it can be readily eaten outside the premises where it is sold.
FCC — Federal Communications Commission.[Added 3-8-2017 by Ord.
No. 949]
FENCE — A structure, partition, wall, hedge, arrangement of plant
materials or other objects intended or utilized to circumscribe, designate,
delineate, define or in some manner enclose an area or some feature or
element thereon. For purposes of this chapter, any vegetation three feet
or more in height which is arranged in a sequential manner over a lineal
distance of six feet or more shall be deemed a "fence."
FILL — Sand, gravel, earth or other materials of any composition
whatsoever placed or deposited by humans for purposes of creating a new
elevation of the ground.
FLOOD — A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the unusual and rapid
accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
A. Provision of nondisposable plates, cups and utensils to all patrons;
B. Availability of printed individual menus for all patrons;
Provision of 75% of the seating in the premises at freestanding tables,
rather than at counters; and
C.
At least 80% of the revenue from food sales is attributable to food
consumed on the premises.
D.
§ 260-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-9
1:473
FLOOD-FRINGE — The portion of the one-hundred-year floodplain outside
the floodway and as defined by the most recent Flood Insurance Rate Map.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land area that must be reserved to discharge a one-hundred-year flood and
as defined on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum, in square feet, of the gross horizontal
areas of all floors of a building, as measured from the exterior walls [except
in Subsection B(8) and (9) below where only interior space shall be
measured and in Subsection A(8) where the area of the parking facility
shall be measured] of a building or the center line of party walls between
buildings.
Gross floor area shall include:
(1) Roofed porches and balconies whether enclosed or unclosed;
(2) Unroofed porches and balconies above the third floor;
Elevator shafts and stairwells on each floor not excluded in
Subsection B(6) below;
(3)
Attic space, whether finished or unfinished, within the area of a
horizontal plane that is five feet above the attic floor and which
touches the side walls and/or the underside of the roof rafters and
which is not excluded in Subsection B(5) below;
(4)
(5) Interior balconies, mezzanines, and penthouses;
Basement and cellar areas not excluded in Subsection B(1), (3) and
(9) below;
(6)
Area of parking facilities in structures except as excluded in
Subsection B(2) below; and
(7)
Any accessory parking spaces not in aboveground structures if in
excess of the maximum number permitted on the premises.
(8)
A.
Gross floor area shall not include:
(1) Areas used for off-street loading purposes;
Area of parking facilities in structures located underground and the
area of on-grade open parking spaces outside the building footprint
at or below the maximum number permitted on the premises;
(2)
Basement and cellar areas devoted to the operations and
maintenance of the building, such as heating and cooling
equipment, electrical and telephone facilities, and fuel storage;
(3)
(4) Open and latticework fire escapes;
(5) Unroofed porches and balconies no higher than the third floor;
B.
§ 260-9 IRWIN CODE § 260-9
1:474
FLOOR AREA, GROSS LEASABLE — The total floor area designed for tenant
occupancy and exclusive use, including basements, mezzanines, and upper
floors, if any, expressed in square feet and measured from the center line of
joint partitions and from outside wall fences.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The ratio of gross floor area of a structure to the
total area of the lot.
FOOD AND BEVERAGE MANUFACTURING — Manufacturing
establishments producing or processing foods and beverages for off-site
human consumption. Large-scale operations would include more than 10
employees, while smaller-scale operations may be related to specialty/craft
foods or people living in a live/work situation. Includes bakeries (wholesale),
bottling plants, breweries, candy, sugar and confectionery products
manufacturing, catering services separate from stores or restaurants,
coffee roasting, dairy products manufacturing, fats and oil product
manufacturing, fruit and vegetable canning, preserving, related processing,
grain mill products and by-products, meat, poultry and seafood canning,
curing, by-product processing, soft drink production, miscellaneous food
item preparation from raw products. May include tasting and accessory
retail sales of beverages produced on site. Does not include bakeries which
sell all products on site, which are included in the definition of "general
retail stores," or beer brewing as part of a brewpub, bar or restaurant (see
"bars and nightclubs").
FORESTRY — The management of forests and timberlands when practiced
in accordance with accepted agricultural principles, through developing,
cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling trees for commercial
purposes, which does not involve any land development. All activities must
also comply with any and all laws, statutes and ordinances of the United
States of America, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, County of
Westmoreland and/or the Borough of Irwin.
FRONTAGE — The front lot line of a parcel that abuts a public right-of-way.
FRONTAGE, STORE — The length of a front building facade.
Attic space and other areas devoted to elevator machinery or
mechanical equipment necessary for the operation of the building;
(6)
Elevator shafts and stairwells on floors where there is no other area
which qualifies to be included in gross floor area;
(7)
(8) Attic space not otherwise included in Subsection A(4) above; and
Basement and cellar spaces with less than seven feet of ceiling
height measured from the floor to the line of the bottom of the
floor joists, or to any subfloor or finished surface above any floor
joists that are spaced not less than four feet on center, and further
provided that the basement or cellar is not a story above grade as
defined in the State Building Code.
(9)
§ 260-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-9
1:475
FUNERAL HOMES AND MORTUARIES — Funeral homes and parlors
where the deceased are prepared for burial or cremation and in which
funeral services may occur.
GARAGE — A "private garage" is an accessory building with area for
housing motor-driven vehicles, the property of and for the use of the
occupants of the lot on which the garage is located. A "public garage" is any
garage other than a private garage as defined herein, available to clients,
operated for gain, and which is used for storage, repair, rental, lubricating,
washing and servicing or equipping of motor vehicles.
GARAGE, COMMERCIAL — A building, other than a private garage, used
for the care, repair or equipment of motor vehicles, or where such vehicles
are parked or stored for remuneration, hire or sale.
GARDEN (APARTMENT) DWELLING — A multifamily residential building,
not exceeding three stories in height, in which units are arranged side to
side, back to back or one above another, which may have either private
external entrances or common hall access, and which may have either
private or common exterior lot area.
GARDEN CENTER/PLANT NURSERY — Establishments providing for the
cultivation and sale of ornamental trees, shrubs and plants, including the
sale of garden and landscape materials (packaged and/or bulk sale of
unpackaged materials) and equipment, including but not limited to lawn
mowers, tillers and edgers, shovels, hoes, rakes, hoses, wheelbarrows.
GRADE — A reference plane representing the average of finished ground
level adjoining the building at all exterior walls.
GREENHOUSE; PLANT MATERIALS NURSERY — An area, building,
structure for the storage of live trees, shrubs or plants offered for retail
sale on the premises, including products for gardening or landscaping. The
definition of greenhouse or nursery, within the meaning of this chapter,
does include any space, building or structure used for the sale of fruits,
vegetables or Christmas trees.
GROCERY STORES/SUPERMARKET — A retail business where the majority
of the floor area open to the public is occupied by food products packaged
for preparation and consumption away from the site of the store. These fullservice
businesses do not typically have limited hours of operation.
HARDSHIP, UNNECESSARY — A hardship by reason of exceptional lot
shape, exceptional topographic conditions, or other exceptional physical
conditions of a parcel of land. "Unnecessary hardship" shall not include
personal or financial hardship or any other hardship that is self-imposed.
HARDWARE STORE — A facility engaged in the retail or wholesale sale
of various basic hardware that shall include, but not be limited to, tools,
builders' hardware, plumbing and electrical supplies, paint and glass,
housewares and household appliances, garden supplies and cutlery.
HEIGHT — See "building height."
§ 260-9 IRWIN CODE § 260-9
1:476
HEIGHT OF A TOWER-BASED WCF — The vertical distance measured
from the ground level, including any base pad, to the highest point on a
tower-based WCF, including antennas mounted on the tower and any other
appurtenances.[Added 3-8-2017 by Ord. No. 949]
HIGH-RISE RESIDENTIAL BUILDING — A multifamily building of four or
more stories.
HOME OCCUPATION, NO-IMPACT — A business or commercial activity
administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary
to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client or
patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal
functions to or from the premises in excess of those normally associated
with residential use. The business or commercial activity must satisfy the
following requirements:
HOSPITAL — An institution for the purpose of caring for persons admitted
thereto for diagnosis, medical, surgical or restorative treatment which is
rendered in said institution. The institution must have and maintain all
current permits required by the laws and statutes of the United States of
America and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
HOUSEHOLD — Related family members living together in a single
dwelling unit with common access to, and common use of, all living and
eating areas and all areas and facilities for the preparation and storage of
food within the dwelling unit.
The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the
property and surrounding residential uses.
A.
The business shall employ no employees other than family members
residing in the dwelling.
B.
There shall be no display or sale of retail or wholesale goods and no
stockpiling or inventory of a substantial nature.
C.
There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but
not limited to, parking, signs or lights.
D.
The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic
interference, including interference with radio or television reception,
which is detectable in the neighborhood.
E.
The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
F.
The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and
may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
G.
The business may not involve any illegal activity or any activity
prohibited by Article XVIII of this chapter.
H.
§ 260-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-9
1:477
HOUSEHOLD PET — Any animal or bird, other than inherently dangerous
mammals/reptiles, livestock, large or small animals and animals or birds
considered to be predatory or wild, which normally lives in or is kept in
a residence. Household pets shall be considered a normal accessory use
in residential districts, provided there are no more than five animals in a
residence.
HVAC — Heating, venting, air-conditioning unit.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Surfaces that do not absorb water or similar
liquids. Examples of such surfaces include buildings and concrete or asphalt
parking areas, roads, sidewalks or driveways.
IMPROVEMENT — Any man-made immovable item that becomes part of, is
placed on, or is affixed to real estate.
INDOOR SPORTS AND RECREATION FACILITY — Predominantly
participant sports and health activities conducted entirely within an
enclosed building, with the exclusion of secondary uses such as a spa, pool,
basketball court, or tennis court. Typical uses include bowling alley, billiard
parlor, ice/roller skating rinks, indoor racquetball courts, indoor climbing
facilities, soccer areas, athletic clubs and health clubs.
INHERENTLY DANGEROUS MAMMAL — Any live member of the canidae,
felidae or ursidae families, including hybrids thereof, which due to its
nature may be considered dangerous to humans, and which includes the
following:
INHERENTLY DANGEROUS REPTILE — Any live member of the class of
reptilia, which:
Canidae, including any member of the dog (canid) family not
customarily domesticated by man, or any hybrids thereof, but not
including domestic dogs (Canis lupus familiaris) or wolf hybrid which
are a cross between a wolf and a domestic dog.
A.
Felidae, including any member of the cat family not customarily
domesticated by man, or any hybrids thereof, but not including
domestic cats (Felis catus).
B.
Ursidae, including any member of the bear family, or any hybrids
thereof.
C.
Is venomous, including, but not necessarily limited to all members
of the following families: Helodermidae; Viperidae; Crotalidae;
Altractaspidae; Hydrophilidae; and Elapidae; or
A.
Is a "rear fanged" snake of the family Colubridae that are known to
be dangerous to humans, including, but not necessarily limited to,
all members of the following families: Dispholidus typus; Thebtornis
kirtlandii; and Rhabdophis spp; or
B.
Is a member of the order of Crocodilia (crocodiles, alligators and
caiman); or
C.
§ 260-9 IRWIN CODE § 260-9
1:478
INSTITUTIONAL USE — The use of land or structures for the nonprofit
charitable, benevolent, spiritual, instructional or custodial activities of
government, education, religious, health care, social service, fraternal/
sorority or similar organizations.
INVASIVE SPECIES — A species that has become a weed pest; a plant
which grows aggressively, spreads and displaces other plants. Generally
invasive species are plants that are not native to North America, spread
quickly, reproducing by roots or shoots, mature quickly, can grow in many
different conditions and be exploiters and colonizers of disturbed ground.
For the purposes of this chapter, "invasive species" shall be those defined
as serious or moderate threats to Pennsylvania's noninvasive plant species
as established by Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural
Resources.
JUNKYARD; SCRAP YARD; RECYCLING FACILITY — An establishment or
place of business, any part of which is maintained, operated or used for
storing, keeping, buying, selling or processing of nonputrescible junk,
scrap, salvage or recyclable materials, including the maintenance or
operation of an automobile graveyard. This definition includes scrap metal
processors, auto-wrecking yards, salvage yards, scrap yards, auto-recycling
yards, used auto parts yards and temporary storage of automobile bodies
and parts awaiting disposal as a normal part of a business operation when
the business will continually have like materials located on the premises.
KENNEL — Any structure, pen or area set aside for the keeping, boarding,
grooming, breeding or showing of dogs, cats or similar household domestic
animals. For the purpose of this chapter, the keeping of four or more
such animals for economic gain shall be deemed as a commercial kennel
and shall be only permitted and maintained according to this and other
provisions of this chapter.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other persons having
a proprietary interest in land or anyone named or designated grantee on
any legal instrument recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of
Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania.
LANDSCAPED AREA — A portion of the site or property containing
vegetation to exist after construction is completed. Landscaped areas
include, but are not limited to, natural areas, buffers, streetscapes, lawns
and plantings.
LANDSCAPED BUFFER — An area of landscaping separating two distinct
land uses, or a land use and a public right-of-way, and acts to soften or
mitigate the effects of one land use on the other.
LANDSCAPING — Open area devoted primarily to trees, grass, shrubs
or plants to soften building lines, provide shade and generally produce
Is a constricting snake of the family Boidae, including but not limited
pythons and boa constrictors.
D.
§ 260-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-9
1:479
a pleasing visual effect on the premises. As complementary features,
fountains, pools, screens, decorative lighting, sculpture or outdoor
furnishings may be placed within the area.
LAUNDRIES AND DRY CLEANING PLANTS — Service establishments
engaged primarily in high-volume laundry and garment services, including
laundries; garment pressing and dry cleaning; linen supply; diaper service;
industrial laundries; and on-site carpet and upholstery cleaners. Does not
include coin-operated laundries or dry cleaning pickup stores without dry
cleaning equipment.
LAUNDROMAT — A business which provides for the hire and use on the
premises of self-service washing, drying and/or ironing machines.
LIBRARY — A public or quasi-public facility in which literary and artistic
materials, such as books, periodicals, newspapers, pamphlets, prints,
records and tapes, are kept for reading, reference or lending, and which are
generally noncommercial in nature.
LIQUOR STORE; BEER DISTRIBUTOR — A store whose primary business
is to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption elsewhere as licensed by the
State of Pennsylvania.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a
building, or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking
of a vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise, materials or persons,
and which has ingress and egress upon a street, alley or other appropriate
means of access.
LODGING HOUSE — A dwelling where lodgings are let to four or more
persons not within the second degree of kinship to the person conducting
it, including fraternity housing but not including dormitories or charitable,
educational or philanthropic institutions.
LOFT APARTMENT — A residential, single-family apartment unit above
presently existing established commercial building, where commercial
activities are carried out on the first floor.
LOGO — The graphic or pictorial presentation of a message, including,
but not limited to, the use of shapes, designs, decorations, emblems,
trademarks, symbols or illustrations, or the superimposition of letters or
numbers or any other use of graphics or images other than the sequential
use of letters and numbers.
LOT — A piece, parcel or tract of land in identical ownership throughout,
having definite boundary lines as specified in a legally recorded deed, which
is designated by its owner to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
LOT, CORNER — A lot located at the junction of two or more intersecting
streets, having an interior angle of less than 135°, with a boundary line
bordering on two of the streets. Also called "double frontage" lots.
LOT COVERAGE — A measure of land use that represents the portion of a
site that is impervious. This portion includes, but is not limited to, all areas
§ 260-9 IRWIN CODE § 260-9
1:480
covered by buildings, parking structures, driveways, roads, sidewalks and
any area of concrete or asphalt.
LOT DEPTH — The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines
measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines.
LOT LINE, FRONT — That boundary line of a lot which is along an existing
or dedicated public street or, where no public street exists, is along a public
way. The front lot line of a corner lot is along the street on which the
principal building faces.
LOT LINE, REAR — A line most distant and opposite from the front lot line;
where the lot is irregular, a line perpendicular to the mean direction of the
side lot lines and at least 10 feet in length within the lot.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any boundary line of a lot which is not a front or rear lot
line.
LOT, NONCONFORMING — A lot the area or dimension of which was lawful
prior to the adoption or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which fails
to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located
by reasons of such adoption or amendment.
LOT OF RECORD — See "lot."
LOT, SUBDIVIDED — A lot that has been created through the subdivision of
a parcel of land on which a permitted development is constructed as defined
under § 260-10, Zoning Districts, as above set forth.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than
one street. Through lots abutting two streets may be referred to as "double
frontage" lots.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured
perpendicular to the mean direction of the side lot lines.
MARQUEE — A roof-like structure that cantilevers from the wall of a
building over its principal entrance, that has no vertical supports other than
the wall from which it cantilevers, and that provides a wall surface at least
four feet high, generally constructed for purposes of containing a sign.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment which provides the
services of massage unless operated by a medical practitioner, chiropractor
or professional physical therapist licensed by the State of Pennsylvania.
The definition does not include an athletic club, gymnasium or spa where
massage is offered as an incidental or accessory service. A massage
establishment is classified as an adult business.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA — Marijuana for certified medical use as set forth
in the Medical Marijuana Act, Act No. 16 of 2016, as amended.97[Added
6-14-2017 by Ord. No. 952]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY — A person, including a natural
person, corporation, partnership, association, trust or other entity, or any
97.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10231.101 et seq.
§ 260-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-9
1:481
combination thereof, which holds a permit issued by the Department of
Health of the commonwealth to dispense medical marijuana.[Added
6-14-2017 by Ord. No. 952]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA GROWER/PROCESSOR — A person, including a
natural person, corporation, partnership, association, trust or other entity,
or any combination thereof, which holds a permit from the Department
of Health of the commonwealth to grow and process medical
marijuana.[Added 6-14-2017 by Ord. No. 952]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA ORGANIZATION — A medical marijuana dispensary
or medical marijuana grower/processor.[Added 6-14-2017 by Ord. No.
952]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA PERMIT — A permit issued by the Department of
Health of the commonwealth authorizing a medical marijuana organization
to conduct activities under the Medical Marijuana Act, Act No. 16 of
2016.98[Added 6-14-2017 by Ord. No. 952]
MEDICAL SERVICES CLINICS, OFFICES AND LABORATORIES — A facility
primarily engaged in furnishing outpatient medical, mental health, surgical
and other personal health services, but which are separate from hospitals,
including medical and dental laboratories, medical, dental and psychiatric
offices, outpatient care facilities, and other allied health services.
Counseling services by other than medical doctors or psychiatrists are
included under "offices."
METAL PRODUCTS FABRICATION, MACHINE/WELDING SHOPS —
Establishments engaged primarily in the assembly of metal parts, including
the following uses that produce metal duct work, tanks, towers, cabinets
and enclosures, metal doors and gates, and similar products: blacksmith
and welding shops, sheet metal shops, machine shops and boiler shops.
METHADONE CLINIC — A licensed facility for counseling of patients and
the distribution of methadone for outpatient nonresidential purposes only.
A methadone treatment clinic or facility is not a medical clinic or substance
abuse treatment facility.
MINIATURE GOLF COURSE — A facility that provides on-site commercial
entertainment in the form of a novelty version of golf played with a putter
and golf ball on a miniature course and featuring obstacles such as alleys,
bridges and tunnels.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
temporary and/or permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or in two
or more units, designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of
again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete
and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and
assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a
permanent foundation.
98.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10231.101 et seq.
§ 260-9 IRWIN CODE § 260-9
1:482
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MONOPOLE — A WCF or site which consists of a single pole structure,
designed and erected on the ground or on top of a structure, to support
communications antennas and connecting appurtenances.[Added
3-8-2017 by Ord. No. 949]
MONUMENT WORKS — A business that manufactures and/or engraves
grave markers, headstones, cornerstones or other stone markers.
MOTEL or HOTEL — Facility with guest rooms or suites provided with or
without a kitchen facility, rented to the general public for transient lodging
(less than 30 days). Generally, hotels provide access to most guest rooms
from an interior walkway or hallway, and typically include a variety of
services in addition to lodging; for example, restaurants, meeting facilities,
personal services, etc. Generally motels provide access to most guest rooms
from an exterior walkway. Both may include accessory guest facilities such
as swimming pools, tennis courts, indoor athletic facilities, accessory retail
uses, etc.
MULTIFAMILY BUILDING — A building containing two or more dwelling
units.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — A building designed for and occupied exclusively
as a residence for two or more families living independently of each other,
including houses separate except for common adjoining walls.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — A body politic and corporate created pursuant
to the Municipality Authorities Act of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
as reenacted and amended.99
MUNICIPAL PUBLIC WORKS BUILDING — A structure owned or leased by
the municipality for the storage and maintenance of equipment and supplies
used to maintain the municipality's infrastructure. May also contain offices
and/or meeting rooms.
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE (MPC) — The Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as reenacted and
amended.100
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Irwin, Westmoreland County,
Pennsylvania.
MUSEUM — A public or quasi-public institution of a noncommercial nature
that procures, cares for, studies and displays objects of lasting interest
or value. Examples of museums include art and historical museums,
aquariums, planetariums, botanical gardens, arboretums and historical
sites and exhibits.
99.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
100. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 260-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-9
1:483
NET RESIDENTIAL ACREAGE — The total acreage of a residential
development minus areas for transportation easements or rights-of-way
where either utilities or their supportive equipment will be on or above the
surface.
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — See "home occupation, noimpact."
NONCONFORMING LOT — See "lot, nonconforming."
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — See "structure, nonconforming."
NONCONFORMING USE — See "use, nonconforming."
NONINVASIVE SPECIES — A plant species not defined as invasive.
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION — Any person(s), partnership, association,
corporation or other group legally established under federal and state law
whose activities are conducted for unselfish, civic or humanitarian motives
or for the benefit of others, and not for the gain of any private individual
group, and may include, but shall not be limited to, patriotic, philanthropic,
social service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, fraternal, cultural,
charitable, scientific, historical, athletic or medical activities.
NON-TOWER WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (NON-TOWER
WCF) — All non-tower wireless communications facilities, including, but
not limited to, antennas and related equipment. Non-tower WCF shall not
include support structures for antennas or any related equipment that is
mounted to the ground or at ground level.[Added 3-8-2017 by Ord. No.
949]
NUDITY — The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic areas
or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the
female breasts with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof
below the top of the nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.
NURSING HOME — A facility devoted primarily to the treatment and
care of persons suffering from illness, disease, deformity or injury not
requiring the intensive care that is normally provided by hospitals, but who
do require care in excess of room and board and who need medical, nursing,
convalescent or chronic care. Institutions primarily for treatment and care
of mentally ill patients or persons recovering from substance abuse shall
not be considered nursing homes. Such facilities shall meet all inspections
and licensing requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Health and
the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT — Authorization issued by the Zoning Officer
attesting that the proposed use or reuse of a lot or structure is in
accordance with this chapter and may legally occur.
OFFICE BUILDING — A building used primarily for offices that may include
ancillary services for office workers, such as a restaurant, coffee shop,
newspaper, or snack stand.
§ 260-9 IRWIN CODE § 260-9
1:484
OFFICE, BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL — Offices of finance businesses
providing direct services to consumers (companies, utility companies, etc.),
government agency and service facilities (post office, civic center, etc.),
professional offices (accounting, legal, employment, public relations,
insurance, real estate, etc.), and offices engaged in the production of
intellectual property (advertising, architectural, computer programming,
photography studios, etc.). These do not include medical offices, temporary
offices, or offices that are incidental and accessory to another business that
is the primary use.
OFFICIAL ZONING MAP — The Zoning Map for the Borough of Irwin
adopted by ordinance pursuant to the MPC.101
OPEN SPACE, GREEN AREA — A landscaped area of land associated with
and located on the same tract of land as a major building or group of
buildings in relation to which it serves to provide light and air, or scenic,
recreational or similar purposes. "Green area open space" shall be open
and unobstructed to the sky, it shall be land at grade, and shall consist
of friable, permeable materials (including but not limited to loam, gravel,
sand, crushed stone, and including naturally occurring soil, bedrock, and
incidental pipes and other underground utilities) having a minimum depth
of three feet. Said land shall be capable of supporting the growth of trees,
grass, ground cover, shrubs and similar vegetation. Such area may not
include any portion of the lot used for parking areas and access drives or
other hard surface areas, except walks and terraces designed and intended
for nonvehicular use. However, in no case shall hard-surfaced walks and
terraces or pervious ground covers like gravel, stone and wood chips not
being used as mulch beneath vegetation exceed 25% of the total required
green area open space.
OPEN SPACE, PERMEABLE — A kind of green area open space (as defined
above) in which the surface material must be permeable but which surface
material is not limited or restricted as to type. That surface material may
include vegetation, rocks, pebbles, wood chips and similar landscaping
materials, or unit pavers. All other materials (for example, continuously
poured asphalt or concrete) are not allowed except that any material may
be used for pedestrian walkways not exceeding 48 inches in width or half
the width of the area in which they are located, whichever amount is less.
OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC — An area owned or controlled by the Borough
of Irwin or other public entity that is intended for public use, that is
open to the sky and that is designed for either environmental, scenic or
recreation purposes. "Public open space" may include but is not limited to
lawns, decorative plantings, interior walkways, abutting sidewalks, active
and passive recreation areas, playgrounds, fountains and public
performance areas. "Public open space" shall not include rooftop areas,
patios, balconies, parking lots, or driveways. Limited paved surfaces may
be designed to accommodate occasional use by motor vehicles servicing
the park facility. If the facility is not held in fee simple by the Borough of
101. Editor's Note: A copy of the official Zoning Map is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 260-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-9
1:485
Irwin or other public entity, the public open space may be land remaining
in private ownership but protected for public use by means of a permanent
easement, conservation restriction, or other similar legal device acceptable
to the Borough of Irwin.
OPEN SPACE, PUBLICLY BENEFICIAL — A portion of a structure, a lot or
other area of land associated with and adjacent to a building or group of
buildings in relation to which it serves to provide light and air or scenic,
recreation, pedestrian amenity or similar purposes. Such space shall be
customarily available or shall be readily visible to occupants and visitors,
though physically inaccessible, by being located and treated to enhance
the amenity of the development through a general appearance of openness.
Publicly beneficial open space shall include parks, plazas, lawns,
landscaped areas, decorative plantings, and active and passive recreational
areas. Publicly beneficial open space shall also include loggias, atriums,
arcades and pedestrianways. Streets, parking lots, driveways, service
roads, loading areas, and areas normally inaccessible to pedestrian
circulation beneath pedestrian bridges, decks or shopping bridges shall not
be counted in determining required publicly beneficial open space.
OPEN SPACE, USABLE — The part or parts of a lot or structure which are
reserved for the use of occupants of a building which is used wholly or in
part for residential purposes. This space shall have minimum dimensions
as prescribed in the chapter, shall exclude parking areas, driveways and
walkways, and shall be open and unobstructed to the sky. Trees, plantings,
arbors, fences, flagpoles, sculptures, fountains and recreational and drying
apparatus and similar objects shall not be considered obstructions when
located within a usable open space. To the extent permitted in this chapter,
balconies and roof areas may also be considered as usable open space.
OWNER — Every person who, alone or jointly or severally with others,
a) has legal title as grantee or so designated by the court to any land,
building or structure; or b) has care, charge or control of any land, building
or structure in any capacity including but not limited to agent, executor,
executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of
the holder of legal title; or c) lessee under a written letting agreement; or
d) mortgagee in possession; or e) agent, trustee or other person appointed
by the courts.
PARKING FACILITY/VEHICLE STORAGE — Service establishments in the
business of storing operative cars, trucks, buses, recreational vehicles,
and other motor vehicles for clients. Includes both day use and long-term
public and commercial garages, parking lots and structures, except when
accessory to a primary use. (All primary uses are considered to include
any customer or public use off-street parking required by this chapter.)
Includes sites where vehicles are stored for rental or leasing. Does not
include dismantling yards.
PARKING SPACE — A space in a garage or parking area reserved for the
parking of only one automobile.
PARKING SPACE, HANDICAP — A space in a garage or parking area
reserved exclusively for an automobile registered with the state with
§ 260-9 IRWIN CODE § 260-9
1:486
handicapped license plates or displaying an official state-issued
handicapped placard. Each handicap parking space shall have a sign
prominently displayed notifying the public that the space is "reserved for
the handicapped."
PARKING, OFF-STREET — An area wholly outside any public right-of-way,
constructed to accommodate the parking of vehicles as required by this
chapter.
PARKING, ON-STREET — The parking storage space for a vehicle that is
located within the street right-of-way.
PARKING, RESTRICTED ACCESSORY — A parking lot, whether free or for
compensation, and available for private use or as an accommodation for
clients or customers that is the sole use of a parcel and provides parking
accessory to a use on a separate parcel.
PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS — Parks, play lots, playgrounds,
amphitheaters and athletic fields for noncommercial neighborhood or
community active recreational use, including tot-lots within apartment
complexes.
PATIO — A level surfaced area directly adjacent to a principal building
without walls or a roof. A patio may be constructed of any material or
combination of materials and is typically constructed at grade level or
slightly higher.
PAVED SURFACE AREA — Ground surface covered with cobblestones, clayfired
bricks, concrete precast paver units, poured concrete with or without
decorative surface materials, blacktop, or other asphalt or rubber mixture
which may include sand or gravel as an ingredient and which creates a
hard surface. A graded natural surface or one covered with rolled stone or
overlaid with loose gravel is not considered a paved surface.
PENNANT — Any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, whether or
not containing a message of any kind, which is suspended from a rope, wire,
string or pole, usually in series, and which is designed to move in the wind.
PERMIT, BUILDING — See "building permit."
PERMIT, OCCUPANCY — See "occupancy permit."
PERMITTED USE — A use which is deemed to be compatible with other
uses in the district in which it is proposed to be located and with the
purposes of that district, and which is allowed to locate there after issuance
of a permit by the Zoning Officer.
PERMIT, ZONING — See "zoning permit."
PERSON — An individual, heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, and
also includes a firm, partnership or corporation, its or their successors or
assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid.
PERSONAL CARE FACILITY, RESIDENTIAL NONPROFIT — A location in a
residentially zoned district in which there is caretaking of no more than two
§ 260-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-9
1:487
persons that is operated by a family member or other party on a nonprofit
basis.
PERSONAL SERVICES — A use that provides a personal service that is
nonmedical and may include accessory retail sales of products related to
the services that are provided. Examples of personal services include, but
are not limited to, the following: barber and beauty shops, clothing and
costume rental, dry cleaning pickup stores, electronics and small appliance
repair, laundromats (self-service laundries), shoe repair shops, nail salons,
and tailors.
PLUMBING, HEATING, ELECTRICAL CONTRACTING AND SALES —
Includes electrical, plumbing, heating and air conditioning contractors, who
must be registered and licensed with the State of Pennsylvania, whose
primary business is the installation and repair of installed equipment rather
than retail sales of supplies and equipment.
PORTABLE POOL — A plastic, canvas or rubber pool temporarily erected
upon the ground that is less than 12 feet in diameter and less than 24 inches
deep at the point of greatest possible depth.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — The building or structure which
is occupied by the principal use of the lot.
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary, major or most important activity conducted
on the lot.
PRINTING AND PUBLISHING — Establishments engaged in printing by
letterpress, lithography, gravure, screen, offset or electrostatic
(xerographic) copying; and other establishments serving the printing trade,
including bookbinding, typesetting, engraving, photoengraving, and
electrotyping. This use also includes establishments that publish
newspapers, books and periodicals; establishments manufacturing business
forms and binding devices. Does not include quick-print stores, which are
included in "retail, general."
PRIVATE CLUB OR LODGE — An association organized and operated on a
nonprofit basis for persons who are bona fide members paying dues, which
association owns or leases premises, the use of which premises is restricted
to such members and their guests, and which manages the affairs of such
association by and through a board of directors, executive committee, or
similar body chosen by the members. Food, meals and beverages may be
served on such premises, provided adequate dining room space and kitchen
facilities are available.
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVE — An easement running with the land which
provides access to more than one legally described lot.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — Any office of recognized professionals, such
as doctors, dentists, lawyers, architects, engineers, artists, musicians,
designers, teachers and others who through training or license to practice
are qualified to perform services of a professional nature.
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes:
§ 260-9 IRWIN CODE § 260-9
1:488
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the
Borough Council or Planning Commission, intended to inform and obtain
public comment prior to taking action in accordance with this chapter.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the
Pennsylvania Sunshine Act (Act of October 15, 1998, P.L. 729, No. 93, 65
Pa.C.S.A § 701 et seq., as amended).
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the public hearing and the particular nature
of the matter to be considered at the public hearing. The first publication
shall not be more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less
than seven days from the date of the hearing.
PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITY — Facility operated by public agencies including
fire stations, other fire prevention and firefighting facilities, police and
sheriff substations and headquarters, including interim incarceration
facilities.
PUBLIC UTILITY — An establishment engaged in the generation,
transmission and/or distribution of electricity, gas, steam, water and
stormwater management systems.
RECREATION FACILITIES, COMMERCIAL — Privately owned and
commercially operated facilities for the provision of recreation, including
tennis clubs, health and fitness spas, commercial swimming pools, etc.
RECREATION VEHICLE — A vehicle built on a single chassis and designed
to be self-propelled or towed by another vehicle. A recreation vehicle is not
designed or intended for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational camping, travel or seasonal use. This
definition includes vehicles such as travel trailers, motor homes, boats,
houseboats, and campers as well as the trailer used to transport such
vehicles.
RELATED EQUIPMENT — Any piece of equipment related to, incidental to,
or necessary for the operation of a tower-based WCF or non-tower WCF. By
way of illustration, not limitation, "related equipment" includes generators
and base stations.[Added 3-8-2017 by Ord. No. 949]
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTIONS — Facility operated by religious organizations
for worship or the promotion of religious activities, including churches,
mosques, synagogues, temples, etc., and accessory uses on the same site,
such as living quarters for clergy and staff and child day care. Other
establishments maintained by religious organizations, such as full-time
educational institutions, hospitals, youth camps, homeless shelters, and
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other
public areas.
A.
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly
owned or operated facilities.
B.
C. Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
§ 260-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-9
1:489
other potentially related operations are classified according to their
respective activities.
REPAIR or MAINTENANCE — An activity that restores the character, scope,
size or design of a serviceable area, structure or land use to its previously
existing, authorized and undamaged condition. Activities that change the
character, size or scope of a project beyond the original design and drain,
dredge, fill, flood or otherwise alter additional regulated wetlands are not
included in this definition.
REPORT — Any letter, review, memorandum, compilation or similar writing
made by any body, board, officer or consultant other than a solicitor to
any other body, board, officer or consultant for the purpose of assisting the
recipient of such report in the rendering of any decision or determination.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT SERVICES — Indoor facilities for
scientific research and the design, development and testing of electrical,
electronic, magnetic, optical and mechanical components in advance of
product manufacturing that is not associated with a manufacturing facility
on the same site. Includes chemical and biotechnology research and
development. Does not include computer software companies or medical
laboratories.
RESTAURANT — A commercial establishment where food and beverages
are prepared, served and consumed primarily within the principal building.
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — A business having as its primary function as
the supplier of merchandise or wares to the end consumer.
RETAIL, GENERAL — Stores and shops selling multiple lines of
merchandise, including art galleries, artists' supplies, bakeries (all
production in support of on-site sales), bicycles, books, cameras and
photographic supplies, clothing and accessories, collectibles (cards, coins,
comics, stamps, etc.), department stores, drug and discount stores, dry
goods, electronics stores, fabrics and sewing supplies, florists and
houseplant stores (indoor sales only; outdoor sales are "plant nurseries"),
furniture, home furnishings and equipment, general stores, gift and
souvenir shops, hardware, hobby materials, jewelry, luggage and leather
goods, musical instruments, parts and accessories, newsstands, orthopedic
supplies, pet supplies, religious goods, specialty shops, sporting goods and
equipment, stationery, quick-print services, toys and games, and variety
stores.
RETAINING WALL — A wall or terraced combination of walls used to retain
more than 18 vertical inches of material and not used to support or provide
a wall for a building or structure.
RETENTION SYSTEM — A stormwater facility that is designed to accept
runoff from a developed site and discharge it at a limited rate when the
runoff rate into the system drops below the limited rate. A specified volume
is stored indefinitely (retained) until it is displaced by runoff from another
storm.
§ 260-9 IRWIN CODE § 260-9
1:490
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land acquired by deed and/or agreement,
reservation, dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be
occupied by a street, trail, waterline, sanitary sewer, and/or other public
utility or facilities.
ROAD — See "street."
ROOMING HOUSE — A residential building where lodging is offered by
prearrangement for a definite period for compensation, but where, in
contrast to hotels and motels, such lodging is not open to transient guests.
SCHOOL — Public, private or parochial, preschool, elementary, secondary,
junior and senior high schools; child-care facilities, nursery schools;
colleges, universities and business institutes of higher learning, all of which
may or do teach a skill or background for commercial or private use or
benefit.
SCHOOL, SPECIAL/STUDIOS — Specialized schools offering instruction
in the following: arts and crafts, movement and dance, computers and
electronics, drama, driver education, language, photography, and music.
Also includes facilities, institutions and conference centers that offer
specialized programs in personal growth and development, such as fitness
training studios, gymnastics instruction and aerobics studios,
environmental awareness, sewing handicrafts, martial arts,
communications, and management.
SCHOOLS, PRIVATE — Private educational institutions, including boarding
schools, business, secretarial and vocational schools, colleges and
universities, elementary, middle, junior high and high schools,
correspondence and online schools, professional schools (law, medicine,
etc.), seminaries/religious ministry training facilities, and military
academies.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE — A storage facility that is characterized by
and secured as private, individual separate spaces which are accessible by
customers for the storing and retrieval of personal effects and household
goods. In no case shall storage spaces be used for manufacturing, retail or
wholesale selling, office or other business services, or human habitation.
SETBACK — The minimum distance that a structure can be located from a
property boundary line, thereby creating a required open space on a lot.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Patently offensive representations or descriptions of
ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, and patently
offensive representations, descriptions of acts of masturbation, excretory
functions, homosexuality, sodomy, sexual intercourse or physical contact
with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if
such person be female, breasts.
SHOPPING CENTER, MALL — Any group of two or more commercial uses
which: a) are designed as a single commercial group, whether or not
located on the same lot; b) are under common ownership or are subject to
reciprocal parking and ingress and egress agreements or easements; c) are
connected by party walls, partitions, canopies or other structural members
§ 260-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-9
1:491
to form one continuous structure or, if located in separate buildings, are
interconnected by common parking areas, travel lanes, walkways or
accessways designed to facilitate customer interchange between the uses
on site; d) share common points of vehicular access; and e) otherwise
present the appearance of one continuous commercial area. For the purpose
of this chapter, a grouping of predominantly office uses which meet the
characteristics specified herein shall not be deemed to be a shopping
center.
SHRUB — An ornamental plant with woody stems that is at least two gallons
at planting.
SIDEWALK, PRIVATE — Any walkway from the property line to the house or
business intended to provide pedestrian access to the building.
SIDEWALK, PUBLIC — A paved walkway along the side of a street.
SIGN — For the purposes of this chapter, a sign shall be considered as
any writing (including letter, word or numeral), pictorial representation
(including illustration or decoration), emblem (including symbol or
trademark) or any other figure, which is a structure or is attached to a
building or other structure and is used to announce, direct attention to, or
advertise.
SIGN, ABANDONED — A sign and/or supporting structure which no longer
identifies a bona fide business conducted or product sold on the premises.
A sign shall be deemed abandoned when these conditions have been in
existence for a period exceeding 90 consecutive calendar days.
SIGN, ANIMATED — A sign that uses movement or change of lighting to
depict action or create a special effect or scene, except LED displays on
restaurant menu boards.
SIGN, BACK-TO-BACK — Two or more integrally connected signs facing in
opposite directions and separated by not more than five feet.
SIGN, BANNER — A temporary sign, with or without characters, letters,
illustrations or ornamentations, applied to cloth, paper, flexible plastic or
fabric of any kind with only such material for backing.
SIGN, BUILDING — A sign attached to a building.
SIGN, CANOPY — A sign that is a part of or attached to a structural
protective cover over a door, entrance, window or outdoor service area.
SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY — Any sign designed so that letters or numbers
attached to the sign can be periodically changed to indicate a different
message.
SIGN, CONSTRUCTION — A sign bearing the names of contractors,
architects, engineers and the like, or advertising promotions, price ranges
and similar information, that is placed at a construction site that has
received development plan approval from the Borough.
SIGN, COPY — Any word, letter, number or emblem affixed to the sign
surface either permanently or in removable form intended to convey a
§ 260-9 IRWIN CODE § 260-9
1:492
message to the reader. Any sign intended for notice to the general public
shall be prepared and presented in the English language but may contain a
secondary or additional message in another language.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL — An on-premises sign that includes information
assisting in the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, such as enter, exit,
and one-way.
SIGN, DIRECTORY — A ground or building sign that lists tenants or
occupants of a building or project with unit numbers, arrows or other
directional information.
SIGN, ELECTRONIC CHANGEABLE COPY — A sign, or portion of a sign,
that is designed so that characters, letters or illustrations can be changed
or rearranged electronically without altering the face or the surface of the
sign.
SIGN, ELECTRONIC SCROLLING MESSAGE — A sign with a fixed or
changing display/message composed of a series of lights, wherein the
sequence of message and the rate of change is electronically programmed
and can be modified by electronic process.
SIGN, EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED — A sign illuminated primarily by light
directed toward or across it or by backlighting from a source not within it.
SIGN, FLASHING — A sign, the illumination of which is not constant in
intensity when in use and which exhibits sudden or marked changes in
lighting effects.
SIGN, INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED — A sign illuminated primarily by light
source incorporated in the sign.
SIGN PLATE, BUILDING — A sign indicating the name and address of a
building or the name of an occupant thereof and the practice of a permitted
occupation therein.
SIGN, ROOF — A sign erected, constructed and maintained above the eaves
of a building.
SIGN, SANDWICH BOARD — A two-sided sign not permanently attached
to the ground or some type of permanent structure; a sign connected to or
located on A or T frames; a two-sided sign attached to boards.
SIGN, SHINGLE — A sign suspended from and located entirely under a
covered porch, covered walkway, or an awning.
SIGN, SPECIAL EVENT — A temporary sign advertising or announcing a
special community-wide event or activity conducted by or sponsored by
or on behalf of a unit of local government, a charitable organization or
nonprofit corporation. A special community-wide event or activity is one
that seeks to attract donations, participants or customers from throughout
the Borough.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A sign that is used for a brief period and is not
permanently mounted.
§ 260-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-9
1:493
SIGN, TRAFFIC — A sign indicating federal, state, municipal regulations for
automobile, truck, bicycle or pedestrian movement.
SIGN, WALL — A sign painted on or attached to and extending not more
than six inches from an exterior wall in a parallel manner.
SIGN, WINDOW — A sign applied to the inside of a glassed area.
SOCIAL SERVICE CENTER — A facility where counseling, limited shortterm
custodial care or similar special services are provided to persons on a
walk-in or appointment basis under the aegis of a nonprofit agency, which
facility and special services have received prior written approval from the
Courts of Common Pleas of Westmoreland County.
SPA — A day spa is a business establishment which people visit for personal
care treatments such as massages and facials only for the duration of the
treatment. In contrast, a destination spa offers the same services in a hotel
setting where people reside for one or more days.
SPECIALTY SHOP/CAFE — A retail business selling ready-to-eat food and/or
beverages for on- or off-premises consumption as well as offering specialty
food and beverage products in a distinct category of merchandise generally
not prepared for immediate consumption, such as seafood or meat,
imported ethnic products, wine or other specialty foods. This use is distinct
from other food or beverage stores in that the type or selection of products
offered is not readily available at a convenience market, liquor store, or
grocery.
STABLE — A building or a group of buildings and adjoining land used for the
housing of horses or other domestic animals owned by an individual for the
use of himself, his immediate family or friends or commercial enterprise.
STATE LICENSED RESIDENTIAL FACILITY — A structure constructed for
residential purposes that is licensed by state regulations; that is inclusive
of a foster family home, a foster family group home, or an adult foster care
small group home.
STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — Camouflaging methods applied to wireless
communications towers, antennas and other facilities which render them
more visually appealing or blend the proposed facility into the existing
structure or visual backdrop in such a manner as to render it minimally
visible to the casual observer. Such methods include, but are not limited
to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, building-mounted
antennas painted to match the existing structure and facilities constructed
to resemble trees, shrubs, and light poles.[Added 3-8-2017 by Ord. No.
949]
STORY — The portion of the building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there be no floor above
it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it.
STORY, HALF — That portion of a building between the eaves and ridgelines
of a pitched roof.
§ 260-9 IRWIN CODE § 260-9
1:494
STREET — The right-of-way, including sidewalks, of a public way, or a
private way open to public use, used or intended for use by automobile
traffic, including highways, parkways, alleys, courts and squares used or
intended for this purpose, to which owners of abutting land have a right
of access. The term includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
freeway, parkway, lane, alley, viaduct or any other ways used or intended to
be used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether public or private.
STREET LINE — The line separating a street from a lot.
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY — A general term denoting land, property or a
property interest usually in a strip, acquired for or devoted to transportation
purposes, which has been dedicated to the public or used, taken, dedicated
or reserved as a private road.
STREET, ARTERIAL — A street, the principal function of which is to provide
for through traffic and which is designed to carry large volumes of traffic.
STREET, COLLECTOR — A street, the principal function of which is carrying
traffic from local streets to arterial streets.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC — A local street terminating in a turnaround.
STREET, LOCAL — A street used primarily for access to abutting property
and for moving local traffic.
STREET, PRIVATE — A way that is intended to afford a means of access to
abutting lots and for moving local traffic. A private street is not owned or
controlled by a government entity.
STREET, PUBLIC — A right-of-way dedicated to and accepted for public
use which affords a means of access to abutting property and a means of
vehicular travel, including avenues, places, ways, drives, lanes, boulevards,
highways, roads, streets or other thoroughfares. A public street is owned or
controlled by a government entity.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS — Any change in the supporting members
of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, or any
substantial change in roof.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials assembled at a fixed location
to give support or shelter, such as a building, bridge, trestle, tower,
framework, retaining wall, tank, tunnel, tent, stadium, reviewing stand,
platform, bin, fence, sign, flagpole or the like. Any man-made object having
an ascertainable stationary location on or in land or water, whether or not
affixed to the land. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on
the ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground,
including, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, advertising
signs, billboards, tennis courts, swimming pools, and pergolas. Fences,
sidewalks, and driveways shall not be considered structures.
STRUCTURE, NONCONFORMING — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the use or extent-of-use provisions
of this chapter or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such
structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of this chapter or
§ 260-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-9
1:495
amendment or prior to the application of this chapter or amendment to its
location by reason of annexation. Such nonconforming structures include,
but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
STUDIO OF INSTRUCTION — A commercial service establishment
specializing in the teaching of skills or arts, such as hobbies or crafts, music,
dance, etc.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot or combination of two
or more lots, a tract or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots,
tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including changes in existing lot
lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the
court for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building
or lot development: provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land
for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving
any new street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be
exempted.
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS — Chapter 230,
Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the Borough of Irwin, as
amended.
SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGE or SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE — A modification
to an existing wireless communications facility substantially changes the
physical dimensions of a tower or base station if it meets any of the
following criteria:[Added 3-8-2017 by Ord. No. 949]
SWIMMING POOL — Any structure, basin, chamber, tank or other
receptacle capable of containing an artificial body of water for the purpose
For a tower-based WCF outside the public rights-of-way, it increases
the height of the facility by more than 10% or by the height of one
additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing
antenna, not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater; for a tower-based
WCF in the rights-of-way, it increases the height of the facility by more
than 10% or 10 feet, whichever is greater;
A.
For a tower-based WCF outside the public rights-of-way, it protrudes
from the edge of the WCF by more than 20 feet or more than the
width of the tower-based structures at the level of the appurtenance,
whichever is greater; for those tower-based WCFs in the public rightsof-
way, it protrudes from the edge of the structure by more than six feet;
B.
It involves installation of more than the standard number of new
equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four
cabinets;
C.
It entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site of the
tower-based WCF; or
D.
It does not comply with conditions associated with prior approval of
construction or modification of the tower-based WCF unless the
noncompliance is due to an increase in height, increase in width, or
addition of cabinets. [Added 3-8-2017 by Ord. No. 949]
E.
§ 260-9 IRWIN CODE § 260-9
1:496
of swimming, diving or recreational bathing and having a depth at any point
of more than 18 inches, whether located at ground level, above ground,
below ground or indoors. Does not include any plastic, canvas, or rubber
portable pools temporarily erected upon the ground that are less than 12
feet in diameter and less than 24 inches deep at the point of greatest
possible depth.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE — Any swimming pool located on private
property under the control of a single homeowner or his tenant, the use
of which is limited to members of his family, the tenant's family and their
invited guests.
SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC — Any swimming pool, other than a private
residential swimming pool, intended to be used collectively by numbers
of persons for swimming or bathing, however owned or operated and
regardless of whether a fee is charged for such use. Such term includes
but is not limited to a swimming pool owned or operated incident to a
multifamily dwelling project, nonprofit recreational facilities, hotels, as well
as educational facilities.
TATTOO AND BODY PIERCING PARLOR — An establishment whose
principal business activity is the practice of placing designs, letters, figures,
piercing or other marks upon the skin of any person using ink or other
substances that result in the permanent coloration of the skin by means of
use of needles or other instruments designed to contact or puncture the
skin.
THEATER, INDOOR — Any building primarily used for dramatic
presentations, shows, movies or similar entertainment, which building has
a roof sheltering performers and patrons, open to the public with or without
charge.
THEATER, OUTDOOR — Any place other than an indoor theater used
primarily for dramatic presentations, shows, movies or similar
entertainment, including drive-in theaters, open to the public with or
without charge.
THEATERS and AUDITORIUMS — Indoor facilities for public assembly and
group entertainment, other than sporting events, including civic theaters
and facilities for "live" theater and concerts, exhibition and convention
halls, motion-picture theaters, public and semipublic auditoriums, similar
public assembly uses. Does not include outdoor theaters, concert and
similar entertainment facilities, and indoor and outdoor facilities for
sporting events.
TOWER — A structure that is intended for transmitting or receiving
television, radio, or telephone communications, excluding those used
exclusively for dispatch communications. This definition not shall include
tower-based wireless communications facilities.[Added 3-8-2017 by Ord.
No. 949]
TOWER-BASED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (TOWERBASED
WCF) — Any structure that is used for the purpose of supporting
one or more antennas, including, but not limited to, self-supporting lattice
§ 260-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-9
1:497
towers, guy towers and monopoles, utility poles and light poles. DAS hub
facilities are considered to be tower-based WCF.[Added 3-8-2017 by Ord.
No. 949]
TOWNHOUSE — A multifamily building in which dwelling units are
arranged side by side at ground level and which provides a private entrance
for each dwelling unit.
TRANSIENT — A person residing or stopping in the Borough for less than
30 days at any one time.
UNDERSTORY TREE — A tree, either single-stemmed or multi-stemmed
(clump form), which has a caliper of at least 1.5 inches at planting and is of
a species which at maturity can be expected to reach a height between 10
and 30 feet.
USE — The purpose of the activity for which the land or building thereon is
designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
The term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed to include
any nonconforming use.
USE, EXISTING — The use of a lot or structure at the time this chapter was
enacted.
USE, NONCONFORMING — A use, whether of land or of structure, which
does not comply with the applicable use provisions in this chapter or
amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully
in existence prior to the enactment of this chapter or amendment, or prior
to the application of this chapter or amendment to its location by reason of
annexation.
USE, PERMITTED — A use allowed in a zoning district, and upon review has
been determined to comply with the provisions of these zoning regulations
and other applicable ordinances and regulations.
USE, PRINCIPAL — The primary use of a lot.
USE, PUBLIC — A use by an agency or department of the Borough, county,
state or federal government. This shall also include public utilities or uses
by any organizations that receive funding either all or in part from any
agency or department of the Borough, county, state or federal government.
This shall also include buildings and premises used in the operation of the
public use.
USE, SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A permission or approval granted to use
land in a zoning district for a purpose other than that generally permitted
outright in the district. The permission or special exception is granted by
the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the standards contained in
this chapter; provided, generally, that the specific application of the use
would not prove injurious to the public interest.
USE, TEMPORARY — Any use permitted under this chapter that may be
granted to temporarily operate for no more than 30 continuous days,
together with a special exception granted by the Zoning Hearing Board; a
§ 260-9 IRWIN CODE § 260-9
1:498
permitted temporary use to operate for a maximum duration of 18 months
after completion of a temporary office, model home or model apartment.
VARIANCE — A deviation from the terms of this chapter.
VEHICLE SALES, NEW — An authorized dealership primarily for the sale
of new motor vehicles subject to licensing but, as an incidental use, may
include the sale of used motor vehicles which are subject to licensing
and truck campers attached to trucks prior to delivery to the dealership.
Said dealership shall have complete facilities housed in a building on the
premises for display of new motor vehicles, for the service, repair and
restoration of new and used motor vehicles, and for the sale of new
accessories.
VEHICLE SALES, USED — An authorized dealership for the sale of used
motor vehicles with completely enclosed office and sales facilities on the
premises. All related activities incidental to the sale of used motor vehicles,
such as minor repairs, services and restoration, shall be performed within
completely enclosed facilities.
VIEW — An area within eyesight from a defined observation point.
WBCA — Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act (53 P.S.
§ 11702.1 et seq.).[Added 3-8-2017 by Ord. No. 949]
WHOLESALING, DISTRIBUTION AND INSTALLATION SERVICES —
Establishments engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial,
commercial, institutional, farm or professional business users; or to other
wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers in buying merchandise for or
selling merchandise to such persons or companies.
WIRELESS — Transmissions through the airwaves, including, but not
limited to, infrared line of sight, cellular, PCS, microwave, satellite, or radio
signals.[Added 3-8-2017 by Ord. No. 949]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WCF) — The antennas, nodes,
control boxes, towers, poles, conduits, ducts, pedestals, electronics and
other equipment used for the purpose of transmitting, receiving,
distributing, providing, or accommodating wireless communications
services.[Added 3-8-2017 by Ord. No. 949]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY APPLICANT (WCF APPLICANT)
— Any person that applies for a wireless communications facility building
permit, zoning approval and/or permission to use the public right-of-way
(ROW) or other Borough-owned land or property.[Added 3-8-2017 by Ord.
No. 949]
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A freestanding structure, such as
a tower-based wireless communications facility or any other support
structure that is constructed primarily to support the placement or
installation of a wireless communications facility if approved by the
Borough.[Added 3-8-2017 by Ord. No. 949]
YARD — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building, open
and unobstructed from the ground to the sky.
§ 260-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-9
1:499
YARD, FRONT — The yard extending across the full width of the lot and
lying between the front street line and the nearest part of a building or the
building line, where such may have been established on the lot.
YARD, REAR — The yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying
between the rear line of the lot and the nearest part of a building or the
building line, where such may have been established on the lot.
YARD, SIDE — The yard between the side line of the lot and the nearest part
of a building and extending from the front yard to the rear yard or, in the
absence of either of such yards, to the front or rear lot line, as may be.
ZONE — Same as "district."
ZONING MAP — The Zoning Map or maps of the Borough of Irwin, together
with all amendments subsequently adopted.102
ZONING OFFICER — Person designated by the Council of the Borough of
Irwin to enforce this chapter.
ZONING PERMIT — A document issued by the Borough prior to a building
permit, stating that the proposed use is in accordance with the
requirements and standards of this chapter.
102. Editor's Note: A copy of the official Zoning Map is attached to this chapter.
§ 260-9 IRWIN CODE § 260-9
1:500
ARTICLE III
Establishment of Zoning Districts
§ 260-10. Zoning districts.
§ 260-11. Zoning Map.103
The Official Map adopted in conjunction with this chapter is hereby
established as the Official Zoning Map (hereinafter "Official Zoning Map")
of the Borough of Irwin, Pennsylvania. The Official Zoning Map designates
the respective zoning districts in accordance with this chapter.
§ 260-12. Interpretation of zoning district boundaries.
In determining the boundaries of districts and establishing the provisions
applicable to each district, due and careful consideration has been given to
existing conditions, the character of buildings erected in each district, the
most desirable use for which the land in each district may be adapted, and
the conservation of property values throughout the Borough.
§ 260-13. Table of permitted land uses.
See the Table of Permitted and Special Exception Uses attached to this
chapter.104
A. The Borough of Irwin is hereby divided into the following base zoning
districts:
R-L Residential-Low Density, Single Family Homes Zone
R-M Residential-Medium Density, Combined Family Zone
R-H Residential-High Density, Multifamily Units and Mobile
Homes Zone
C-B-R Commercial-Business, Residential Zone
C-H Commercial-Highway Business, Route 30 Corridor Zone
I Industrial Zone
S-R-C Special Recreation and Conservation Zone
F-P Floodplain Zone
PA-O Pennsylvania Avenue Overlay Zone
B. The districts' boundaries are shown on the Official Map.
A. The uses shown as permitted in each zone are the only uses permitted
in that zone. Unless otherwise noted, the use or dimensional standards
are the requirements for each use.
103. Editor's Note: A copy of the official Zoning Map is attached to this chapter.
104. Editor's Note: Table 1, the Table of Permitted and Special Exception Uses, is attached to
this chapter.
§ 260-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-13
1:501
§ 260-14. Prohibitions.
Only household pets are permitted in residential districts. The keeping
of large animals or small animals, as defined herein, and/or bees for
commercial or noncommercial purposes is not permitted in any residential
district. The keeping, raising and/or breeding of inherently dangerous
mammals or reptiles is not permitted in any district within the Borough.
§ 260-15. Temporary uses.
B. Special exception standards are established by the Zoning Hearing
Board according to express standards contained in Article XVIII of this
chapter.
A. Intent. Temporary uses shall be permitted by the granting of a
temporary zoning permit issued by the Zoning Officer in accordance
with the requirements of this section.
B. General provisions.
(1) The duration of the temporary period is stated hereinafter;
provided, however, renewal of the permit may be requested. The
Zoning Officer is not obligated to renew such permits if doing so
leads to a de facto permanent use.
(2) Temporary uses shall be subject to all the regulations of the
applicable district in which they are located.
C. Permitted temporary uses.
(1) Temporary office, model home or model apartment and related
signs, both incidental and necessary for the sale, rental or lease of
real property in the district. Maximum duration: 30 days after
completion of the project.
(2) Temporary building or yard for construction materials and
equipment, both incidental and necessary to construction in the
district. Maximum duration: 18 months after completion.
(3) Parking lot designated for a special event in a district. Maximum
duration: three days.
(4) Other similar uses deemed temporary by the Zoning Officer and
attached with such time period, conditions and safeguards as the
Officer may deem necessary.
D. Standards.
(1) Adequate access and off-street parking facilities shall be provided
which shall not interfere with traffic movement on adjacent streets.
(2) Any floodlights or other lighting shall be directed upon premises
and shall not be detrimental to adjacent properties.
§ 260-13 IRWIN CODE § 260-15
1:502
§ 260-16. Fences and enclosure walls.
E. Special requirements for retail temporary uses in the C-H Zoning
District. Temporary uses involving the sale of retail goods shall be
permitted by permit issued by the Zoning Officer, subject to the
following conditions:
(1) Sales area, including stands, shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet
from the nearest public road right-of-way and in no case shall be
less than 30 feet from the edge of pavement.
(2) The parcel used shall have a minimum of 50 feet of road frontage to
ensure safe ingress and egress.
(3) Provide at least three off-street parking spaces and one
handicapped accessible space.
(4) Entrances and exits to the required parking area shall be at least
50 feet from any intersection on a local road and 100 feet from all
other road intersections.
(5) No permanent or temporary electrical service or lighting shall be
installed without an electrical permit.
(6) Christmas tree displays and sales shall be permitted for a maximum
period of 45 days prior to January 1. Other uses shall be permitted
for a maximum period of 30 days.
(7) Temporary use permits may be extended one time for an additional
30 days with the approval of the Zoning Officer.
A. Fences and enclosure walls and plant materials are permitted on any
lot, subject to the requirements of this section.
B. Fences, walls, plant materials or similar enclosures are permitted up to
the property line. In no case shall such structures and/or materials be
placed beyond the lot line in any public right-of-way.
C. In residential districts, rear yard fences and any portions of side yard
fences which extend from the front building line to the rear lot line may
be erected no closer than two feet of the property line of a lot, unless a
written waiver is obtained from the adjacent property owner, to a
height not in excess of six feet above the adjusted ground level.
D. In residential districts, front yard fences may be erected up to the
property line and any portion of side yard fences which extend from the
front building line to the front lot line may be erected no closer than two
feet of the property line of a lot, unless a written waiver is obtained
from the adjacent property owner, to a height not in excess of three feet
above the adjacent ground level, provided that the ratio of the solid
portion of the fence to the open portion shall not exceed one to one.
§ 260-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-16
1:503
§ 260-17. Street systems.
The streets of the Borough of Irwin, for the purpose of this chapter, are
hereby divided into the following classifications:
E. In commercial and industrial districts, fences or similar enclosures
walls not exceeding eight feet in height are permitted up to the
property line of any lot. Solid fences may be permitted at the sole and
exclusive discretion of the Zoning Officer.
F. Where determined by the Zoning Hearing Board to be necessary in
conjunction with any use permitted as a special exception, such
required fences or enclosures may exceed the height limits of this
section.
G. Fences, enclosure walls, plant materials and similar enclosures shall
not be located at street corners so as to interfere with visual sight
distances in any manner, whether by obstruction, confusion, glare or
other means. The height of such objects shall be restricted to three feet
within a triangular area formed by the intersecting lot lines and
equidistant from the point of intersection. This distance shall be 30 feet
from the point of intersection. These requirements which apply to such
restricted areas for the preservation of visual sight distance are also
applicable to all forms of plant materials and other objects, whether or
not they fall within the definition of fence under the provision of this
chapter.
A. Major highways. The classification of major highways and includes the
Route 30 corridor.
B. Primary thoroughfares. The classification of primary thoroughfares and
includes Pennsylvania Avenue, Route 993, Main Street, Oak Street,
Brush Hill Road, Tenth Street, and Chestnut Street.
C. Secondary corridors. The classification for secondary corridors and
includes Ash Street, Caruthers Lane, Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth and
Sixth Street from Main Street to Oak Street.
D. Local roads. The classification of local roads and includes every other
street, avenue, alley and highway not listed above within the Borough of
Irwin.
E. The Zoning Hearing Board may use the street classification in this
chapter to limit the location of special exception uses to streets
adequate for the traffic created by such uses or in other ways to achieve
the purposes and community development objectives of this chapter
and of the Municipalities Planning Code.
§ 260-16 IRWIN CODE § 260-17
1:504
Part 2
Land Use
ARTICLE IV
Residential-Low Density, Single Family Homes Zone (R-L)
§ 260-18. Purpose.
The purpose of the R-L, Single-Family Residential District is to preserve
the desirable character and stability of large-lot residential areas in the
Borough. These areas include single-family dwelling units on larger lots
with greater setbacks and at a lower density than other residential districts.
§ 260-19. Permitted land uses.
Per § 260-13, Table 1, Table of Uses.105
§ 260-20. Area and bulk requirements.
Per § 260-99, Table 2, Area and Bulk Standards.106
§ 260-21. Building height.
The maximum building height of a principal structure shall not exceed three
stories or 35 feet.
§ 260-22. Performance standards.
All residential construction shall substantially conform in street orientation
and massing homes, according to the following guidelines:
A. New residential structures should harmonize in scale and massing with
the existing historic structures in surrounding blocks. For instance, a
narrow two-and-one-half-story structure should not be built in a block
largely occupied by one-story bungalows.
B. New structures which will be larger than their neighbors should be
designed in modules, with the greater part of the mass located away
from the main facade to minimize the perceived bulk of the structure.
C. New residential structures should present their front door and major
architectural facades to the primary street and not to the side or rear
yard.
D. In some cases on corner lots, a corner entryway between two defining
architectural facades may be appropriate.
105. Editor's Note: Table 1, Permitted and Special Exception Uses, is attached to this chapter.
106. Editor's Note: Table 2, Area and Bulk Standards, is attached to this chapter.
§ 260-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-23
1:505
§ 260-23. Accessory structures and uses.
Customary and incidental accessory structures and uses shall be regulated
as follows:
§ 260-24. Parking and loading, internal roadways.
The provisions of Article XIII, Parking and Loading, and Article XIV, Internal
Roadways, shall apply.
§ 260-25. Landscaping and screening.
The provisions of Article XV, Landscaping and Screening, shall apply.
§ 260-26. Signs.
The provisions of Article XVI, Signs, shall apply.
A. Accessory structures shall be subordinate in size to the principal
structure on the lot.
B. Accessory structures shall not be placed within the front setback. If
placed in side yard, accessory structures shall not be located closer to
the street than the front building line of the principal structure.
C. Accessory structures shall not be located closer than 10 feet to the rear
and side property lines nor closer than 10 feet to the principal
structure, unless otherwise indicated in this chapter. Storage sheds of
less than 144 square feet may be located as close as three feet to the
rear and side property lines.
D. On corner lots, accessory structures shall not be located between any
portion of the principal structure and either street.
E. The maximum height of an accessory structure shall not exceed 18 feet
or shall not be taller than the height of the principal structure,
whichever is lower. In case of accessory structures that serve as
outdoor storage sheds associated with a principal residential structure,
the height limit shall be measured from grade for each level of the
structure.
F. No part of any such structure, with the exception of accessory dwelling
units as defined herein, shall be designed or used for sleeping purposes,
and no cooking fixtures shall be placed or permitted therein.
G. Pools are subject to the accessory use provisions herein and subject to a
building permit.
H. Outdoor play equipment, such as swing sets and similar large
recreational structures which are typically anchored to the ground and
are not easily relocated, shall be placed in side or rear yards.
§ 260-23 IRWIN CODE § 260-27
1:506
§ 260-27. Multiple uses and buildings.
There shall be no more than one principal use allowed on any lot in the R-L
District. There shall be no more than one principal building allowed on any
lot in the R-L District.
§ 260-28. Swimming pools.
A private swimming pool shall be permitted as an accessory use in the R-L
Zoning District, provided:
A. A swimming pool accessory to a one- or two-family dwelling may be
located within a rear yard subject to the setback requirements for
accessory uses.
B. A swimming pool shall be enclosed by a fence or other enclosure at
least four feet in height above the adjacent ground level, which pool
shall be locked when unattended by an adult in order to prevent
accidental or unauthorized entry.
C. All lights used for illumination of the pool area shall be appropriately
located or shielded to eliminate direct sight of light bulbs from outside
the property lines.
D. Portable pools and children's pools shall be covered or protected in a
manner to prevent access by children of tender age when unattended
unless and until the children are attended by an adult over 21 years of
age. They are only permitted in the Borough from May 1 through
September 30.
§ 260-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-28
1:507

ARTICLE V
Residential-Medium Density, Combined Family Zone (Single Family
Dwellings and Multifamily Dwellings) (R-M)
§ 260-29. Purpose.
The purpose of R-M, Combined Family Residential District is to preserve the
desirable character and stability of more compact residential areas in the
Borough and also protect them from change and intrusion that may cause
deterioration.
§ 260-30. Permitted land uses.
Per § 260-13, Table 1, Table of Permitted and Special Exception Uses.107
§ 260-31. Area and bulk requirements.
Per § 260-99, Table 2, Area and Bulk Standards.108
§ 260-32. Building height.
The maximum building height of a principal structure shall not exceed three
stories or 45 feet.
§ 260-33. Performance standards.
All residential construction shall substantially conform in street orientation
and massing homes according to the following guidelines:
A. New residential structures should harmonize in scale and massing with
the existing historic structures in surrounding blocks. For instance, a
narrow two-and-one-half-story structure should not be built in a block
largely occupied by one-story bungalows.
B. New structures which will be larger than their neighbors should be
designed in modules, with the greater part of the mass located away
from the main facade to minimize the perceived bulk of the structure.
C. New residential structures should present their front door and major
architectural facades to the primary street and not to the side or rear
yard.
D. In some cases on corner lots, a corner entryway between two defining
architectural facades may be appropriate, only if prior written approval
from the Zoning Officer is obtained.
107. Editor's Note: Table 1, the Table of Permitted and Special Exception Uses, is attached to
this chapter.
108. Editor's Note: Table 2, Area and Bulk Standards, is attached to this chapter.
§ 260-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-34
1:509
§ 260-34. Accessory structures and uses.
Customary and incidental accessory structures and uses shall be regulated
as follows:
§ 260-35. Parking and loading, internal roadways.
The provisions of Article XIII, Parking and Loading, and Article XIV, Internal
Roadways, shall apply.
§ 260-36. Landscaping and screening.
The provisions of Article XV, Landscaping and Screening, shall apply.
§ 260-37. Signs.
The provisions of Article XVI, Signs, shall apply.
§ 260-38. Multiple uses and buildings.
There shall be no more than one principal use allowed on any lot in the R-M
District. There shall be no more than one principal building allowed on any
lot in the R-M District.
A. Accessory structures shall be subordinate in size to the principal
structure on the lot.
B. Accessory structures shall not be placed within the front setback. If
placed in side yard, accessory structures shall not be located closer to
the street than the front building line of the principal structure.
C. Accessory structures shall not be located closer than 10 feet to the rear
and side property lines nor closer than 10 feet to the principal
structure, unless otherwise indicated in this chapter.
D. On corner lots, accessory structures shall not be located between any
portion of the principal structure and either street.
E. The maximum height of an accessory structure shall not exceed 10 feet.
In case of accessory structures that serve as outdoor storage sheds
associated with a principal residential structure, the height limit shall
be measured from grade for each level of the structure.
F. No part of any such structure, with the exception of accessory dwelling
units as defined herein, shall be designed or used for sleeping purposes,
and no cooking fixtures shall be placed or permitted therein.
G. Pools are subject to the accessory use provisions herein and subject to a
building permit.
H. Outdoor play equipment, such as swing sets and similar large
recreational structures which are typically anchored to the ground and
are not easily relocated, shall be placed in side or rear yards.
§ 260-34 IRWIN CODE § 260-39
1:510
§ 260-39. Swimming pools.
A private swimming pool shall be permitted as an accessory use in the R-M
Zoning District, provided:
A. A swimming pool accessory to a one- or two-family dwelling may be
located within a rear yard subject to the setback requirements for
accessory uses.
B. A swimming pool shall be enclosed by a fence or other enclosure at
least four feet in height above the adjacent ground level, which pool
shall be locked when unattended by an adult in order to prevent
accidental or unauthorized entry.
C. All lights used for illumination of the pool area shall be appropriately
located or shielded to eliminate direct sight of light bulbs from outside
the property lines.
D. Portable pools and children's pools shall be covered or protected in a
manner to prevent access by children of tender age when unattended
unless and until the children are attended by an adult over 21 years of
age. They are only permitted in the Borough from May 1 through
September 30.
§ 260-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-39
1:511

ARTICLE VI
Residential-High Density, Multifamily Units and Mobile Homes
Zone (R-H)
§ 260-40. Purpose.
The purpose of R-H, Multifamily and Mobile Homes Residential District is
to preserve the desirable character and stability of multifamily residential
neighborhoods in the Borough and to provide a dense urban residential
pattern suitable to the needs of the population to coincide with the
character and stability of the predominantly single-family neighborhoods in
the Borough.
§ 260-41. Permitted land uses.
Per § 260-13, Table 1, Table of Permitted and Special Exception Uses.109
§ 260-42. Area and bulk requirements.
Per § 260-99, Table 2, Area and Bulk Standards.110
§ 260-43. Building height.
The maximum building height of a principal structure shall not exceed
seven stories or 65 feet.
§ 260-44. Performance standards.
All residential construction shall substantially conform in street orientation
and massing homes, according to the following guidelines:
A. New residential structures should harmonize in scale and massing with
the existing historic structures in surrounding blocks. For instance, a
narrow two-and-one-half-story structure should not be built in a block
largely occupied by one-story bungalows.
B. New structures which will be larger than their neighbors should be
designed in modules, with the greater part of the mass located away
from the main facade to minimize the perceived bulk of the structure.
C. New residential structures should present their front door and major
architectural facades to the primary street and not to the side or rear
yard.
D. In some cases on corner lots, a corner entryway between two defining
architectural facades may be appropriate.
109. Editor's Note: Table 1, the Table of Permitted and Special Exception Uses, is attached to
this chapter.
110. Editor's Note: Table 2, Area and Bulk Standards, is attached to this chapter.
§ 260-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-45
1:513
§ 260-45. Accessory structures and uses.
Customary and incidental accessory structures and uses shall be regulated
as follows:
§ 260-46. Parking and loading, internal roadways.
The provisions of Article XIII, Parking and Loading, and Article XIV, Internal
Roadways, shall apply.
§ 260-47. Landscaping and screening.
The provisions of Article XV, Landscaping and Screening, shall apply.
§ 260-48. Signs.
The provisions of Article XVI, Signs, shall apply.
§ 260-49. Multiple uses and buildings.
There shall be no more than one principal use allowed on any lot in the R-H
District.
A. Accessory structures shall be subordinate in size to the principal
structure on the lot.
B. Accessory structures shall not be placed within the front setback. If
placed in side yard, accessory structures shall not be located closer to
the street than the front building line of the principal structure.
C. Accessory structures shall not be located closer than 10 feet to the rear
and side property lines nor closer than 10 feet to the principal
structure, unless otherwise indicated in this chapter.
D. On corner lots, accessory structures shall not be located between any
portion of the principal structure and either street.
E. Accessory structures shall not exceed 10 feet in height from grade,
except for accessory dwellings units. In case of accessory structures
that serve as outdoor storage sheds associated with a principal
residential structure, the height limit shall be measured from grade for
each level of the structure.
F. No part of any such structure, with the exception of accessory dwelling
units as defined herein, shall be designed or used for sleeping purposes,
and no cooking fixtures shall be placed or permitted therein.
G. Pools are subject to the accessory use provisions herein and subject to a
building permit.
H. Outdoor play equipment, such as swing sets and similar large
recreational structures which are typically anchored to the ground and
are not easily relocated, shall be placed in side or rear yards.
§ 260-45 IRWIN CODE § 260-50
1:514
§ 260-50. Swimming pools.
A private swimming pool shall be permitted as an accessory use in the R-H
Zoning District for one- or two-family dwellings only, provided the following
conditions are met:
§ 260-51. Townhouse units per building.
There shall be a maximum of six units per building.
A. A swimming pool accessory use may be located within a rear yard,
subject to the setback requirements for accessory uses.
B. A swimming pool shall be enclosed by a fence or other enclosure at
least four feet in height above the adjacent ground level, which pool
shall be locked when unattended by an adult in order to prevent
accidental or unauthorized entry.
C. All lights used for illumination of the pool area shall be appropriately
located or shielded to eliminate direct sight of light bulbs from outside
the property lines.
D. Portable pools and children's pools shall be covered or protected in a
manner to prevent access by children of tender age when unattended,
unless and until the children are attended by an adult over 21 years of
age. They are only permitted in the Borough from May 1 through
September 30.
§ 260-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-51
1:515

ARTICLE VII
Commercial-Business, Residential Zone (C-B-R)
§ 260-52. Purpose.
The C-B-R, Commercial-Business, Residential District has been established
within residential and commercial areas of Main Street, Pennsylvania
Avenue and other areas within the Borough of Irwin to provide locations for
retail sales, personal services and offices as well as residential uses. It shall
be the purpose of this district to provide for the routine shopping needs of
the surrounding residential areas and to preserve the character and intent
of the district.
§ 260-53. Permitted land uses.
Per § 260-13, Table 1, Table of Permitted and Special Exception Uses.111
§ 260-54. Area and bulk requirements.
Per § 260-99, Table 2, Area and Bulk Standards.112
§ 260-55. Building height.
The maximum height of a building is 65 feet and seven stories.
§ 260-56. Performance standards.
All construction shall substantially conform in street orientation.
§ 260-57. Accessory structures and uses.
A. Customary and incidental accessory structures and uses shall be
regulated as follows:
(1) Accessory structures shall be subordinate in size to the principal
structure on the lot.
(2) Accessory structures shall not be placed within the front setback. If
placed in side yard, accessory structures shall not be located closer
to the street than the front building line of the principal structure.
(3) Accessory structures shall not be located closer than 10 feet to the
rear and side property lines nor closer than 10 feet to the principal
structure, unless otherwise indicated in this chapter.
(4) On corner lots, accessory structures shall not be located between
any portion of the principal structure and either street.
111. Editor's Note: Table 1, the Table of Permitted and Special Exception Uses, is attached to
this chapter.
112. Editor's Note: Table 2, Area and Bulk Standards, is attached to this chapter.
§ 260-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-57
1:517
§ 260-58. Parking and loading, internal roadways.
The provisions of Article XIII, Parking and Loading, and Article XIV, Internal
Roadways, shall apply.
§ 260-59. Landscaping and screening.
The provisions of Article XV, Landscaping and Screening, shall apply.
§ 260-60. Signs.
The provisions of Article XVI, Signs, shall apply.
§ 260-61. (Reserved)113
(5) Accessory structures shall not exceed 25 feet in height from grade
feet or shall not be taller than the height of the principal structure,
whichever is lower.
(6) No part of any such structure shall be designed or used for sleeping
purposes, and no cooking fixtures shall be placed or permitted
therein.
(7) Pools are subject to the accessory use provisions herein and subject
to a building permit.
(8) Outdoor play equipment, such as swing sets and similar large
recreational structures which are typically anchored to the ground
and are not easily relocated, shall be placed in side or rear yards.
B. The permitted accessory buildings and uses include, but are not limited
to, the following:
(1) Storage of merchandise and goods normally carried in stock in
conjunction with the principal use on the same parcel or lot of
ground.
(2) Storage of goods used in, or produced by, manufacturing activities
on the same parcel or lot of ground.
(3) Off-street motor vehicle parking areas and loading and unloading
areas.
113. Editor's Note: Former § 260-61, Outdoor dining and sidewalk sales, was repealed
11-13-2019 by Ord. No. 985.
§ 260-57 IRWIN CODE § 260-61
1:518
ARTICLE VIII
Commercial-Highway Business, Route 30 Corridor Zone (C-H)
§ 260-62. Purpose.
The purpose of the C-H Commercial District is to provide reasonable
standards for the provision of general commercial and highway-oriented
commercial uses along the roadside in areas where a nucleus of such
uses already exists and where, due to the character of undeveloped land,
the designation of highway commercial uses is feasible. The standards
of this district are designed to minimize the access roads from major
thoroughfares, to minimize traffic congestion, and to provide for
architecturally attractive building facades and landscaping. The purpose of
a Commercial Highway District is to accommodate the needs of the highway
traveler and to serve as the retail marketing centers or shopping complexes
for the entire Borough.
§ 260-63. Permitted land uses.
Per § 260-13, Table 1, Table of Permitted and Special Exception Uses.114
§ 260-64. Area and bulk requirements.
Per § 260-99, Table 2, Area and Bulk Standards.115
§ 260-65. Building height. [Amended 3-8-2017 by Ord. No. 949]
§ 260-66. Performance standards.
All construction shall substantially conform in street orientation.
§ 260-67. Accessory structures and uses.
The permitted accessory buildings and uses include, but are not limited to,
the following:
A. The maximum height of any structure other than a tower-based
wireless communications facility is 65 feet or seven stories high.
B. The maximum height of any tower-based wireless communications
facility is 100 feet. A variance may be requested on the basis that a gap
in coverage cannot be eliminated through the use of a tower less than
100 feet in height and that there are no other locations that can
eliminate the gap in coverage without a variance. A variance from the
height restriction cannot exceed 50 feet from the limit, for a total
permissible height of 150 feet.
114. Editor's Note: Table 1, the Table of Permitted and Special Exception Uses, is included as
an attachment to this chapter.
115. Editor's Note: Table 2, Area and Bulk Standards, is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 260-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-67
1:519
§ 260-68. Parking and loading, internal roadways.
The provisions of Article XIII, Parking and Loading, and Article XIV, Internal
Roadways, shall apply.
§ 260-69. Landscaping and screening.
The provisions of Article XV, Landscaping and Screening, shall apply.
§ 260-70. Signs.
The provisions of Article XVI, Signs, shall apply.
§ 260-71. Development guidelines.
A. Storage of merchandise and goods normally carried in stock in
conjunction with the principal use on the same parcel or lot of ground.
B. Storage of goods used in, or produced by, manufacturing activities on
the same parcel or lot of ground.
C. Off-street motor vehicle parking areas and loading and unloading areas.
A. When possible, as determined by the Borough Engineer, a proposed
development shall share ingress and egress with surrounding existing
developments and proposed developments. This will limit the amount of
traffic entering and exiting Route 30. The goal is to have combined
entrances and exits where retail stores, restaurants and other facilities
share a combined parking space and shared ingress and egress onto the
Route 30 corridor.
B. The potential development shall not change the character of the district
as stated in § 260-62 above. Buildings shall not exceed the maximum
building heights, maximum widths, and maximum square footages. The
proposed developments shall not create a visual impact on the district
due to the bulk and the size of the structure.
C. The proposed development shall not impact traffic patterns and/or the
volume of traffic within the district, based upon a review by the
Borough Engineer and a traffic study, if required by same.
D. The operation of the proposed development shall not impact the
character of the neighborhood. Operational impacts include, but are
not limited to, the following: management of traffic servicing the
development, unloading inventory, on-site operations that would cause
continuous use of the proposed development site. The proposed
development shall not impact the character of surrounding
developments. The proposed development shall not create operational
impacts that may create additional expenses for the surrounding
developments, including, but not limited to, the cost of monitoring the
operational impacts. The developer who creates operational impacts, as
described herein, may be charged additional, reasonable fees in order
§ 260-67 IRWIN CODE § 260-71
1:520
to cover the costs incurred by the Borough of Irwin for monitoring
and inspecting the operation of the development. If, at the sole and
exclusive discretion of the Borough of Irwin and/or the Zoning Hearing
Board, it is determined that the proposed development adversely
impacts the character of the surrounding areas, developments or
proposed developments within the Borough of Irwin, such operations
may be terminated by the Borough. The proposed development shall
not create health and safety hazards that affect environmental and
characteristic conditions of the district, including but not limited to
noise emissions or vibrations, excessive smoke and air pollution
emissions, and other potential safety and/or health hazards.
E. Buildings shall be clustered together to preserve natural and
landscaped open areas along the corridor. Buildings shall be arranged
in a manner that creates well-defined open space that is viewable from
the traveled portion of the corridor.
§ 260-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-71
1:521

ARTICLE IX
Industrial Zone (I)
§ 260-72. Purpose.
The purpose of the Industrial District is to provide appropriate space and
locations for a variety of industrial uses in ways that are least intrusive
to other land uses. It is further intended that these regulations permit
the development of certain functions, protect the surrounding areas from
incompatible industrial activities, and restrict the intrusion of nonrelated
uses, such as residential and commercial.
§ 260-73. Permitted land uses.
Per § 260-13, Table 1, Table of Permitted and Special Exception Uses.116
§ 260-74. Area and bulk requirements.
Per § 260-99, Table 2, Area and Bulk Standards.117
§ 260-75. Building height. [Amended 3-8-2017 by Ord. No. 949]
§ 260-76. Performance standards.
All construction shall substantially conform in street orientation.
§ 260-77. Accessory structures and uses.
The permitted accessory buildings and uses include, but are not limited to,
the following:
A. The maximum height of any structure other than a tower-based
wireless communications facility is 65 feet or seven stories high.
B. The maximum height of any tower-based wireless communications
facility is 100 feet. A variance may be requested on the basis that a gap
in coverage cannot be eliminated through the use of a tower less than
100 feet in height and that there are no other locations that can
eliminate the gap in coverage without a variance. A variance from the
height restriction cannot exceed 50 feet from the limit, for a total
permissible height of 150 feet.
A. Storage of merchandise and goods normally carried in stock in
conjunction with the principal use on the same parcel or lot of ground.
B. Storage of goods used in, or produced by, manufacturing activities on
the same parcel or lot of ground.
116. Editor's Note: Table 1, the Table of Permitted and Special Exception Uses, is included as
an attachment to this chapter.
117. Editor's Note: Table 2, Area and Bulk Standards, is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 260-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-77
1:523
§ 260-78. Parking and loading, internal roadways.
The provisions of Article XIII, Parking and Loading, and Article XIV, Internal
Roadways, shall apply.
§ 260-79. Landscaping and screening.
The provisions of Article XV, Landscaping and Screening, shall apply.
§ 260-80. Signs.
The provisions of Article XVI, Signs, shall apply.
C. Off-street motor vehicle parking areas and loading and unloading areas.
§ 260-77 IRWIN CODE § 260-80
1:524
ARTICLE X
Special Recreation and Conservation Zone (S-R-C)
§ 260-81. Purpose.
The purpose of the S-R-C Special Recreation and Conservation District is to
enhance the quality of life for Borough residents through the preservation
of public recreation parks and trails and the promotion, creation and
expansion of trails and parks.
§ 260-82. Permitted land uses.
Per § 260-13, Table 1, Table of Permitted and Special Exception Uses.118
§ 260-83. Area and bulk requirements.
Per § 260-99, Table 2, Area and Bulk Standards.119
§ 260-84. Building height.
§ 260-85. Performance standards.
All construction shall substantially conform in street orientation.
§ 260-86. Accessory structures and uses.
The permitted accessory buildings and uses include, but are not limited to,
the following:
§ 260-87. Parking and loading, internal roadways.
The provisions of Article XIII, Parking and Loading, and Article XIV, Internal
Roadways, shall apply.
§ 260-88. Landscaping and screening.
The provisions of Article XV, Landscaping and Screening, shall apply.
A. The maximum building height in the district is 35 feet (three stories).
B. The maximum height for accessory structures shall not exceed 18 feet.
A. Storage of equipment, supplies and goods normally carried in stock in
conjunction with the principal use on the same parcel or lot of ground.
B. Off-street motor vehicle parking areas and loading and unloading areas.
118. Editor's Note: Table 1, the Table of Permitted and Special Exception Uses, is included as
an attachment to this chapter.
119. Editor's Note: Table 2, Area and Bulk Standards, is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 260-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-89
1:525
§ 260-89. Signs.
The provisions of Article XVI, Signs, shall apply.
§ 260-89 IRWIN CODE § 260-89
1:526
ARTICLE XI
Pennsylvania Avenue Overlay Zone (PA-O)
§ 260-90. Purpose.
The purpose of the Pennsylvania Avenue District is to enhance the economic
growth of the neighborhood through allowing business development
opportunities in a predominately residential neighborhood. Unless
specifically identified in this article, the prevailing standards of the
underlying zone shall apply.
§ 260-91. Overlay boundaries.
The Pennsylvania Avenue Overlay District will be added to the Official
Zoning Map of Irwin, Pennsylvania. The boundaries are as follows: rightof-
way line of Pennsylvania Avenue, the southerly right-of-way of Grant
Avenue, the easterly right-of-way of Lombard Street, and the westerly rightof-
way line of Orchard Street, inclusive.
§ 260-92. Permitted land uses.
Per § 260-13, Table 1, Table of Permitted and Special Exception Uses.120
§ 260-93. Area and bulk requirements.
Per § 260-99, Table 2, Area and Bulk Standards.121
§ 260-94. Parking and loading, internal roadways.
The provisions of Article XIII, Parking and Loading, and Article XIV, Internal
Roadways, shall apply.
§ 260-95. Landscaping and screening.
A. All planting for this district is required within the setback area to act as
a buffer.
(1) Height requirements for vegetation are listed below:
Type
Minimum Height at
Planting
Maximum Height at
Maturity
(feet)
Evergreen shrub 18 inches 6
Evergreen tree 5 feet 15
Understory tree 5 feet 15
Canopy tree 10 feet 50
120. Editor's Note: Table 1, the Table of Permitted and Special Exception Uses, is attached to
this chapter.
121. Editor's Note: Table 2, Area and Bulk Standards, is attached to this chapter.
§ 260-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-95
1:527
§ 260-96. Signs.
The provisions of Article XVI, Signs, shall apply.
§ 260-97. Conditional use.
The Borough Council shall grant a conditional use only if the applicant
meets the burden of proving that the following criteria have been met:
(2) Only evergreen shrubs shall be planted in the front yard buffering
and setback zone.
B. Existing vegetation. Trees and shrubs on the development parcel
adjacent to the abutting agriculture, conservation or residential lot may
be used to satisfy the buffer area planting requirements, provided that
all performance standards regarding width, height and mix of types are
met. The applicant may use a combination of existing and new planting
to meet the buffer requirements.
C. Structures and parking.
(1) No structures or parking of any kind shall be permitted within the
planted buffer area. In addition, no structures or parking shall be
permitted within the required setback.
(2) The buffering and landscaping standards may be modified if any of
the following conditions are met:
(a) Natural land features such as topography of the same or better
buffering or screening effect as that to be achieved under the
requirements of this section.
(b) Innovative landscaping or architectural design is proposed for
the development such that an equivalent or superior buffering
or screening effect is achieved.
(c) The required screening and landscaping would be ineffective
at maturity due to the topography of either the lot to be
developed or the abutting lot.
D. Maintenance.
(1) The owner and/or owner's agent of the parcel developed under this
article shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair and
replacement of all screening and buffer planting.
(2) All plant materials shall be maintained in a healthy condition and
kept free of refuse and debris.
(3) All fences and walls shall be maintained in good repair. No
openings shall be permitted unless necessary to maintain buffer
planting. Any such opening shall have a gate that shall be secured
at all times when maintenance activities are not occurring.
§ 260-95 IRWIN CODE § 260-97
1:528
A. The development must not increase the flow of traffic within the
district. A traffic impact analysis must be completed by a transportation
engineer. The analysis must be inclusive of the following:
(1) The estimated number of daily trips and a.m. and p.m. peak hour
car trips that would be generated by the proposed use or uses when
the proposed facility is fully occupied and operational. Estimates
must be calculated using the most current edition of the Trip
Generation Report prepared by the Institute of Transportation
Engineers.
(2) The current levels-of-service of intersections within one-half-mile
radius of the subject site.
(3) The projected levels-of-service of the same intersections when the
proposed use is fully occupied and operational.
(4) A demonstration that any queuing or staging of vehicles will take
place on the development site.
B. If the traffic impact analysis indicates that the proposed uses would
generate more than 500 average daily trips or more than 75 additional
a.m. or p.m. peak hour car trips per day, the applicant shall develop a
traffic mitigation plan for approval by the Borough and all applicable
state regulatory agencies.
§ 260-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-97
1:529

Part 3
Development Standards
ARTICLE XII
Height, Bulk, Area and Density Provisions
§ 260-98. Intent.
Except as provided in this chapter, no building or structure shall be erected,
enlarged, altered, changed or otherwise modified on a lot unless such
building, structure or modification conforms to the height, bulk, area and
density regulations of the zone in which it is located.
§ 260-99. Area and bulk standards table.122
The conditions, standards, requirements and notes set forth in each district
and otherwise prescribed by this chapter are established as the basic
height, bulk, area and density regulations for the Borough. See Table 2,
Area and Bulk Standards, attached to this chapter.
§ 260-100. General exceptions to height, bulk, area and density
provisions.
A. Height exceptions. In all districts, spires, church steeples, chimneys,
cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, scenery lofts,
transmission lines or towers and distribution poles and lines, and
essential mechanical appurtenances may be erected to any height not
prohibited by other laws or ordinances. Standard television antenna
and similar appurtenances shall not exceed the maximum building
height in the district in which they are located by more than 10 feet.
This exception does not extend to communications towers and
antennas.
B. Front and side setback exception.
(1) All new construction will conform to the clearly prevailing setback
pattern of developed lots within the block fronting on the same
street, even when the prevailing front yard setbacks differ from
those required in the zoning district. When an unimproved lot is
situated between two lots, the existing front yard setback may be
adjusted to a depth equal to the average of the front yard setbacks
of the two adjacent lots. On Main Street, Oak Street, 2nd Street,
3rd Street, and 4th Street, all new construction proposed between
two existing buildings shall be required to have front and rear
setbacks equal to the average of the front and rear setbacks,
respectively, of the two existing buildings. Side setbacks shall not
be required for buildings constructed between two existing
buildings.
122. Editor's Note: Table 2, Area and Bulk Standards, is attached to this chapter.
§ 260-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-100
1:531
§ 260-101. Projections into required setbacks.
§ 260-102. Safety and vision.
In no event shall a building, architectural feature, or structure obstruct the
view of motorists or cause any other danger to motorists or pedestrians
within a public right-of-way. If in any event the public's safety is at risk the
owner will have to remove the safety and visual hazard within 30 days of
notice from the Borough. If the owner does not remove the hazard within
the 30 days, the Borough will have the right to remove the structure or
building or portion of the structure or building that is the hazard at the
owner's expense.
§ 260-103. Special requirements.
If the event a building's or structure's plans do not meet the minimum
requirements established within the chapter, a property owner has the right
to request a variance.
(2) A setback greater than or equal to the minimum required front yard
setback shall be provided along all portions of a corner lot, except
where the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Borough
Council that the provisions of a smaller setback will conform with
the clearly prevailing yard pattern on numerous existing developed
lots fronting on the same street.
A. Uncovered ramps designed in accordance with the American with
Disabilities Act, cornices, eaves, sills or other similar architectural
features, or other required means of egress, rain leads or chimneys or
other similar structures that do not include spaces usable by persons
may extend or project into a required yard not more than four feet.
Unenclosed and uncovered exterior stairways and fire escapes may
extend or project into a required side or rear yard not more than four
feet. In no case shall any of the above architectural features or means of
egress be constructed less than three feet from the property line.
B. Front porches or decks may extend into the required front yard. In no
case shall a front porch or deck extend more than eight feet into the
required front yard.
§ 260-100 IRWIN CODE § 260-103
1:532
ARTICLE XIII
Parking and Loading
§ 260-104. General requirements.
§ 260-105. Methods of providing required parking and loading.
All required parking or loading spaces shall be located on the same zoning
lot as the principal uses it serves, except as provided below.
A. Off-street parking shall be provided for all uses of land, structures and
building as well as for any expansions or change of such uses in
accordance with the requirements of this article.
B. Off-street loading space shall be provided for all commercial and
industrial uses as well as for any expansion of such uses or changes in
use requiring the regular delivery or shipping of goods, merchandise or
equipment to the site by trucks, in accordance with the requirements of
this article.
A. In lieu of actual construction of required on-site parking spaces, all or
any portion of the off-street parking required in this article may be
provided by satellite parking, particularly in the C-B-R District.
Required parking for use(s) on a zoning lot may be located on another
zoning lot, either by itself or combined with parking for other uses,
subject to certification by the Planning Commission, if the following
requirements have been met:
(1) The use being served by the off-site parking shall be a permitted
principal use, as provided for in this chapter, in the zoning district
within which the zoning lot containing such parking is located.
(2) The off-site parking spaces shall be located within 300 feet walking
distance of a public entrance to the structure or zoning lot
containing the use for which such spaces are required. A safe,
direct, attractive, lighted and convenient pedestrian route shall
exist or be provided between the off-site parking and the use being
served.
(3) Parking facilities shall be designed to connect with similar facilities
on adjacent zoning lots, where appropriate, to eliminate the need to
use abutting street(s) for cross movements.
B. Curbed islands shall be required at the ends of and between parking
aisles for traffic control and drainage control for all new nonresidential
development in excess of 10,000 gross square feet.
C. Except for single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings, all parking
spaces shall be delineated with painted lines.
D. Parking lots shall be sloped not less than 1/2% nor more than 6%
toward a storm drain if the lot is paved. When the slope extends
§ 260-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-105
1:533
§ 260-106. Design standards for handicapped parking spaces.
§ 260-107. Off-street parking and off-street loading and unloading.
downhill from the edge of a parking lot, the edge shall be protected
by a curb or stop bar. Stormwater on a paved lot shall be collected in
the lot and directed to a storm inlet or a recognized drainageway or
watercourse.
E. Parking lots shall be set back from side and rear property lines at least
two feet and from front lot lines at least five feet.
F. Where a parking lot designed for more than eight vehicles abuts
residential properties, the parking lot shall be screened along the
common property line by a hedge, fence or wall of not less than four
feet in height. In lieu of the hedge, fence or wall screen, the Planning
Commission may approve a natural change in grade along property
lines as the required screening.
A. Single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings shall be exempt from
the requirements of this section.
B. Parking facilities designed to accommodate 10 or more vehicles shall
provide, as part of the required number of parking spaces, one
handicapped parking space for every 50 parking spaces, or fraction
thereof. Such spaces shall be defined with pavement marking and a sign
and clearly reserved for exclusive use by handicapped persons.
C. Each required handicapped parking space shall be 10 feet by 20 feet. In
addition, each space shall be adjacent to a five-foot-wide access aisle.
The access aisle may be shared by two handicapped spaces by being
placed between them. However, one out of every four required
handicapped parking spaces shall be van accessible and have an
adjacent access aisle of eight feet instead of five feet.
D. Handicapped parking spaces shall be located in areas of less than fivepercent
slope in any direction.
E. All required handicapped spaces shall be constructed in compliance
with the UCC codes.
A. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of the table below for any land use which is instituted or
enlarged after the effective date of this chapter.
B. Each parking space shall be nine feet by 18 feet in size. Spaces shall be
so arranged as to permit the ingress, egress and regress of a vehicle to
each space without the requirement of moving any other vehicle in
order to do so.
C. Required parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as the use for
which they are provided or on an adjacent lot which is guaranteed for
§ 260-105 IRWIN CODE § 260-107
1:534
the use of off-street parking for the life of the use for which the parking
is provided. Such guarantee shall be in the form of a formal legal
agreement, such as a long-term lease or deed restriction, and shall be
subject to the approval of the Borough Council.
D. Where more than one use occupies a given lot, building or structure,
the Zoning Officer may require off-street parking which is equal to the
sum of required spaces for each such use.
E. In any district, in connection with every building or building group or
part thereof hereafter erected which is to be occupied by
manufacturing or commercial uses or other nonresidential uses which
rely upon the delivery or distribution of materials or merchandise, there
shall be provided and maintained on the same lot with such building offstreet
loading berths in accordance with the following minimum
standards:
(1) Each loading space shall be not less than 15 feet in width and 40
feet in length and shall have a minimum clearance of 14 vertical
feet and may occupy all or any part of required setback area.
F. Development and maintenance of parking areas and structures and
loading areas. Structures used as a parking garage or loading areas,
including a commercial parking lot, shall be developed and maintained
in accordance with the following requirements. Plans for such areas
shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer to comply with the following
regulations:
(1) Off-street parking areas or structures and off-street loading areas
shall be effectively screened by a fence or hedge. The screening
shall be on the sides which adjoin, abut, are adjacent to, or face
premises situated in any residential zone or institutional buildings.
(2) No off-street loading area or parking area or part thereof shall be
closer than 10 feet to any dwelling, school, hospital or institution
for human care located on an adjoining or adjacent lot.
(3) Any off-street parking area or off-street loading area shall be
surfaced with an asphaltic or portland cement pavement or similar
durable and dustless surface. All areas shall be marked so as to
provide for the orderly and safe loading, parking and storage of
automobiles or trucks.
(4) Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking or loading
area shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining
premises or traffic areas.
(5) Off-street parking facilities for multifamily structures containing
four or more families shall be adequately lighted.
§ 260-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-107
1:535
§ 260-108. Exceptions to paved parking.
The following situations are exempted from the paved parking
requirements.
§ 260-109. Exemptions and adjustments subject to Borough Council
approval.
(6) Parking shall be permitted on the roof of any structure designed for
such purpose, provided a four-foot wall is constructed around the
perimeter of the roof.
A. A parking lot used only for occasional use. (Occasional use is a use that
occurs on two or fewer days per week.)
B. When a proposed development is temporary in nature, the Planning
Commission may exempt the development from the paved parking
requirements of this section. The duration of the exception shall not
exceed six calendar months and shall be included as a condition of the
approved zoning permit.
A. In the instance where a change of use does not involve any building
enlargement of an existing building or building(s), constructed before
the effective date of this chapter, and the parking requirements that
would be applicable as a result of the proposed change cannot be
satisfied on such lot because there is not sufficient area available on the
lot that can practically be used for parking, then the developer need
only comply with the requirements to the extent that: a) parking space
is practically available on the lot where the development is located; and
b) if satellite parking space is not available, then it shall be a continuing
condition of the permit authorizing development on such lot that the
developer obtain satellite parking when it does become reasonably
available.
B. The minimum number of spaces required may be adjusted by the
Planning Commission when it has been determined that the reductions
are necessary to preserve a healthy tree or trees with a twelve-inch or
greater diameter from being damaged or removed and where the site
plan provides for the retention of said tree or trees. Off-street parking
requirements for developments on currently vacant parcels on Main
Street shall be waived.
§ 260-107 IRWIN CODE § 260-110
1:536
§ 260-110. Minimum off-street parking requirements.
Table 3
Table of Parking Requirements
Land Use
Minimum Off-Street Parking
Requirements
Adult-oriented business 5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA
Group day-care home 1 space per employee plus 1 space per 5
clients
Group home 1 space per employee plus 1 space per 5
residents (or, if residents are unable to
drive, 1 space per 1,000 square feet of
gross living area)
Hardware store 2 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA
Home occupation dwelling unit's requirements
Industrial park 1 space per employee plus 1 space per
vehicle used in the operation of the
industry plus 10 customer/visitor spaces
Industrial supply sales
establishment
2 spaces per 1,000 square feet GFA and 1
space per employee
Industry, heavy 1 space per employee plus 1 space per
vehicle used in the operation of the
industry plus 5 customers/visitor spaces
Industry, light 1 space per employee plus 1 space per
vehicle used in the operation of the
industry plus 5 customer/visitor spaces
Instructional studio 3 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Loft apartment 1 space per unit (recommended, but may
be waived by Borough Council)
Mobile home park 2 per dwelling unit
Nursing home 1 space per 4 beds and 1 space per
employee
Office building 3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of net floor
area up to 20,000 square feet plus 2 spaces
per 1,000 square feet
Organization, charitable/
fraternal/social
1 space for each 4 persons at maximum
capacity
Outdoor storage shed, private dwelling unit's requirements
Personal care home 1 space per employee plus 1 space per 5
residents (or, if residents are unable to
drive, 1 space per 1,000 square feet of
gross living area)
§ 260-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-110
1:537
Table 3
Table of Parking Requirements
Land Use
Minimum Off-Street Parking
Requirements
Personal service
establishment
3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA plus
1 per employee
Professional service
establishment
3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA plus
1 per employee
Public park/playground 1 space per 1,000 square feet of indoor
area or 15 spaces per acre of outdoor area
Recreational facility, private 1 space per 1,000 square feet of indoor
area or 15 spaces per acre of outdoor area
Restaurant/bar 1 space per 3 seats plus 1 space per 2
employees
Residential low density 1 off-street parking space per dwelling
unit. A property owner without off-street
parking available shall be allowed to park 1
vehicle in the rear of his home in the grass.
Rental property owners must provide 1
parking space per tenant.
Residential medium density a property owner without off-street parking
available shall be allowed to park 1 vehicle
in the rear of his home in the grass. Rental
property owners must provide 1 parking
space per tenant.
Residential high density a property owner without off-street parking
available shall be allowed to park 1 vehicle
in the rear of his home in the grass. Rental
property owners must provide 1 parking
space per tenant.
Retail establishment 3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA
Snack bar/shop 1 space per 50 square feet seating area
plus 1 space per 2 employees
Theater/performing arts
venue
1 space for each 4 persons at maximum
capacity
GFA: Gross Floor Area
§ 260-110 IRWIN CODE § 260-110
1:538
ARTICLE XIV
Internal Roadways
§ 260-111. General requirements.
§ 260-112. Design and arrangement.
A. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all
streets shall conform to the Official Map of the Borough. Where streets
are not shown on the Official Map, the arrangement and other design
standards of streets shall conform to the provisions set forth herein.
Every subdivision shall have access to a public street, except as may be
otherwise authorized herein.
B. The purpose of this article and all of its subsections now or hereafter
adopted is to regulate new street and road construction in order to
protect the safety and health and to provide for the general welfare of
the Borough and its inhabitants by providing procedures and
specifications for street and roadway construction within the Borough.
A. In general, all streets shall be continuous and in alignment with existing
streets and shall compose a convenient system to ensure circulation of
vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
B. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed street,
the newly proposed streets shall be planned and designed in order to
protect residential areas from heavy traffic and also to provide
separation between local and through traffic.
C. Streets shall be logically related to the topography so as to produce
usable lots and reasonable grades.
D. Half or partial streets shall not be permitted. Wherever a tract to be
subdivided borders an existing half or partial street, the remaining
portion of the street shall be platted within such tract.
E. Dead-end streets shall be prohibited except as stubs utilizing temporary
culs-de-sac to permit future street extension into adjoining tracts of
ground or when designed as permanent culs-de-sac of less than or
equal to 1,000 feet in length serving no more than 50 lots. Culs-de-sac
shall be a minimum of 250 feet in length, measured from the center line
of the intersecting street to the midpoint of the cul-de-sac. The paved
turnaround must have a minimum radius of 40 feet (eighty-foot
diameter) and a right-of-way radius of 50 feet (one-hundred-foot
diameter). Where the intersection of more than one cul-de-sac is
proposed, the maximum length of any section from point of origin and
through street shall not exceed 1,000 feet in length or serve more than
50 units.
F. Where a street is proposed to be extended into property proposed for
future development, a temporary hammerhead turnaround shall be
provided in an extension of the right-of-way onto the property proposed
§ 260-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-112
1:539
for future development. The extension of the right-of-way containing
the hammerhead turnaround shall not include any portion of frontage
for a residential lot.
G. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets
in new subdivisions shall make provision for the proper projection of
streets. Where a new subdivision adjoins unsubdivided land capable of
future subdivision, then the new streets shall be carried to the
boundaries of the tract proposed to be subdivided.
H. Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles; in any event, no street shall intersect another at less than 70°.
Intersections of more than two streets shall be avoided. Where this
proves impossible, such intersections shall be designed with care for
safety, and suitable curbs, barriers, signs and other devices may be
required. Streets entering opposite sides of another street shall be laid
out directly opposite one another.
I. Street intersections shall not be so numerous or so close to each other
as to impede the flow of traffic or as to create a safety hazard.
J. Clear sight triangles shall measure a minimum distance of 75 feet along
street center lines from their point of junction at all intersections unless
longer distances are required to provide adequate sight distance; no
structures or other obstructions to vision shall be permitted. A clear
sight triangle is defined as an area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by lines of sight between points on the center
lines at a given distance from the intersection of street lines.
K. The vacation of any street or part of a street dedicated for public use
shall not be approved if such vacation interferes with the uniformity of
the existing street pattern or any future street plans prepared for the
area.
L. A design speed of 30 miles per hour shall be utilized unless traffic
patterns and volumes dictate an increase. Said increase shall be as
approved by the Borough Engineer.
M. If undeveloped property has an alternative means of vehicular access, a
single-family lot in an adjoining recorded plan shall not be used as a
future right-of-way for a public street, private street or other vehicular
access.
N. These regulations shall apply to all streets and roads shown on plats of
residential subdivision containing four lots or parcels or more and for
all roads and streets shown on plats of subdivision of business,
commercial or industrial properties, regardless of the number of lots
shown thereon.
O. In subdivisions of residential properties containing three lots or fewer,
an exception may be granted by Borough Council wherein private
drives shown on laid plats may be built to a lesser standard than that of
§ 260-112 IRWIN CODE § 260-112
1:540
§ 260-113. Street grades.
§ 260-114. Vertical and horizontal curve design.
the provisions herein only if said private drives are to be privately
owned and maintained and are not to be dedicated to the Borough.
In that event, Council will establish such lesser standards subject to
conditions of ground and character of the development. Furthermore,
whenever a plat of residential subdivision depicts three lots or fewer,
and the streets thereon are to be privately owned and maintained and
not dedicated to the Borough, no further subdivision of the land area
shown thereon shall be permitted, and such restriction shall be marked
on the residential subdivision plat.
P. All streets shall also conform to the requirements of the Westmoreland
County Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. Where the
requirements of these specifications and the county ordinance conflict,
the provisions herein will prevail.
A. Profiles. No street grade shall be less than 1% and shall not exceed 10%
for any collector streets or roadways and 14% for any local streets and
roadways in the Borough. Streets shall have a grade not to exceed 5%
for a distance within 50 feet of the street right-of-way line for any
intersecting street.
B. Cross section. The gradients of streets shall be 0.02 foot per foot, and
the cross section shall conform to the dimensions and depths as set
forth on Detail No. 1, Typical Street Section, as the same is attached
hereto and made a part hereof by reference.123
A. Vertical curves in profile design. For all streets and roadways in the
Borough, profile grades shall be connected by vertical curves as
established in the American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials (AASHTO) Policy on Geometric Design of
Highways and Streets, latest edition; however, the minimum vertical
curve length shall be 100 feet.
B. Horizontal curvatures shall conform to the following minimum centerline
radii:
(1) Collector streets and roadways: 325 feet.
(2) Local streets and roadways: 150 feet.
(3) A minimum fifty-foot tangent shall be introduced between reverse
curves on all streets and roadways.
C. Minimum sight distance for vertical curves shall be as follows:
(1) Streets longer than 500 feet: 200 feet.
123. Editor's Note: Street Details are attached to this chapter.
§ 260-112 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-114
1:541
§ 260-115. Minimum required street improvements.
(2) Streets shorter than 500 feet: 100 feet.
A. Standards. The gradations and consistency of all materials and the
methods of construction, unless otherwise authorized herein, shall be in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Specifications, Form 408, as amended.
B. Notice. No road construction activity shall be permitted in the Borough
until and unless the contractor shall notify the Borough at least one
week in advance of commencing the work. The contractor shall at all
times during the progress of the work have a competent superintendent
or foreman on the job site. Inspection of the road work shall be done by
representatives of Borough Council and/or the Borough Engineer.
C. Grading.
(1) The entire width of the right-of-way of each street in a proposed
subdivision shall be graded and suitably prepared for the
installation of paving, drainage structures, curbs, gutters and
sidewalks in accordance with the appropriate standards for the
class of street.
(2) The subgrade shall be free of sod, vegetation matter or other
unsuitable material. Where poor subsurface drainage conditions
exist, adequate drainage shall be installed. The subgrade
construction shall conform to minimum standards as adopted by
the Borough.
(3) All utility lines, underdrains, sewer lines, including laterals and
service lines, being placed in the right-of-way shall be installed
prior to the commencement of road construction at the following
minimum depths:
(a) Sewer lines: six feet.
(b) Waterlines: four feet.
(c) Gaslines: 2 1/2 feet.
(d) Telephone, electrical and television cable: two feet.
(4) All backfill for utilities under the roadway shall be only 2A modified
stone compacted at the optimum material moisture content and
placed in not greater than eight-inch lifts.
D. Preparation of road subgrade.
(1) The subgrade shall be well-rolled and fine-graded to a tolerance of
not more than 0.1 foot above and 0.2 foot below the grade as shown
on the plan.
§ 260-114 IRWIN CODE § 260-115
1:542
(2) All soft, plastic or rock areas in the subgrade shall be undercut to a
depth of at least 12 inches or more, if deemed necessary by the
Borough Engineer, and shall be refilled with approved materials
(including possible use of geotextile) and by methods approved by
the Borough Engineer.
(3) The subgrade shall conform to the same crown as the paved
surface.
(4) Prior to the placement of subbase or base course material, the
subgrade shall be proof-rolled with a loaded tri-axle truck with a
gross weight of 75,500 pounds and approved by the Borough
Engineer. In the alternative, in those circumstances where the
Borough Engineer, in his sole discretion, shall deem it necessary,
the subgrade shall be tested utilizing a compaction meter to ensure
proper compaction prior to the placement of the subbase or base
course material.
(5) french drains shall be installed pursuant to the specifications set
forth on Detail No. 1,124 as attached hereto and made a part hereof,
said french drains to be constructed pursuant to the provisions of
§ 260-116 hereof. Cross drains may be required where persistent
wet conditions exist within the road base or as may be directed by
the Borough during inspection of the road base. Such cross drains,
if required, shall be connected to the road drainage system.
E. Preparation of road subsurface. The subsurface shall consist of two
inches of 2A modified stone, free of any solids and graded in accordance
with Pennsylvania Department of Transportation specifications for
material. Materials shall be spread evenly over the entire width of the
proposed road or street.
F. Preparation of road base. The base course material shall consist of
eight inches of compacted PennDOT No. 4 aggregate (AASHTO No. 1),
installed as set forth in this section. The base course shall be
constructed in two layers. The bottom layer shall consist of five inches
of No. 4 aggregate spread evenly, compacted to a thickness of four
inches by use of a ten-ton vibratory roller to compact each layer. After
the bottom layer has been properly placed, the entire surface shall be
choked with PennDOT No. 1A (AASHTO No. 10) screenings, swept into
place and rolled until all void spaces have been properly filled. The top
layer shall be applied in the same manner as the bottom layer and with
the same specifications. (All materials shall be in accordance with
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation specifications.)
G. Preparation of road surface. The surface course shall consist of two
courses, a binder course and a wearing course of hot-mixed, hot-laid
asphaltic concrete.
124. Editor's Note: Street Details are attached to this chapter.
§ 260-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-115
1:543
§ 260-116. Subsurface drainage.
All roadways and streets constructed in the Borough shall provide for the
proper flow of stormwater and natural water in the areas of new streets and
roads as follows:
(1) The binder course shall consist of a minimum of three inches after
compaction of Superpave Asphalt Mixture Design, HMA Binder
Course, PG 64-22, 0.3 to <3 million ESALs, 19 mm mix, meeting the
specifications of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Publication 408, as amended, and shall be laid in the manner
described therein. After the binder of a new road or street is
completed, it shall be sealed using 0.3 gallon of E-3 oil and 25
pounds of PennDOT No. 1B (AASHTO No. 8) stone per square yard
of road surface. However, during the time frame of September 15
through and including October 31 of any year, said sealing must be
done utilizing 3/4 inch after compaction of Superpave Asphalt
Mixture Design, HMA Wearing Course, PG 64-22, 0.3 to <3 million
ESALs, 9.5 mm mix fine grade, meeting the requirements of
PennDOT Publication 408, as amended, and shall be laid in the
manner prescribed therein. Sealing roads in this manner shall not
relieve the developer of the placement of the one-and-one-half-inch
wearing course as hereinafter set forth.
(2) The wearing course shall consist of a minimum of 1 1/2 inches after
compaction of Superpave Asphalt Mixture Design, HMA Wearing
Course, PG 64-22, 0.3 to <3 million ESALs or 3 to <30 million
ESALs, 9.5 mm mix, fine grade meeting the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Publication 408, as
amended, and shall be laid in the manner prescribed therein.
(3) The wearing course shall only be placed after sufficient time has
passed to ensure that no further settling will take place. The
wearing course shall only be placed after an inspection has
determined no sags, low spots, or depressions exist which could
adversely affect the integrity of the wearing course. Any defects
found shall be repaired prior to the placement of the wearing
course. Subject to said inspection, the wearing course shall be
placed no later than the time when 90% of the lots abutting on said
road or portion thereof shall have been developed or when three
years have passed from the placement of the binder course,
whichever occurs first.
A. The french drain is to be constructed and shall be placed along the edge
of the road on the uphill side, except that, when the road has an
elevated berm on both sides, the french drain shall be constructed
under both edges. The size of the trench shall be a minimum of 14
inches wide. The drain shall lead into storm inlets with six-inch
perforated plastic pipe placed in the trench four inches from the bottom
of said trench. The french drain ditch shall have PennDOT No. 2B
§ 260-115 IRWIN CODE § 260-116
1:544
§ 260-117. Berms and curbs.
§ 260-118. Catch basins, pipe and endwalls.
(AASHTO No. 57) aggregate placed in it and shall not be choked with
fines.
B. No drainage from dwellings or other buildings, nor downspouts for roof
drainage water shall be piped to the road cartway. The developer shall
provide a minimum of two taps from the storm sewer system for each
lot or parcel in the subdivision for the control of roof drains and other
drains on the lot. These taps must be comprised of four-inch plastic
pipes properly connected to the storm sewer and extended to the edge
of the right-of-way line. Storm drainage from dwellings and roof
drainage water must be connected to the storm sewer system or to an
eight-inch PVC pipe to be provided specifically for roof drains and
french drains.
C. All french drains or storm sewers must be piped to the approved
stormwater management facility for the development.
A. Berms. Each street or road constructed in the Borough shall have a
berm of at least four feet wide at the lower side of the road and 10 feet
wide at the uphill side, and, if not undisturbed, virgin soil shall be
compacted in six- to eight-inch layers. Any slopes or embankments
beyond the four-foot or ten-foot area shall be sloped at one foot vertical
to 1 1/2 feet horizontal or better and shall be seeded with perennial rye
grass at a rate of four pounds per 1,000 square feet and covered with
mulch.
B. Curbs. All new streets or roadways constructed in the Borough shall
have bituminous wedge-type curbs constructed with the asphalt
wearing course material five inches high by 12 inches wide.
A. Catch basins shall be designed in conformity with the drawings and
specifications set forth on Detail No. 2,125 as the same is attached to this
chapter and made a part hereof by reference. Said drawings and
specifications are for a standard catch basin which shall be two feet by
four feet in size and placed at a maximum depth of six feet. Precast or
poured-in-place reinforced-concrete-type catch basins shall be used,
although no more than two sections shall be permitted for precast catch
basins. Any catch basin proposed to deviate from the standards set
forth herein and on Detail No. 2 shall only be permitted upon special
approval by the designated representatives of the Borough on a caseby-
case basis based upon individual plans and specifications prepared
by the developer or contractor.
B. Catch basins are to be placed no greater than 350 feet apart where the
road grade is between 1% and 5% and no greater than 250 feet apart
125. Editor's Note: Street Details are attached to this chapter.
§ 260-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-118
1:545
§ 260-119. Bridges.
for roads having a grade between 5% and 10%. For road grades in
excess of 10%, calculations must be provided to ensure the
effectiveness of the catch basin system and the proper placement
thereof.
C. Pipe for storm sewers shall be a minimum of fifteen-inch reinforced
concrete pipe or as may be required by the size of the watershed. This
pipe shall be in accordance with the standards and specifications set
forth in the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Form 408, as
amended. All natural springs becoming apparent during construction
shall be piped to the nearest storm sewer or watershed with proper
drainpipe.
D. In lieu of reinforced concrete pipe, a polyethylene pipe with a
corrugated exterior and smooth interior may be utilized so long as said
pipe shall be a minimum sixteen-gauge and shall conform to the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Form
408, as amended.
E. All catch basins installed pursuant to the provisions hereof shall include
a cast-iron frame as is more fully described on Detail No. 3,126 which is
attached to this chapter and made a part hereof by reference.
F. All catch basins installed or placed within any newly developed roadway
shall be equipped with bicycle-safe, heavy-duty, cast-iron grates. This
grate is more fully described on Detail No. 4,127 which is attached to this
chapter and made a part hereof by reference.
G. All endwalls shall be poured-in-place or precast reinforced concrete
conforming to the drawings and specifications set forth on Detail No.
5,128 which is attached to this chapter and made a part hereof by
reference.
A. All bridges or similar structures to be constructed on any Borough
roads or any road which is to be dedicated to the Borough for
acceptance must be designed in accordance with the requirements of
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation's Design Manual and
Part 4, as amended, entitled "Structures," as well as the requirements
of the American Association of State and Highway Transportation
Officials (AASHTO) Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges.
B. Plans and design calculations meeting the foregoing requirements shall
be submitted for review and approval by the Borough Engineer.
126. Editor's Note: Street Details are attached to this chapter.
127. Editor's Note: Street Details are attached to this chapter.
128. Editor's Note: Street Details are attached to this chapter.
§ 260-118 IRWIN CODE § 260-119
1:546
§ 260-120. Calendar and weather limitations.
Road construction work, such as filling, berming, subgrade, fine-grade
construction, base construction, surface construction or paving, shall not
be commenced before April 1 and shall be completed by October 31 of the
same year. It is assumed that the weather conditions between these dates
will be ideal for road construction. However, if adverse weather conditions
occur between these dates, the contractor or builder must abide by the
judgment of the Borough Council in regard to permissible construction
weather conditions. Work shall only be permitted before or after these dates
on a day-by-day basis as approved by the Borough Council.
§ 260-121. Special requirements and services.
C. All materials and workmanship for construction must be in compliance
with the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Specifications
Publication 408, as amended.
D. All bridges to be constructed in accordance with the terms hereof shall
be of reinforced concrete, either poured-in-place or utilizing precast
concrete members. The use of steel beam structures will be subject to
specific approval on a case-by-case basis by the Borough Council.
A. Street sign. The contractor or developer, after the street is complete
with binder course and after the performance bond has been provided,
and as soon as the first dwelling is being occupied, shall request the
Borough to install a road sign and shall be required to pay the cost of
the sign and of the installation of the work. The cost is to be the actual
cost to the Borough for the materials and labor. Following the
installation of said sign and the payment of the costs for that
installation, the Borough shall thereafter be solely responsible for the
maintenance thereof at the expense of the developer until the final
acceptance and adoption of the street by the Borough and upon
expiration of the required maintenance bond.
B. Snow removal. The contractor or developer, after having met all the
above-mentioned requirements, may request that the Borough provide
snow removal to the residents of the new street or road. This service is
rendered by the Borough; provided, however, that the contractor or
developer assumes all responsibility for the effect of the snow removal,
including plowing, salt, cinders, etc., on the road surface.
C. Fire hydrants. Where the subdivision is serviced by a waterline
sufficient to enable the installation of fire hydrants, the developer shall
pay the cost of the required fire hydrants set forth on said plan as the
placement thereof is approved by the Borough Fire Chief. The location
of said hydrants shall be such that all dwellings will be within a sixhundred-
foot radius of a hydrant. The cost of a hydrant is charged to the
governing body by the appropriate water authority. The developer shall
post moneys sufficient to cover the cost of the installation of said fire
§ 260-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-121
1:547
§ 260-122. Submission of plans and profiles.
§ 260-123. Permits and inspection fees.
hydrants with the Borough Council at the time of application for a road
construction permit.
A. Construction and paving plans. The paving width, curving
requirements, grade and type of paving shall be established by and
noted on detailed plans and profiles submitted to the Borough Council.
Incorporated herein as Detail No. 1129 is a typical road section which
establishes paving width and specifications.
B. Drainage plans. Detailed plans of the existing and proposed drainage
facilities of said street or road and contiguous territory shall be
submitted to the Borough Council for its approval. When necessary, said
plans shall address and be in conformity with the provisions of the
Borough's stormwater management requirements.130 Said plans must
cover a scope large enough to show the effect of the facility or facilities
on any land or stream above and any land or stream below. This scope
shall be determined by the Borough Council or the Borough Engineer
and must be set forth on a separate plan.
C. Certification of plans. All plans, profiles or drawings required under the
provisions of this chapter shall include a certification by a Pennsylvaniaregistered
professional engineer attesting that all elements of the plan
are in conformity with the Borough's Code and any applicable state
regulations.
D. Number of plans. Plans and profiles for streets, roadways, drainage or
other items required under the terms of this chapter must be submitted
to the Borough on drawings not to exceed 24 inches by 36 inches.
Match sheets may be used where necessary. One Mylar copy and four
prints must be provided.
E. As-built drawings. Within 30 days of the completion of the street,
roadway and/or drainage system, the Borough Engineer's office shall be
supplied detailed Mylar drawings of said streets, roadways and/or
drainage systems as the same have been completed. Said drawings
must include a certification by a Pennsylvania-registered professional
engineer that all elements of the approved plan have been constructed
as designed and approved.
A. Permit. A road construction permit shall be secured by the developer or
contractor before starting any work or road construction. The Borough
Council shall, from time to time, by resolution, fix the cost of such
permit.
129. Editor's Note: Street Details are attached to this chapter.
130. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Stormwater Management.
§ 260-121 IRWIN CODE § 260-123
1:548
B. Inspection fees. Inspection shall be required for all phases of road
construction work: subgrading, base installation, binder placement and
finish course applications. The contractor and/or builder, prior to any
approval by the Borough Council, must pay an inspection fee in an
amount not less than the actual cost of the inspection.
§ 260-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-123
1:549

ARTICLE XV
Landscaping and Screening
§ 260-124. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article is to establish standards for general landscaping,
green space and required screening applicable to all districts. When
landscape material is used for screening it shall incorporate plant types and
sizes that will promote healthy landscapes. These standards are intended
and designed to assure compatibility of uses and to enhance the health,
safety and general welfare of the residents of the Borough.
§ 260-125. Minimum requirements.
The requirements in this article are minimum requirements, and under no
circumstances shall they preclude the ability of the property owner and the
Borough from agreeing to more extensive landscaping.
§ 260-126. General landscaping.
§ 260-127. Green space.
A. Except as may be required or permitted in this article, provided by
development contract or approval by the Borough Council, the site area
remaining after providing for off-street parking, off-street loading,
sidewalks, driveways, building site and/or other requirements shall be
landscaped using ground cover such as mulch or landscape rock, turf
grass, ornamental grass, shrubs, trees other acceptable vegetation or
treatment generally used in landscaping prior to the date of building
occupancy. Fences, walls or trees placed upon utility easements are
subject to removal at the cost of the property owner if required for the
maintenance or improvement of the utility.
B. Except for single-family and two-family lots and parcels developed prior
to the adoption of this chapter, new development shall have a mixture of
evergreen and deciduous trees planted at the rate of one tree per 3,000
square feet or portion thereof of any unpaved open area remaining after
development for which specific landscaping requirements do not
appear in this article. Required trees may be planted at uniform
intervals, at random or in groupings. Newly planted trees shall comply
with the requirements of this chapter. Trees retained on site following
development can be subtracted from the total required plantings.
A. Nonresidential site development and nonresidential site
redevelopment. New developments shall designate a minimum of 15%
of the total site area for green space. A minimum of 50% of the required
green space shall be located along the street frontage with the most
traffic and visibility. The fifty-percent requirement shall be located
across the street from or adjacent to residentially zoned or used
property. Stormwater retention areas when designed as rain gardens
may be used to meet the green space requirement. When development
§ 260-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-127
1:551
§ 260-128. Screening.
or redevelopment occurs on existing sites the required green space may
be reduced to 10% of the total site and the fifty-percent distribution
requirements remain in effect.
B. Incentives for additional green space. In addition to the fifteen-percent
minimum green space requirement, incentives are available for
creating additional green space and/or adding landscaping to the site.
For every five-percent increase in green space area, off-street parking
requirements can be reduced by 10%. Thirty percent or greater green
space provisions will allow up to a thirty-percent reduction in total
parking spaces required.
A. Landscaping plan. Prior to approval of a building permit, a landscape
plan and specification requirements shall be approved, including size of
plantings, species and site location, as follows. Said landscape plan
shall be developed with an emphasis upon the following areas:
(1) The boundary or perimeter of the proposed site adjoining other
property.
(2) The immediate perimeter of the structure.
(3) The perimeter of parking and loading areas.
B. All landscaping incorporated in said plan shall conform to the following
standards and criteria.
(1) All plants must at least equal the following minimum size:
(a) Evergreen tree: six feet in height.
(b) Canopy tree: 2 to 2 1/2 inches in caliper.
(c) Understory tree: six feet in height, 1 1/2 inches in caliper.
(d) Evergreen and deciduous shrubs: 18 inches in height; four feet
at maturity.
(2) Spacing.
(a) Landscape material used for required screening shall consist
of two rows of closely spaced, staggered evergreen plantings
planted no more than 15 feet on center, which can be
reasonably expected to form the required visual barrier
measured at least six feet above ground level within three
years of planting. A single row of evergreen screening planted
10 feet on center may be substituted if documentation is
provided that insufficient room exists to plant a staggered
double row. A single row of evergreen material shall provide a
visual barrier measured at least six feet above ground level
within three years of planting.
§ 260-127 IRWIN CODE § 260-128
1:552
§ 260-129. R-L and R-M lots.
Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, one- and two-family dwelling
lots shall have all yards started with seed or sod.
§ 260-130. R-H developments.
§ 260-131. Nonresidential uses.
(b) Deciduous plant materials may be used, provided that the
minimum required year-around opacity visual screen is
maintained. Wherever screening is required adjacent to
residentially zoned or used property, the screening shall be
installed prior to the beginning of site grading and general
construction, except where such activity would result in
damage to the screening.
(3) Design.
(a) All exterior areas within the property lines (or beyond, if side
grading extends beyond), not paved or designated as drives,
parking or storage, must be at a minimum established with
seed or sod.
(b) Newly established or created turf slopes in excess of 3:1 are
prohibited unless approved by the Borough.
(c) All ground areas under the building roof overhang must be
landscaped as described in this chapter.
(4) Landscape guarantee. All new plants shall be guaranteed for one
full year from the time planting has been completed. All plants shall
be alive and in satisfactory growth at the end of the guarantee
period or shall be replaced.
A. General site landscaping. In addition to the requirement in § 260-126,
four shrubs shall be planted per dwelling unit. Shrubs used as required
screening shall not be counted in meeting these requirements.
B. Privacy screen. Where multiple-family dwellings are designed so that
rear open areas or patio areas front onto a public or private street, an
eighty-percent opacity six-foot-high landscaped privacy screen shall be
provided. The screen shall consist of a combination of trees, shrubs,
berms and/or fences (no walls). Screening fences shall not be
constructed of corrugated metal, corrugated fiberglass, sheet metal,
chain link or wire mesh. Screening fences should be built with material
compatible with that of the main building.
A. General site landscaping. All developed portions of the site shall
conform to the general landscaping requirements in § 260-126 except
where screening is required.
§ 260-128 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-131
1:553
§ 260-132. Parking lots.
B. Screening. A six-foot-high fence or landscaped screen, providing eightypercent
year-round opacity, shall be required wherever a nonresidential
use abuts directly upon land zoned or used for residential purposes or is
across an alley from land used or zoned for residential purposes. Berms
may be used as part of the six-foot screen height but shall not be used to
achieve more than three feet of the required height. Shrubs are to be
planted along the outside of a fence or wall (except when adjacent to an
alley) with a maximum spacing of five per 40 lineal feet. Screening
fences and walls shall not be constructed of corrugated metal,
corrugated fiberglass, sheet metal, chain link or wire mesh. Screening
fences and walls should be built with material compatible with that of
the main building.
A. All exposed parking areas of 10 or more required spaces in a front and
side street yard shall be screened with landscaping not less than three
feet or more than four feet in height. The landscaping shall maintain a
year-round fifty-percent opacity.
B. When a parking lot is adjacent to or across an alley from a residential
use or zone, the required screen height shall be increased to six feet.
C. A berm may be used as part of the screening for off-street parking, in
which case the berm shall be no more than two feet in height.
Landscaping on a berm shall maintain eighty-percent year-round
opacity not less than three or more than four feet in height.
D. A four-foot-high wall or fence constructed of masonry, brick, wood or
vinyl may be used for required screening. The area between the parking
lot and a wall or fence shall be planted with grass or established with
landscape material.
E. Screening fences and walls shall not be constructed of corrugated
metal, corrugated fiberglass, sheet metal, chain link or wire mesh.
Screening fences and walls should be built with material compatible
with that of the main building. Screening fences and walls shall not be
constructed of corrugated metal, corrugated fiberglass, sheet metal,
chain link or wire mesh. Screening fences and walls should be built with
material compatible with that of the main building.
F. Shrubs planted along the outside of a fence will have a maximum
spacing of five per 40 lineal feet. Off-street parking facilities with
internal parking rows of 20 or more spaces shall have landscaped
islands at the ends of the rows. Landscaped islands shall be a minimum
of six feet wide and extend the length of the parking row. The islands
shall be contained within raised, curbed beds.
G. At least 50% of each interior landscaped area shall be covered by living
plant material, such as sod, shrubs, ground cover or trees.
§ 260-131 IRWIN CODE § 260-132
1:554
§ 260-133. Screening of equipment.
Ground-mounted mechanical equipment, such as air compressors, pool
pumps, transformers, sprinkler pumps, air conditioners, and similar
equipment, shall be screened on all sides except those facing a building.
An eighty-percent opacity visual screen shall exceed the vertical height of
the equipment being screened by at least six inches. A three-foot open
area shall be maintained around such equipment to facilitate repairs. In
residential districts, these screening requirements only apply to streetfacing
ground-mounted equipment.
§ 260-134. Installation and maintenance.
The following standards shall be observed where installation and
maintenance of landscape materials are required:
H. It is not the intent of this section to relieve a project from the
installation of islands or peninsulas that are necessary to promote the
safe and efficient flow of traffic, regardless of parking lot size.
I. No landscaping or screening shall interfere with driver or pedestrian
visibility for vehicles entering, circulating or exiting the premises.
A. Installation. Landscaping shall be installed in the manner
recommended by the manufacturer. Wire and rope caging and
nondegradable burlap around tree root balls shall be removed during
planting. Landscaping along the perimeter shall be installed prior to
construction, except where such landscaping would be destroyed
during construction.
B. Protection from vehicles. Landscaping shall be protected from vehicles
through use of curbs or wheel stops in parking lots. Landscape areas
shall be elevated above the pavement to a height that is adequate to
protect the plants from snow removal, salt and other hazards.
C. Seeding or sodding/off-season planting requirements. Lots or parcels
shall be established with seed or sod prior to occupancy or property
use. If development is completed during the off-season when plants
cannot be installed, the owner shall provide a performance guarantee
to ensure installation of required landscaping in the next planting
season.
D. Maintenance. Landscaping required by this chapter shall be maintained
in a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance, free from refuse and debris.
A healthy, neat and orderly appearance includes proper pruning,
regular mowing of lawns, and removal of all litter and the replacement
of dead and unhealthy plant material. All unhealthy and dead plant
material shall be replaced immediately upon notice from the Borough,
unless the season is not appropriate for planting, in which case such
plant material shall be replaced at the beginning of the next planting
season.
§ 260-132 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-134
1:555
§ 260-135. Suggested and undesirable plant material.
E. Landscaping shall be maintained to ensure it does not encroach into
adjoining properties or public right-of-ways. Encroachment includes
both root systems and any plant material growth to eight feet above
grade.
F. Maintenance of a required buffer plantings shall be the responsibility of
the individual property owners or, if applicable, the homeowner's
association.
G. All constructed or manufactured landscape elements, such as but not
limited to benches, retaining walls, edging, and so forth, shall be
maintained in good condition and neat appearance. Rotted,
deteriorated, or damaged landscape elements shall be repaired,
replaced, or removed. Replacement of landscape materials or plantings
in a required buffer shall be consistent with the original screen design.
All repair or replacement of plantings in a required buffer shall be done
within 10 days of written notification from the Borough.
A. All plant materials must meet the minimum standards set forth by the
American National Standards Institute. Landscape species shall be
indigenous or proven adaptable to the climate, but shall not be invasive
species.
B. Landscape materials shall be tolerant of specific site conditions,
including but not limited to heat, drought and salt.
C. Existing healthy plant material may be utilized to satisfy landscaping
requirements, provided it meets the minimum plant sizes specified
herein.
§ 260-134 IRWIN CODE § 260-135
1:556
ARTICLE XVI
Signs
§ 260-136. Intent.
It is the intent of this article to authorize the use of signs whose types,
sizes and arrangements are compatible with their surroundings, preserve
the natural beauty of the area, protect existing property values in both
residential and nonresidential areas, prevent endangering the public safety,
express the identity of the community as a whole or individual properties
or occupants, legible in the circumstances in which they are seen, and
appropriate to traffic safety. These regulations are designed and intended to
prevent over-concentration, improper placement and excessive height, bulk
and area of signs.
§ 260-137. Permit requirements and application.
§ 260-138. Types and classes.
Signs in all zoning districts shall be categorized according to the types and
classes described below and shall comply with the requirements for those
types and classes described in this section.
A. It is unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, move or
convert any sign in the Borough or cause the same to be done without
first obtaining a sign permit for each sign.
B. Applications for a sign permit shall be made in writing to the Zoning
Officer and shall be accomplished by such information as may be
required to assure compliance with these regulations and all other
appropriate ordinances and regulations of the Borough.
C. Sign permits shall be issued for the life of the sign or any shorter period
as stated on the approved permit application. However, any permit may
be revoked at any time by the Zoning Officer upon finding that the sign
violates any provision of this article or that the permittee made false
representations in securing the permit.
D. No person shall erect, construct or maintain any sign upon any
property, structure or building without the prior written consent of the
owner or person entitled to possession of the property, structure or
building, or his authorized representative. The written consent must
accompany the sign permit application.
E. Every sign permit issued shall become null and void if installation is not
commenced within 180 days from the date of such permit.
A. Classes. Signs are classified by physical attributes into the following
categories:
§ 260-136 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-138
1:557
(1) Freestanding. A sign supported on a foundation or by one or more
uprights, poles or braces permanently affixed to the ground and not
attached to any building or other structure, including:
(a) Pole sign. A freestanding sign which is supported by one or
more poles, uprights or braces and which has a minimum
clearance between the bottom edge of the sign and the
adjacent ground level as specified by this chapter.
(b) Ground sign. A freestanding sign which is affixed to the ground
by means of a permanent foundation and which provides a
maximum clearance of 18 inches between the bottom edge of
the sign and the adjacent ground level.
(2) Wall. A sign or painting permanently attached to and erected
parallel to the face of an outside wall of a building, projecting
outward no more than six inches from the wall of the building.
[Amended 6-12-2019 by Ord. No. 982]
(3) Bulletin. A type of changeable copy sign constructed to allow
letters or symbols to be changed periodically, such as those used by
churches and schools to announce events. The sign shall be a
permanent installation. [Amended 6-12-2019 by Ord. No. 982]
(4) Roof sign. A sign erected and maintained permanently upon or
above the roof of any building which projects no more than six feet
above the roof. [Amended 6-12-2019 by Ord. No. 982]
(5) Overhanging. A sign, other than a wall sign, permanently affixed to
a building or wall whose leading edge extends beyond such
building or wall more than six inches. [Amended 6-12-2019 by
Ord. No. 982]
(6) Billboard. An off-site sign which advertises goods or services
unrelated to or not available on the premises where the sign is
located.
(7) Changeable copy. A sign that is designed so that characters, letters
or illustrations can be changed or rearranged either manually or
electronically without altering the face or surface of the sign.
(8) Indirectly illuminated. A sign which is lighted by means of lamps or
lighting devices external to, and reflected on, the sign, which
lighting is stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times
and which is shielded so that the illumination is concentrated on
the face of the sign, and there is no spillover of illumination or glare
beyond the face of the sign.
(9) Internally illuminated. A sign which is lighted by means of lamps or
lighting devices internal to the sign, which lighting is either behind
the face of the sign or is an integral part of the sign structure and
the advertising effect.
§ 260-138 IRWIN CODE § 260-138
1:558
§ 260-139. General regulations.
The following regulations shall apply to signs in all zoning districts.
(10)Off-premises directional. A sign, other than a billboard, as defined
herein, erected by a business, agency, organization or development
located within the Borough, that directs vehicular traffic to an
establishment, event, activity, product or service not sold,
produced or available on the property on which the sign is located,
but not including any directional signs erected by a governmental
agency, which are exempt from these regulations.
B. Types. Signs are categorized by use, function or purpose into the
following types: [Amended 6-12-2019 by Ord. No. 982]
(1) Residential identification. A sign containing only the name and
address of the occupant of a dwelling.
(2) Home occupation or home office identification. A sign containing
only the name and address of the occupant of the dwelling and
their occupation.
(3) Notification. Signs bearing legal and/or property notices, such as
no trespassing, private property, no turnaround, safety zone, no
hunting and similar messages and signs posted by a governmental
agency for traffic control or the safety of the general public.
(4) On-premises directional. A sign which directs and/or instructs
vehicular or pedestrian traffic relative to parking areas, proper
exits, loading areas, entrance points and similar information on the
premises on which it is located.
(5) Business identification sign. A sign which contains the name,
address and goods, services, facilities or events available on the
premises.
(6) Temporary signs. A banner, flag, pennant or similar display
constructed of durable material and affixed to the wall of a building
or anchored to the ground, designed to withstand wind speeds of
50 miles per hour, which shall be maintained in a safe and good
condition, without signs of deterioration.
A. Restricted signs. The following signs shall not be permitted in any
zoning district.
(1) Signs located within or extending into any Borough right-of-way
unless placed by a government entity.
(2) Roof signs.
(3) Signs illuminated by a flashing, pulsating or intermittent source.
(4) Signs with moving parts.
§ 260-138 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-139
1:559
(5) Signs illuminated by strings of bare bulbs or lighted in such a
manner as to cause glare on adjacent streets or properties.
(6) Signs that obstruct sight within a clear vision triangle.
(7) Signs that are distracting and can be perceived as confusing to
motorists.
(8) Any sign determined to be unsafe or insecure or that is erected in
violation of the provisions of this chapter.
(9) "A-frame" or sandwich board signs on private property, other than
temporary signs as authorized by this chapter. [Amended
6-12-2019 by Ord. No. 982]
(10) Portable or wheeled signs.
(11) Banners and pennants, other than temporary special event displays
authorized by this chapter.
(12) Signs affixed to trees, utility poles, fences, equipment or official
traffic control devices or signs.
(13) Signs on or affixed to vehicles and/or trailers which are parked on a
public right-of-way, public property or private property, other than
temporarily for overnight storage on the site of a business or for
maintenance, repair, loading, unloading or rendering a service at
any location, which are visible from the public right-of-way and
where the apparent purpose is to advertise a product or direct
people to a business or activity located on the same or nearby
property.
B. Lots with multiple street frontage. In all zoning districts, lots fronting
on more than one street shall be permitted to have one additional
business identification wall sign which is authorized per lot on each
street frontage.
C. 131Notification signs. In all zoning districts, the number, location and
size of legal notification signs erected by public agencies shall be in
accordance with the laws of the commonwealth. In all zoning districts,
legal notification signs posted on private property by property owners
shall be limited to a surface area not exceeding two square feet. The
placement and maximum number of signs permitted along road
frontages shall be one sign for every 50 feet of road frontage.
[Amended 6-12-2019 by Ord. No. 982]
D. Visibility. No sign shall be located in such a position that it will cause a
hazard by obstructing visibility for traffic on a street or obscuring a
traffic signal or other traffic control device. No sign, other than official
131. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, Temporary signs, was repealed 6-12-2019 by Ord. No.
982. This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections D through I
as Subsections C through H, respectively.
§ 260-139 IRWIN CODE § 260-139
1:560
§ 260-140. Signs authorized in all zoning districts. [Amended
6-12-2019 by Ord. No. 982]
The following signs are authorized in all zoning districts:
traffic signs, shall hang over or be erected within the right-of-way of
any street.
E. Illumination. Illumination, when authorized by this chapter, shall be
directed upon the sign face and not towards adjoining properties or
streets. Flashing or oscillating signs shall not be permitted. Lighting
shall be stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times. The
intensity of any source of illumination of any sign, whether indirect or
internal, shall be controlled so as to not create glare and to be
compatible with the intensity of ambient light and illumination on
surrounding properties.
F. Maintenance and inspection. All signs must be constructed of a durable
material and maintained in good condition. Any sign found to be in an
unsafe condition upon inspection shall be declared to be a public
nuisance, and the Zoning Officer shall give notice to the owner in
writing to repair or remove the sign within 10 days. Upon failure of the
owner to comply, the Borough shall remove the sign at the owner's
expense.
G. Removal of signs. Whenever any business is discontinued or vacated, all
signs relating to the discontinued or vacated business shall be removed
within 30 days of the vacation or discontinuance of the business. Upon
failure of the owner to comply, the Borough shall remove the sign at the
owner's expense.
H. Permits required. No permit shall be required for the following types of
signs: temporary, notification, residential identification and directional
signs. Permits for all other signs shall be required. The Zoning Officer
shall issue the required permits upon submission of an application
which complies with all applicable provisions of this chapter and
payment of the required fee established from time to time by resolution
of Borough Council. [Amended 6-12-2019 by Ord. No. 982]
A. One bulletin sign, which is nonilluminated or indirectly or internally
illuminated and which does not exceed 24 square feet in surface area,
shall be permitted in connection with any church, school, library or
similar public or semipublic building.
B. One nonilluminated temporary sign shall be permitted on the premises
of a property that is listed for sale or lease or is actively being
developed, provided the surface area of the sign shall not exceed six
square feet in any residential zoning district or 12 square feet in any
other zoning district. Such signs shall be removed within 10 days of the
sale, lease or completion of development of the property.
§ 260-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-140
1:561
C. One nonilluminated temporary sign shall be permitted on the premises
of a property wherein contractors or artisans are performing work. Said
signs shall be permitted on the property, provided the sign shall not
exceed 12 square feet in area and shall be removed immediately upon
completion of the work.
D. One nonilluminated temporary sign shall be permitted to be erected on
the face of a public building, church or building housing a nonprofit
organization, when said location is hosting an event, provided that the
area of the sign shall not exceed 40 square feet, and provided the sign is
displayed for a period no longer than 15 days and is removed within five
days following the event. The person operating the event may place,
upon consent of the property owner, two off-site temporary signs.
E. Placement of temporary signs during elections or political campaigns.
(1) Temporary signs on public property. Signs may be posted on public
property located within the Borough within 30 days of the date of a
special election, primary election, municipal, state or federal
election, or any other election, subject to the following general
requirements:
(a) Number of signs. No more than one sign shall be placed on
public property at any intersection of roads or streets by any
one person or organization nor shall signs be placed by the
same person or organization within 50 feet of each other.
(b) Area. Signs on public property shall not exceed an aggregate
gross surface area of six square feet, as measured from the
base of the sign or grade of the nearest adjacent roadway,
whichever is higher.
(c) Height. Signs shall not project higher than four feet, as
measured from the base of the sign or grade of the nearest
adjacent roadway, whichever is higher.
(d) Timing. Signs may be erected or maintained for a period not to
exceed 30 days prior to the date of the election and shall be
removed within three days following the termination of the
election.
(e) Illumination. Signs shall not be illuminated in any manner.
(f) Posting of a cash bond. Prior to any person, firm or corporation
placing a sign pursuant to this subsection within the confines
of any public right-of-way within the Borough, there shall be
posted with the Borough Manager a cash bond in the amount
of $100.
(g) Required information. At the time of the posting of the cash
bond, there shall be submitted to the Borough, on a form
supplied by the Borough, the following information:
§ 260-140 IRWIN CODE § 260-140
1:562
[1] The name and address of a person who is placing the signs
and the name and address of the person who will be
responsible for the removal of each sign.
[2] The date when the signs will be removed.
(h) Required consent of the Borough for the placement of sign on
public rights-of-way or public property pursuant to this
subsection. The Borough reserves the absolute right to deny a
request to post a sign on public property or to require the
removal of any such sign at any time whenever such sign poses
a threat to the public's safety, health and welfare. Specific
prohibitions include, but are not limited to, the following:
[1] Signs shall be prohibited within five feet of the edge of the
paved surface of any road or street within the Borough.
[2] Signs shall be prohibited along any road or street within
the Borough where it would obstruct the clear sight
distance of the traffic.
(i) Return of bond. If the sign is removed within three days after
the date when it was declared to the Borough that it would be
so removed, the cash bond shall be refunded to the person or
organization responsible for posting that bond.
(j) Forfeiture of bond. If the signs are not removed within three
days after the date when it was declared to the Borough that
they would be so removed, the posted cash bond as required by
this section shall be forfeited to the general fund of the
Borough in an amount of $5 per sign as the cost to the Borough
to remove the signs.
(2) Temporary signs on private property during time of election. Signs
posted on private property located within the Borough within 30
days of the date of a special election, primary election, municipal,
state or federal election, or any other election, subject to the
following general requirements:
(a) Number of signs. No more than one sign shall be placed on
private property per item on the ballet of the applicable
election.
(b) Area. Signs on private property shall not exceed an aggregate
gross surface area of six square feet, as measured from the
base of the sign or grade of the nearest adjacent roadway,
whichever is higher.
(c) Height. Signs shall not project higher than four feet, as
measured from the base of the sign or grade of the nearest
adjacent roadway, whichever is higher.
§ 260-140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-140
1:563
(d) Timing. Signs may be erected or maintained for a period not to
exceed 30 days prior to the date of the election and shall be
removed within three days following the termination of the
election.
(e) Illumination. Signs shall not be illuminated in any manner.
(f) Posting of a cash bond. Prior to any person, firm or corporation
placing a sign pursuant to this subsection upon or within any
private property within the Borough, there shall be posted with
the Borough Manager a cash bond in the amount of $100.
(g) Required information. At the time of the posting of the cash
bond, there shall be submitted to the Borough, on a form
supplied by the Borough, the following information:
[1] The name and address of a person who is placing the signs
and the name and address of the person who will be
responsible for the removal of each sign.
[2] The date when the signs will be removed.
(h) Required consent of the property owner prior to the placement
of signs on private property. The property owner reserves the
absolute right to deny a request to post a sign on private
property or to require the removal of any such sign at any time
whenever such sign poses a threat to the public's safety, health
and welfare. The Borough also reserves the absolute right to
restrict the placement of any sign upon or within private
property if the same violates any of the restrictions set forth in
this chapter, including, but not limited to, the following
prohibitions:
[1] Signs shall be prohibited within five feet of the edge of the
paved surface of any road or street within the Borough.
[2] Signs shall be prohibited along any road or street within
the Borough where they would obstruct the clear sight
distance of the traffic.
(i) Return of bond. If the sign is removed within three days after
the date when it was declared to the Borough that it would be
so removed, the cash bond shall be refunded to the person or
organization responsible for posting that bond.
(j) Forfeiture of bond. If the signs are not removed within three
days after the date when it was declared to the Borough that
they would be so removed, the posted cash bond as required by
this section shall be forfeited to the general fund of the
Borough in an amount of $5 per sign as the cost to the Borough
to remove the signs.
§ 260-140 IRWIN CODE § 260-140
1:564
§ 260-141. Signs authorized in residential zoning districts.
The following signs shall be permitted in all residential zoning districts:
§ 260-142. Signs authorized in commercial and industrial districts.
The following signs shall be permitted in all commercial and industrial
districts:
(3) Violations and penalties. Any person who shall be convicted of a
violation of any of the provisions of this subsection before a
Magisterial District Judge having jurisdiction shall be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $300 together with the costs of
prosecution, or to imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to
exceed 30 days, or both.
F. One nonilluminated identification sign shall be permitted at the location
of an approved home occupation or home office, provided that the
surface area of the sign does not exceed one square foot.
A. Residential plan. One nonilluminated or indirectly illuminated
permanent wall or freestanding ground sign located at a residential
plan for identification and address purposes, which shall not exceed 12
square feet in area. The sign may be affixed to a freestanding
decorative wall, rather than to a building wall, provided that the
decorative wall meets all applicable ordinance requirements and does
not obstruct visibility for traffic entering or leaving the plan. Any such
sign which is proposed to be located in a public right-of-way shall be
subject to permission from the owner of the right-of-way and
assignment of responsibility for maintenance of the sign to the
developer or a homeowners' association. [Amended 6-12-2019 by
Ord. No. 982]
B. One nonilluminated or indirectly illuminated wall or freestanding
ground identification sign for any nonresidential use, other than a home
occupation, authorized by special exception in a residential zoning
district, which shall not exceed 12 square feet in area.
C. One nonilluminated or indirectly illuminated wall or freestanding
ground sign dentifying a lawfully maintained nonconforming use in a
residential zoning district, which shall not exceed 12 square feet in
area. [Amended 6-12-2019 by Ord. No. 982]
A. 132Directional signs. On lots with areas less than one acre, a maximum
of four nonilluminated or indirectly illuminated directional signs, each
of which shall not exceed four square feet in area, shall be permitted.
On lots with areas of one acre or more, a maximum of six
nonilluminated or indirectly illuminated directional signs, each of which
132. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, Temporary special event display, was repealed
6-12-2019 by Ord. No. 982. This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former
Subsections B through D as Subsections A through C, respectively.
§ 260-140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-142
1:565
shall not exceed four square feet in area, shall be permitted on the first
acre. For each additional acre or fraction thereof over one acre, two
additional directional signs shall be permitted.
B. Changeable copy signs. In addition to the authorized business
identification signs, one nonilluminated or internally illuminated
changeable copy sign shall be permitted per lot, regardless of the
number of businesses on the lot, which shall not exceed 30 square feet
in area and which shall be permanently affixed to the wall of the
building or to the supporting structure of an authorized freestanding
sign on the lot.
C. General signage requirements. [Amended 6-12-2019 by Ord. No.
982]
(1) Wall signs. Each business establishment shall be permitted to have
wall signs which may be illuminated or nonilluminated. The
aggregate area of all wall signs shall not exceed two square feet for
each lineal foot of width of the street-facing wall of the building or
portion of the building occupied by the business.
(2) Ground signs. In addition to the wall signs, one freestanding
ground sign shall be permitted per lot, regardless of the number of
businesses on the lot, provided that:
(a) No freestanding pole sign exists or is proposed to be erected
on the lot.
(b) The maximum surface area of the ground sign shall not exceed
24 square feet.
(c) The height and location of the sign shall be designed so as to
not interfere with visibility for vehicular traffic entering or
leaving the lot or traveling on any street.
(d) Ground signs shall be nonilluminated or indirectly illuminated
only. Internally illuminated ground signs shall not be
permitted.
(e) No portion of any ground sign shall be located closer than 10
feet to any curb or, if there is no curb, to the edge of paving of a
public street.
(f) Ground signs are not permitted if a pole sign or roof sign is
present.
(3) Pole signs. In addition to the authorized wall signs, one
freestanding pole sign shall be permitted per lot, regardless of the
number of businesses on the lot, provided that:
(a) No freestanding ground sign exists or is proposed to be
erected on the lot.
§ 260-142 IRWIN CODE § 260-142
1:566
(b) The property has a minimum of 100 feet of frontage on a public
right-of-way.
(c) The pole sign shall be nonilluminated, indirectly illuminated or
internally illuminated.
(d) The maximum height of the top of the pole sign shall be 20 feet.
(e) The minimum height of the bottom edge of the pole sign shall
be eight feet.
(f) The maximum size of the freestanding pole sign shall not
exceed 64 square feet and neither dimension of such sign shall
be less than six feet.
(g) No portion of any pole sign shall project over any public rightof-
way.
(h) No portion of any pole sign shall be located closer than 10 feet
to any curb or, if there is no curb, to the edge of paving of a
public street.
(i) Pole signs are not permitted if a ground sign or roof sign is
present.
(4) Overhanging signs. In addition to authorized wall signs, one
overhanging sign, hanging from a horizontal pole or structural
element of the building, with said sign being permanently affixed to
said pole or structural element of the building (hanging from a
metal chain or bolted, with said hanging devices being sufficient to
hold the sign and withstand substantial wind), provided that:
(a) No freestanding ground or pole sign exists or is proposed to be
erected on the lot.
(b) The property has frontage on a public right-of-way.
(c) The sign shall be nonilluminated indirectly illuminated or
internally illuminated.
(d) The maximum height of the top of the sign shall be 15 feet.
(e) The minimum height of the bottom edge of the pole sign shall
be seven feet, unless the applicant can show that the sign is not
above the sidewalk or is in such a position that it is not in
danger of being struck by a passing pedestrian, on foot,
bicycle, or other mode of transportation.
(f) The maximum size of the sign shall not exceed four square feet,
and neither dimension of such sign shall be less than six feet.
(g) No portion of any pole sign shall project over or be within two
feet of the curb or, if there is no curb, the edge of paving of a
public street.
§ 260-142 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-142
1:567
§ 260-143. Billboard signs.
Billboards may be permitted only as a special exception when approved
by the Zoning Hearing Board after submission in accordance with the
procedures specified in this chapter and provided that all of the following
requirements are met:
D. (Reserved)
E. Off-premises directional signs. A maximum of four off-premises
directional signs shall be permitted to be erected by any business or
organization located within the Borough, with the following
restrictions:
(1) The off-premises directional sign shall be located only along an
arterial or collector street, as defined herein. The maximum
number of signs located at any intersection or at any other
individual location along the arterial or collector street shall be
four signs.
(2) The off-premises directional signs shall be nonilluminated and shall
not exceed six square feet in surface area. Such signs shall be
permitted in the public right-of-way only if permission is granted by
the owner of the right-of-way and, if the owner of the right-of-way is
Westmoreland County or PennDOT, the applicable permit is
obtained for the use of the right-of-way. Evidence of permission
from the landowner in the form of a lease agreement or notarized
statement shall be required for signs that are proposed to be
erected on property owned by an owner other than the owner of the
business or organization the sign is intended to serve.
(3) Signs located outside the public right-of-way shall be located no
closer than 10 feet to the edge of the right-of-way and no closer
than 15 feet to the edge of the cartway if the right-of-way is not
contiguous with the lot line. The sign shall comply with the
requirements of § 260-139E regarding visibility at intersections.
(4) A permit shall be required for such off-premises directional signs
and shall be renewable annually by the Zoning Officer upon a
determination of compliance with these regulations.
A. Location. Billboards shall not be erected on any property within a
residential zoning district or within 500 feet of the property line of any
public or private school property, measured along the highway frontage
of the street or highway on which the billboard is located from a point
on the center line of the street or highway which is perpendicular to the
centermost point of the billboard structure and parallel to the front lot
line of the lot on which the billboard is located. Billboards may be
erected within 400 feet of the center line (measured horizontally) of
Pennsylvania Route 30.
§ 260-142 IRWIN CODE § 260-143
1:568
(1) The minimum side and rear yard requirements applying to a
principal use as set forth within the zoning district in which the
billboard is to be located shall apply to each billboard structure,
except that where the yard adjoins a residential zoning
classification the minimum required yard shall be 100 feet.
(2) The maximum lot coverage as specified for the zoning district in
which the billboard is to be located shall apply to any lot upon
which a billboard structure is located and shall be cumulative,
including any other structures and buildings on the same lot
therewith.
(3) No billboard shall be erected in such a manner as to block the view
from the road or street of any existing business sign, residential or
nonresidential structure, or limit or reduce the light and ventilation
requirements under the Borough Building Code.133
(4) No part of any billboard shall be located closer than 10 feet to any
street right-of-way.
(5) No billboard shall be constructed within the clear sight triangle of
the public street on which it is situated and shall not in any case
obstruct or impede traffic safety.
(6) Billboards shall not be mounted on the roof, wall or other part of a
building or any other structure.
B. Size and height. A billboard shall have a maximum allowable gross
surface area of 750 square feet per sign face. A billboard shall have a
maximum of two sign faces per billboard structure. However, the gross
surface area of each sign face shall not exceed the 750 square foot
maximum.
(1) The billboard structure may have sign faces placed back to back or
in a V-shaped configuration on a single billboard structure.
(2) The billboard's gross surface area shall not exceed 20 feet in total
height or 60 feet in total length.
(3) A billboard structure shall have a maximum height of 40 feet above
the curb of the street from which they are intended to be viewed.
However, the height of a billboard structure oriented to a
depressed street shall be measured from the grade at the base of
the billboard.
C. Construction methods. Billboards shall be constructed in accordance
with applicable provisions of the Borough of Irwin Building Code134 and
in addition:
133. Editor's Note: See Ch. 110, Construction Codes, Uniform.
134. Editor's Note: See Ch. 110, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 260-143 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-143
1:569
(1) A billboard structure shall have a maximum of one vertical support,
being a maximum of three feet in diameter or width and without
bracing or vertical supports.
(2) The one vertical support shall be capable of enabling the entire
sign face to be able to withstand a minimum sixty-mile-per-hour
wind load.
(3) A billboard sign face shall be independently supported and have
vertical supports of metal which are galvanized or otherwise
treated to prevent rust and corrosion.
(4) The entire base of the billboard structure on the side of the sign
face shall be permanently landscaped with suitable shrubbery and/
or bushes of minimum height of three feet placed in such manner
as to screen the foundation of the structure.
(5) Landscaping shall be maintained by the sign owner in an attractive
and healthy manner in accordance with accepted conservation
practices.
(6) Permanent landscaping shall form a base and/or backdrop to the
billboard sign when practical in the opinion of the Zoning Officer.
(7) A billboard with display lighting shall be constructed so that it does
not glare upon adjoining property and shall not exceed a maximum
of 1.5 footcandles upon the adjoining property.
(8) Display lighting shall not operate between 12:00 midnight and 5:00
a.m., prevailing local time.
(9) No billboard structure, sign face, or display lighting shall move,
flash or emit noise. No display lighting shall cause distractions,
confusion, nuisance or hazard to traffic, aircraft or other
properties.
(10) The use of colored lighting is not permitted.
D. Maintenance.
(1) A billboard structure shall be entirely painted every three years.
(2) Every 10 years, the owner of the billboard shall have a structural
inspection made of the billboard by a qualified Pennsylvaniaregistered
engineer or architect and shall provide to the Borough a
certificate from the engineer or architect certifying that the
billboard is structurally sound.
(3) Annual inspections of the billboard shall be conducted by the
Borough to determine compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 260-143 IRWIN CODE § 260-143
1:570
§ 260-144. Electronic changeable copy signs.
Electronic changeable copy signs shall be considered billboards and shall
meet all requirements of § 260-143 and shall also be subject to the following
requirements:
(4) Billboards found to be in violation of this chapter shall be brought
into compliance or removed within 30 days upon proper
notification by the Borough.
(5) Billboards using removable paper or other materials shall be
maintained in such condition as to eliminate loose or frayed
material protruding or hanging from the structure.
E. Permits. Special exception approval for a billboard shall be valid for six
months from the date of action by the Zoning Hearing Board granting
the special exception. If the applicant fails to obtain a building permit
for the billboard within the six-month period, special exception
approval shall automatically expire without notice to the applicant.
A. Electronic changeable copy signs shall not be located closer than 1,000
feet from an existing electronic changeable copy sign.
B. Messages shall not change at a frequency of more than once every
seven seconds (time, temperature and date signs may change more
frequently, but must do so on a separate portion of the changeable copy
area of the sign). The time interval used to change from one complete
message to another complete message or display shall be a maximum of
one second. There shall not be any appearance of a visual dissolve or
fading in which any part of one electronic message or display appears
simultaneously with any part of a second message or display. There
shall be no appearance of flashing or sudden bursts of light and no
appearance of animation, movement or flow of the message.
C. No electronic variable message sign whose face is visible from a
residence or residential use shall be closer than 275 feet from the
dwelling(s).
D. An electronic message display board that has a display area of only a
single line is permitted to alternate between a display of time and a
display of temperature, or to alternate between a display of a message
and a display of time and temperature. Each of the lines of an
alternating display may have a maximum of 30 characters, including all
letters, numbers, spaces or other symbols. The content of a single line
display that alternates between a display of time and a display of
temperature may be changed at each alternation and may alternate at
time periods of not less than two seconds.
§ 260-143 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-144
1:571

ARTICLE XVII
Nonconforming Uses
§ 260-145. Intent.
It is the intent of article to permit legal nonconforming lots, structures
or uses to continue until they are removed. Nonconforming uses are not
encouraged to survive.
§ 260-146. Nonconforming use limitations.
§ 260-147. Nonconforming lots.
In any zoning district in which single-family dwellings are permitted,
notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter, a
single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected
on any single lot of record at the effective date of this chapter or any
subsequent amendment. This provision shall apply even though such lot
fails to meet the requirements for area and/or width that are generally
applicable in the district, provided that the yard dimensions and other
requirements not involving area and/or width of the lot shall conform to the
regulations for the district in which such lot is located. When an unimproved
lot exists and a work permit for improvement is requested, it must comply
and conform to the clearly prevailing setback, parking, signage and other
exterior patterns of the ordinances of the district.
§ 260-148. Nonconforming structure used for permitted use.
In any zoning district in which nonconforming structures exist, the
nonconforming structure may conform its uses to comply with the
surrounding structures' uses. Nonconforming structures can be classified
as permitted uses after they have met the following criteria:
A. It is recognized that there may exist within the districts established by
this chapter, and subsequent amendments, lots, structures, signs and
uses of land and structures which were lawful before this chapter was
passed or amended which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted
under terms of this chapter to be incompatible with permitted uses in
the districts involved.
B. It is further the intent of this chapter that nonconformities shall not be
enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for
adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same
district.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the
plans, construction or designated use of any building on which actual
construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption
or amendment of this chapter and upon which actual building
construction has been diligently conducted.
§ 260-145 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-148
1:573
§ 260-149. Nonconforming use of structure or land.
No land within any district will retain a nonconforming status once a
structure is demolished or transformed to meet the regulations of the
structures of the district. The land and usage of the land shall no longer be
nonconforming.
§ 260-150. Nonconforming signs.
A nonconforming sign shall not be altered, enlarged or reconstructed unless
the reconstruction, alterations and enlargements comply with the current
regulations.
§ 260-151. Burden of establishing nonconforming status.
Nonconforming status is established for any structure or land usage when
the structure and land usage does not comply with the regulations of
the zoning district. In order for a structure to be established as a
nonconforming structure it must have existed before the land ordinances
and/or amendments to the land ordinances were adopted.
A. The nonconforming structure's proposed use shall be subject to all
regulations of the district in which it is located.
B. The nonconforming structures must provide adequate off-street
parking.
C. The nonconforming structures must provide a reasonable egress and
ingress to limit or prevent the creation of hazardous traffic conditions in
the vicinity in which the nonconforming use is situated.
D. The nonconforming structure shall not impose hazardous health and
safety conditions within the district through emission of hazardous
waste materials, creation of loud noises, and other nuisances.
A. Repairs and maintenance. Normal maintenance of nonconforming signs
shall be permitted. Normal maintenance consists of painting of chipped
or faded signs, replacement of faded or damaged surface panels, or
repair or replacement of electrical wiring or electrical devices.
B. Nonconforming changeable copy signs. The sign face or message on a
nonconforming changeable copy sign or nonconforming bulletin board
sign may be changed, provided that the change does not create any
greater nonconformity.
C. Substitution. No nonconforming sign shall be replaced with another
nonconforming sign. However, the panel containing the message may
be replaced with a different message without affecting the legal
nonconforming status of a sign, provided that the sign structure or
frame is not altered.
§ 260-148 IRWIN CODE § 260-151
1:574
A. Structural alteration. A nonconforming structure may be enlarged or
structurally altered, provided the enlargement or alteration does not
encroach any further into a required yard than the existing
nonconforming structure does, and further provided that no new
nonconformities are created. [Amended 8-14-2019 by Ord. No. 983]
B. Damage or destruction. In the event a structure that is devoted in whole
or in part to a nonconforming use is damaged or destroyed by any
means to an extent that the replacement cost is more than 40% of the
insured value of the entire structure, exclusive of foundation, it shall be
reconstructed only in conformity with the regulations for the district in
which it is located. Moreover, no repairs or restoration shall be
permitted unless a building permit is obtained, and restoration or
repairs shall not be permitted unless a building permit is obtained and
restoration actually begun within 12 months of the date of such partial
destruction and is diligently pursued to completion.
C. Moving. Should a nonconforming use of land or structure be moved, in
whole or in part, for any reason for any distance, it shall thereafter
conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after
being moved.
D. Change. A nonconforming use which is hereafter discontinued for any
reason and remains such for a continuous period of one year shall not
thereafter be reestablished. Such location shall thereafter be occupied
by a use which conforms to the regulations for the district in which it is
located. For the purpose of this chapter, "discontinuance" shall be
defined as the removal of inventory or equipment from the premises,
ceasing of all business activity and/or failure to renew required
licenses.
E. Nonconforming accessory use. A nonconforming accessory use shall
not continue to remain after the principal use to which it is an accessory
use has been destroyed, relocated, abandoned or discontinued.
§ 260-151 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-151
1:575

ARTICLE XVIII
General and Express Standards for Special Exceptions
§ 260-152. Standards for all special exceptions.
The following basic standards shall apply to all special exceptions in any
district.
§ 260-153. Standards applicable to specific special exceptions.
The following special exceptions have additional requirements as stated in
the following:
A. The location and size of the use, the nature and intensity of the
operations involved in or conducted in connection with it, its site layout
and its relation to streets giving access to it shall be such that both
pedestrian and vehicular traffic to and from the use and the assembly of
persons in connection with it will not be hazardous or inconvenient to
the predominant character of the district or be incongruous therewith
or conflict with the normal traffic on the streets thereof, both at the
time and as the same may be expected to increase with any prospective
increase in the population and area development, taking into account,
among other things, convenient routes of pedestrian traffic, particularly
of children; relation to main traffic thoroughfares and to street
intersections; turning movements in relation to vehicular flow; and the
general character and intensity of development of the district.
B. The location and height of buildings; the location, nature and height of
walls and fences; display of signs in connection with the use; and the
nature and extent of landscaping on the site shall be such that the use
will not hinder or discourage the appropriate development and use of
affected and/or adjacent land and buildings or ground that is an integral
part of the operation.
C. The nature, location, size and site layout of the use shall be such that it
will be a harmonious part of the district in which it is situated, taking
into account, among other things, prevailing shopping habits,
convenience of access by prospective patrons, the physical and
economic relationships of one type of use to another and characteristic
groupings of uses in the district.
D. The location, size, intensity and site layout of the use shall be such that
its operations will not be a nuisance or be objectionable to nearby
dwellings by reason of vibration, noise, fumes, lights or pollution of any
type or be hazardous to a greater degree than is normal with respect to
the proximity of other uses.
E. In the event that special exception requirements conflict with any other
municipal land use requirement, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 260-152 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-153
1:577
A. Church (or temple, synagogue or mosque), provided the building
delegated for religious purposes has access from the frontage to a
major highway, primary or secondary street as classified in this chapter.
B. Funeral homes and mortuaries, provided the home shall have its access
from the frontage to a major highway or primary or secondary street as
classified in this chapter.
C. Cemeteries may be allowed by special permit in the designated zones.
All required setbacks shall be maintained as landscaped or open space
areas. Additional setback or screen requirements may be required to
minimize impacts on adjacent properties.
D. A conversion dwelling will be allowed, provided the following are
provided:
(1) Adequate off-street parking is provided as required in this chapter.
(2) The conversion complies with all applicable Fire and Building Code
requirements.
(3) There shall be no more than one dwelling unit in conversion in
accordance with Article XIII.
E. A bed-and-breakfast facility must adhere to the following conditions:
(1) The individual or family who operates the facility must occupy the
house as his or its primary residence. The house must be at least
five years old before a bed-and-breakfast facility is allowed.
(2) A maximum of five bedrooms may be occupied by guests.
(3) Nonresident employees for such activities as booking rooms and
food preparation are permitted if approved as part of the
conditional use review. Hired service for normal maintenance,
repair and care of the residence or site, such as yard maintenance,
may also be approved. The number of employees and the frequency
of employee auto trips to the facility may be limited or monitored as
part of a conditional use approval.
(4) Serving alcohol and food to guests and visitors is allowed. The
proprietor may need Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board approval
to serve alcohol at a bed-and-breakfast facility.
(5) Commercial meetings, including luncheons, banquets, parties,
weddings, meetings, charitable fund-raising, commercial or
advertising activities, or other gatherings for direct or indirect
compensation, are prohibited.
F. Car washing and detailing facilities must adhere to the following
conditions:
§ 260-153 IRWIN CODE § 260-153
1:578
(1) All automated washing facilities shall be in a completely enclosed
building. All other car washing facilities shall be under a roofed
structure which has at least two walls.
(2) Drainage water from the washing operation shall be controlled so
that it does not flow or drain onto berms, streets or other property.
(3) A stacking area shall be required on the lot for automobiles,
accessible to the end of the washing equipment. Such stacking area
shall be able to accommodate the number of vehicles equal to the
maximum hourly processing capability of the aforesaid vehicular
wash.
(4) Such information shall be provided to the Borough as part of the
application for the special exception.
G. Construction, remodeling contractor, lumber facility must adhere to the
following conditions:
(1) No outside storage of construction equipment is permitted except
in an enclosed building.
(2) There shall be three off-street parking spaces for each four
employees on the largest shift or one off-street parking space for
every 250 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater, plus
one space for each company vehicle normally stored on the
premises.
H. All drive-through facilities must meet the following:
(1) Service areas and stacking lanes must be set back five feet from all
lot lines.
(2) All driveway entrances, including stacking lane entrances, must be
at least 50 feet from an intersection; the distance is measured
along the property line from the junction of the two street lot lines
to the nearest edge of the entrance.
(3) Stacking lanes must be designed so that they do not interfere with
parking and vehicle circulation.
(4) All stacking lanes must be clearly identified through the use of
means such as striping, landscaping and signs.
I. Garden dwelling. Garden dwellings may be authorized by the Zoning
Hearing Board as a special exception upon a finding that compliance
with the requirements of this chapter, as well as the following specific
criteria, has been established by the applicant:
(1) The minimum gross land area of the development site shall be
three acres.
(2) All new garden apartment developments shall have a minimum of
two vehicular entrances if over 50 units are proposed.
§ 260-153 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-153
1:579
(3) The maximum density (dwelling units per acre) shall be eight units
per gross acre.
(4) Building height. No garden apartment shall have a height greater
than three habitable stories.
(5) Principal buildings having dwelling units above the second story
shall be provided with elevators.
(6) Building length. No building shall have a length or a width greater
than 300 feet.
(7) Garages shall not front on arterial or collector roads.
J. High-rise residential building. High-rise residential buildings may be
authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception upon a
finding that compliance with the requirements of this chapter, as well
as the following specific criteria, has been established by the applicant:
(1) The minimum gross land area of the development site shall be
three acres.
(2) All new high-rise developments shall have a minimum of two
vehicular entrances if over 50 units are proposed.
(3) The maximum density (dwelling units per acre) shall be 20 units
per gross acre.
(4) Building height. No high-rise residential buildings shall have a
height greater than seven habitable stories.
(5) Principal buildings having dwelling units above the second story
shall be provided with elevators.
(6) Garages shall not front on arterial or collector roads.
K. Scrap processing operations and salvage yards may be allowed by
special permit in the designated zoning district, and enclosed
disassembly operations may be allowed by special permit under the
following conditions:
(1) Construction and operation shall comply with all state and federal
environmental and safety codes or requirements.
(2) Receiving areas for salvage material shall be designed to avoid the
depositing of salvage material outside a building or outside
screened storage areas.
(3) Scrap processing operations and salvage yards shall contain a
minimum of two acres, except that the site may be as small as
20,000 square feet where the site abuts one or more existing scrap
processing or salvage yards that exceed two acres in total.
§ 260-153 IRWIN CODE § 260-153
1:580
(4) Salvage material kept outside a building or buildings shall not be
located closer than 500 feet from any entrance corridors, except
where existing land forms completely obstruct the view by the
traveling public of the salvage material.
(5) Salvage material kept outside a building or buildings shall not be
located in the front yard.
(6) Salvage materials may be stored in enclosed semitrailers, provided
that the semitrailers are properly licensed and are operable to be
drawn by a motor vehicle upon the streets and highways of the
State of Pennsylvania, and the semitrailer shall not be located in
the front yard. Where the side yard or rear yard of the salvage yard
abuts a residential district, the semitrailers shall be located at least
20 feet from the respective side lot line or rear lot line and the
openings to the trailer shall not face the residential district.
L. Laundromat.
(1) Public sewer and public water facilities shall be utilized.
(2) All activities shall be conducted within a completely enclosed
building.
(3) Any exhaust ventilation equipment shall be directed away from
adjoining residentially zoned property.
M. Any methadone or drug maintenance or treatment facility shall also
meet the following requirements:
(1) The building shall be a minimum of 500 feet in any direction from
any residential dwelling, including any multifamily dwelling or
structure, and any public park property.
(2) The building shall be a minimum of 1,000 feet in any direction from
any school property, church property, preschool property, child daycare
center or facility, or senior citizen facility and nursing home
property.
(3) The building shall be a minimum of 2,500 feet in any direction from
any other methadone or drug maintenance or treatment facility.
(4) In measuring compliance with requirements of Subsection M(1)
through (3), any uses or building located in adjacent municipalities
shall be considered.
(5) The building shall be located within 1,000 feet of a public transit
stop.
(6) The hours of any such facility shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
§ 260-153 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-153
1:581
N. Mobile home parks may be allowed by special permit exception in the
R-H District, if served by public water and public sewerage systems,
under the following conditions:
(1) The mobile home park has a minimum site area of 10 acres.
(2) Twenty-five feet shall be maintained between mobile homes and
between mobile homes and buildings in all horizontal directions.
(3) No mobile home shall be located closer than 50 feet to any exterior
property line, except when the mobile home is located adjacent to a
trailer park or another mobile home park.
(4) Land within said fifty-foot exterior open space shall be permanently
landscaped in accordance with the landscape design standards,
except for the necessary paving of roadways and walkways to reach
the mobile home area; provided, however, such landscaping shall
not create a traffic hazard by impairing visibility at street and
roadway intersections.
(5) Mobile homes within the mobile home park shall be required to
have a setback of at least 20 feet from the pavement of private
roadways.
(6) The design and construction or installation of roadways, walkways,
parking spaces, utilities, drainage facilities, storage facilities,
recreational facilities, landscaping and other improvements shall
comply with the written design standards.
(7) Every manufactured mobile home shall be supported on a
permanent four-inch-thick reinforced concrete manufactured
mobile home pad or foundation at least the complete width of the
home, with a minimum of 840 square feet; all areas between the
manufactured mobile home and ground shall be enclosed by a fireresistant
skirting.
(8) In the event the soil or topographic conditions of the proposed
manufactured mobile home park are such that other foundations or
support are appropriate, and the developer provides to the Building
Inspector a report by a certified engineer that piers are equal to or
superior to the specifications as set forth by the manufacturer, then
piers may be used. Such foundations shall be inspected by the
Building Inspector.
(9) Every manufactured mobile home shall be at least 14 feet in width
and have a minimum of 720 square feet of living area exclusive of
porches, decks, carports, garages and cabanas.
(10) Each manufactured mobile home lot shall be limited to one
detached storage building, not including a garage or carport.
O. Home occupations. Home-based occupations may be established in
order that a resident may carry on a business activity which is clearly
§ 260-153 IRWIN CODE § 260-153
1:582
incidental and subordinate to a dwelling unit in a residential zone. The
establishment of a home-based occupation shall be compatible with the
surrounding neighborhood and uses and shall not adversely change
the character of the dwelling unit or detract from the character of
the surrounding neighborhood. Every home-based occupation shall be
subject to the following regulations:
(1) The home-based occupation shall be demonstrably secondary and
incidental to the primary dwelling unit and shall not change the
character and appearance of the dwelling unit.
(2) The home-based occupation shall not be conducted in any attached
or unattached structure intended for the parking of automobiles.
(3) The home-based occupation shall not create or cause noise, dust,
vibration, odor, gas, fumes, smoke, glare, electrical interferences,
hazards or nuisances. There shall be no storage or use of toxic or
hazardous materials other than the types and quantities
customarily found in connection with a dwelling unit. No noise or
sound shall be created that will cause disturbances and affect the
character of the neighborhood.
(4) There shall be only one home-based occupation per dwelling unit.
(5) The use shall be conducted only by persons residing within the
dwelling unit, except that no more than one person not residing on
the premises may be employed, either for pay or as a volunteer, to
work on the premises as part of the home-based occupation carried
on in the dwelling unit. One on-site standard-sized parking space
shall be provided for such employee or volunteer in addition to
other required parking.
(6) The business may have one sign that is no larger than two square
feet to promote, advertise and/or make customers aware of location
and services offered.
(7) No stock-in-trade, inventory or display of goods or materials shall
be kept or maintained on the premises, except for incidental
storage kept entirely within the dwelling unit.
(8) No mechanical equipment is permitted in connection with the
home-based occupation, other than light business machines, such
as computers, facsimile-transmitting devices and copying
machines.
(9) The home-based occupation shall not involve the use of commercial
vehicles for delivery of materials and products to or from the
premises in excess of that which is customary for a dwelling unit or
which has a disruptive effect on the neighborhood. Such delivery
services can include, but are not limited to, United States Mail,
express mail and messenger services. No tractor-trailer or similar
§ 260-153 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-153
1:583
heavy-duty delivery or pickup shall be permitted in connection with
the home-based business.
(10) Activities conducted and equipment or material used shall not
change the type of construction of the residential occupancy and
shall be subject to all required permits.
(11) The home-based occupation shall not generate pedestrian or
vehicular traffic in excess of that which is customary for a dwelling
unit or which would have a disruptive effect on the neighborhood.
(12)No more than one client visit or one client vehicle per hour shall be
permitted, and only from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday, in connection with the home-based occupation.
(13) The home-based occupation shall cease when the use becomes
detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare or constitutes a
nuisance, affects the character of the neighborhood and/or
threatens to decrease property value due to disturbances and/or
nuisances, or when the use is in violation of any statute, ordinance,
law or regulation.
(14) Prohibited home-based businesses are as follows:
(a) Adult business.
(b) Ambulance service.
(c) Animal training.
(d) Automotive repair, painting, body/fender work, upholstering,
detailing, washing, including motorcycles, trucks, trailers and
boats.
(e) Body piercing.
(f) Dentist, except as a secondary office which is not used for the
general practice of dentistry but may be used for consultation
and emergency treatment as an adjunct to a principal office
located elsewhere.
(g) Funeral chapel or home.
(h) Firearms manufacturing or sales.
(i) Gunsmith.
(j) Massage therapist, unless the therapist has procured a
massage technician's license and fulfilled the state licensure
process.
(k) Medical physician (nonpsychiatric), except as a secondary
office which is not used for the general practice of medicine
§ 260-153 IRWIN CODE § 260-153
1:584
but may be used for consultation and emergency treatment as
an adjunct to a principal office located elsewhere.
(l) Restaurant.
(m) Tattoo studio.
(n) Upholstery.
(o) Tow truck service.
(p) Veterinary services and other uses which entail the harboring,
training, care, breeding, raising or grooming of dogs, cats,
birds or other domestic animals on the premises, except those
which are owned by the resident.
(q) Welding or machine shop.
(r) Yoga/spa retreat center.
(s) Any other use which disrupts and is inconsistent with the
residential character of the neighborhood is prohibited.
P. School. Private school or public school which is not conducted as a
private gainful business. In all districts, access to a collector street is
required. The use shall meet the following requirements:
(1) It shall provide safe and adequate traffic flow.
(2) It shall prohibit glare due to site lighting.
(3) It shall provide sufficient screening of outdoor play areas to protect
the neighborhood from inappropriate noise and other disturbance.
(4) It shall provide fencing to control pedestrian ingress and egress.
Q. Self-service storage.
(1) No storage may take place outside of a personal enclosed storage
unit.
(2) No personal enclosed storage unit shall have water or sanitary
sewer service.
(3) A caretaker may reside on a portion of the personal storage site.
The caretaker's residence shall have public water and public sewer
service.
(4) Ingress or egress shall be from an arterial or collector street only.
(5) Distance from face of building to face of building: 30 feet minimum.
(6) Distance from end of building to end of building: 20 feet minimum.
(7) If units are placed back to back, the maximum width of the building
shall not exceed 60 feet.
§ 260-153 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-153
1:585
(8) Driveway width: 22 feet minimum.
(9) All driveways shall be paved with an impervious surface.
(10) A landscaping plan shall be submitted with the site plan showing
the site's buffer area to adjoining parcels.
(11) Lighting shall not interfere with surrounding area or distract
traffic.
(12)On a personal storage facility site only, there shall be allowed more
than one building for housing of the storage units. These buildings,
other than for use of one management office, one caretaker's
residence and individual storage, shall be used for no other
purpose.
R. All family child- and adult-care facilities shall ensure they have proper
state licenses and are consistent in compliance of all the State of
Pennsylvania Department of Welfare guidelines for child-care or adultcare
facilities.
(1) Dropoff/pickup areas, such as curb spaces and driveway areas,
which are of sufficient size and are located to avoid interference
with traffic and to ensure the safety of children and elderly adults,
must be identified and not disrupt the flow of traffic and effect the
character of the neighborhood.
(2) The proposed facility shall not be located within two lots of an
existing family child-care or adult-care facility on the same side of
the street nor on the lot or the lots on either side of the lot directly
across the street from an existing family child or adult care home.
(3) In cases where child-care facilities are located within a ten-mile
radius to one another, a permit will not be granted to the proposed
child- and/or adult-care facility.
S. Townhouse projects shall be allowed by special exception in the R-H
District served by public water and public sewerage systems if they
meet the following requirements:
(1) No building permit shall be issued to a developer of a townhouse
project unless and until the requirements of this article, other
applicable articles of this chapter, other applicable ordinances of
the county and applicable state statutes are complied with.
(2) A townhouse structure shall consist of no more than eight
townhouse units.
(3) Individual property lines shall run from the street through the
center of the common party walls of attached interior units and
continue to the rear lot line. The lots, utilities and other
improvements for each townhouse unit shall be designed to permit
§ 260-153 IRWIN CODE § 260-153
1:586
individual and separate ownership of each lot and dwelling unit
thereon.
(4) No townhouse project or portion thereof shall have an overall site
density greater than one townhouse unit per 6,000 square feet of
gross site area.
(5) Setback requirements for townhouse structures shall conform to
the established setback regulations of the district in which the
townhouse project is located.
(6) A lot occupied by a townhouse unit shall contain not less than 2,000
square feet.
(7) Lot frontage, measured at the setback line for individual townhouse
units, shall have a minimum width of 20 feet. Lot width for end
units shall be adequate to provide side and rear yards as required.
(8) Each townhouse unit shall have a rear yard of not less than 25 feet.
(9) Each townhouse structure shall have two side yards of not less than
15 feet each. In no case shall any two townhouse structures be
closer than 30 feet.
(10) The facades of each unit of a townhouse structure shall be varied
by changing front yard depth and utilizing variations in materials
or design so that no more than three abutting townhouse units have
the same front yard depth or the same or essentially the same
architectural treatment of facades and rooflines.
(11) Each townhouse unit shall have an unencumbered access to and
from a dedicated public street.
(12) Townhouse projects shall have provisions for at least two vehicular
off-street parking spaces for each townhouse unit.
(13) Amenities and other accessory uses, if any, shall conform to the
setback, yard and height requirements of the district in which they
are to be located.
(14) Townhouse units shall be separated by a common party wall
designed to meet the fire protection requirements as set forth in
the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code, as amended.
T. Adult businesses shall only be allowed by special exception in the I
District served by public water and public sewerage systems if they
meet the following requirements:
(1) Adult businesses regulated by this section shall include adult
bookstore/video stores, adult movie theaters or movie houses, adult
live theaters and adult nightclubs, as defined herein.
(2) Adult businesses shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any
property which is zoned residential.
§ 260-153 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-153
1:587
(3) Adult businesses shall not be located within 500 feet of the
property boundary of any existing school, day-care center, hospital,
group-care facility, personal-care boardinghome, group home,
public park or playground, church or establishment which is
licensed to serve and/or sell alcoholic beverages.
(4) No adult business shall be located within 500 feet of any other
existing or approved adult business.
(5) Adult businesses shall comply with the applicable parking
requirements for retail sales and/or theaters specified in Article
XIII of this chapter. Any portion of an adult business which does not
involve retail sales or theater seating shall meet the requirements
of one parking space for each occupant at maximum permitted
occupancy.
U. Kennels. More than five dogs, cats or other household pets over the age
of four months constitutes a kennel and can only be located within
permitted zoning districts. Commercial kennels shall only be allowed by
special exception in the C-H and I Districts served by public water and
public sewerage systems if they meet the following requirements:
(1) Demonstrate that all animals are confined to the property.
(2) Demonstrate adequate methods for sanitation and sewage disposal.
(3) Outdoor runs shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from any
dwelling not located on the same lot.
(4) Outdoor runs shall be screened with a solid fence to reduce the
potential for inciting dogs to bark due to external influences.
(5) A site plan, drawn to scale, shall accompany the application,
indicating the location of existing and/or proposed parking
facilities, buildings, runs and other physical features.
V. Stables shall only be allowed by special exception in the C-H and I
Districts served by public water and public sewerage systems if they
meet the following requirements:
(1) A minimum of 10 contiguous acres shall be required.
(2) No stable shall be located within 200 feet of any property line or
occupied dwelling other than the stable owner's dwelling.
(3) All grazing and pasture areas shall be adequately fenced.
W. Comparable uses not specifically listed, subject to:
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board shall consider a proposed use which is
not listed in the zoning district in which the property is located only
if it is comparable to other authorized uses listed in that same
district. If a use is specifically listed in a less restrictive zoning
§ 260-153 IRWIN CODE § 260-153
1:588
district, it shall not be eligible for consideration as a "comparable
use" in a more restrictive zoning district under this subsection.
(2) Uses of the same general character as any of the uses authorized as
permitted uses by right, conditional uses or uses by special
exception in the zoning district in which the property is located
shall be allowed, if the Zoning Hearing Board determines that the
impact of the proposed use on the environment and adjacent
streets and properties is equal to or less than any use specifically
listed in the zoning district. In making such determination, the
Board, at a minimum, shall consider the following characteristics of
the proposed use:
(a) The number of employees;
(b) The floor area of the building or gross area of the lot devoted to
the proposed use;
(c) The type of products, materials or equipment and/or processes
involved in the proposed use;
(d) The magnitude of walk-in trade, if any; and
(e) The traffic and environmental impacts, and the ability of the
proposed use to comply with the performance standards of this
chapter;
(3) The proposed use shall comply with all applicable area and bulk
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
(4) The proposed use shall comply with the performance standards of
§ 260-76 of this chapter.
(5) The proposed use shall comply with any applicable express
standards and criteria specified in this chapter for the most nearly
comparable use by special exception or conditional use listed in the
zoning district in which the comparable use is proposed.
(6) The proposed use shall be consistent with the statement of intent
for the zoning district in which it is proposed and shall be
consistent with the community development objectives of this
chapter.
X. Medical marijuana organizations shall be permitted if they are in
compliance with Article XXIII of Chapter 260 of the Irwin Code. [Added
6-14-2017 by Ord. No. 952]
§ 260-153 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-153
1:589

Part 4
Administration
ARTICLE XIX
General Administration and Enforcement
§ 260-154. Zoning Officer.
§ 260-155. Zoning permit.
A. The provision of this chapter will be administered and enforced by the
Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer shall be appointed by the Borough
Council. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer, who is hereby given
the power, to:
(1) Administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Review zoning permit applications for compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, all other applicable ordinances and with
all federal, state, county and local laws and regulations which are
relevant to the subject property.
(3) Collect fees and fines as provided herein to be deposited into the
Borough's general fund.
(4) Issue and revoke zoning and occupancy permits according to the
provisions stated herein.
(5) Maintain permanent files of all zoning and occupancy permits and
applications for such permits as public records.
(6) Attend meetings of Borough Council and the Zoning Hearing
Board, as needed, and provide the Council and the Board with
information concerning applications and site plans.
(7) Examine the progress of the work as stated in specific permit
applications to ensure that it is proceeding according to the stated
information in that application.
(8) Prepare and maintain a list of nonconforming uses and structures.
(9) Process requests for hearings before the Zoning Hearing Board.
(10) Issue notices of violations of this chapter.
B. The Assistant Zoning Officer, if appointed by the Borough Council, shall
exercise the same powers as the Zoning Officer when he is acting on
behalf of the Zoning Officer.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter, relocate, enlarge or
structurally change a sign or other advertising structure, unless
specifically exempted by these regulations, without first obtaining a
permit in accordance with the provisions set forth herein.
§ 260-154 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-155
1:591
§ 260-156. Occupancy permit.
B. Zoning permits are required to control physical changes to land,
buildings, structures and signs and to assure that such activities are
conducted in conformance with all applicable Borough ordinances.
C. A zoning permit shall be required to construct, reconstruct, erect, alter,
enlarge, raze or move a building, a structure, an accessory building, an
accessory structure, any lighted or flashing sign, or any sign larger than
6 1/2 square feet in area.
D. No activity described in Subsection C shall be undertaken by any
person unless that person shall first have obtained a zoning permit.
E. No zoning permit shall be issued unless the proposed activity conforms
to the requirements of this and other applicable Borough ordinances, to
all Borough codes and other applicable Borough ordinances, to all
Borough codes and to any appropriate State or Federal requirements
affecting the activity.
A. Occupancy permits are required for residential, business, commercial
or industrial establishments or buildings in order to control changes in
the use of the land, buildings and structure; to be certain that such uses
are allowed by this chapter; and to assure safety of buildings and
activities before occupancy is allowed. An occupancy permit shall be
required in the following instances: [Amended 5-9-2018 by Ord. No.
966]
(1) Occupancy of buildings, structures or land previously vacant.
(2) Reuse or reoccupancy of buildings, structures or land previously
used or occupied.
(3) To occupy or use a new building or structure.
(4) To occupy or use a building or structure or part thereof that has
been altered, moved or enlarged so that a zoning permit was
required.
(5) To occupy or use a lot or zoning lot newly created by way of
subdivision or rezoning.
(6) Change in the use or character of any building, structure or lot.
(7) Change of a nonconforming use.
(8) The transfer of ownership or title of the building or structure, or
units located therein.
B. No activity, as specified in Subsection A of this section, shall be
undertaken by any person until said person shall have first obtained an
occupancy permit.
§ 260-155 IRWIN CODE § 260-156
1:592
§ 260-157. Applications.
C. No occupancy permit shall be issued unless the proposed activity
conforms to the requirements of this and other applicable Borough
ordinances and to any appropriate State or Federal requirement
affecting the activity.
D. Where a person or entity: [Added 5-8-2019 by Ord. No. 980]
(1) Leases a residential structure to residential tenants;
(2) Has complied with the registration requirements of the Borough of
Irwin Code Chapter 195135 for all leased residential dwelling units
within the structure; and
(3) All residential rental dwelling units were inspected pursuant to
Chapter 195 and were found to be in compliance with the
requirements therein, that residential real property shall be
exempted from the occupancy permit requirements of this section.
A. Zoning and occupancy permits may only be obtained after the filing of
an application with the Zoning Officer and approval by him or her of the
application following a review of all application materials and an
inspection of the premises, where the application is for an occupancy
permit or where the Zoning Officer otherwise deems the same
appropriate. [Amended 5-9-2018 by Ord. No. 966]
(1) The application for such permits shall be a standard form to be
provided by the Borough.
(2) The completed application shall be accompanied by such
information as the Zoning Officer may require for administration of
this chapter.
(3) An applicant for a permit of either kind shall pay a fee with the
application according to the fee schedule established and approved
by the Borough Council.
(4) Before granting approval for such permits, the Zoning Officer may
require such changes in the plans as may be necessary to assure
compliance with this chapter and other ordinances of the Borough
of Irwin.
(5) The application shall include the name and address of the applicant
and contractor and the site location on which construction is
proposed.
(6) Each application shall stipulate the proposed use of the land,
building or structure. If more than one use is proposed or existing,
the application shall include tabulation and description of all uses
135. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Rental Property.
§ 260-156 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-157
1:593
§ 260-158. Issuance of permit.
No zoning permit shall be issued until the Zoning Officer has determined
that the proposed use of land, the proposed tenant or occupant, or the
existing or proposed building or structure complies with the provisions
of the applicable zoning district and other provisions of this chapter. The
issuance of a zoning permit does not permit construction or occupancy of
building or structure. A certificate of occupancy is also required pursuant
to the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code, as amended. In case of
refusal of the Code Enforcement Officer to issue a permit, the applicant
shall be advised in writing of the reasons for denial and his or her rights of
appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 260-159. Revoking of zoning permit.
on the property and a brief description of the proposed work and
the estimated cost.
(7) The application shall include a site layout plan indicating the
location, dimensions, height and relation to property and street
lines of proposed buildings or structures and all existing buildings
or structures. The site layout plan shall be prepared and certified
by a registered professional engineer, land surveyor or landscape
architect licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Review of application.
(1) Planning Commission review. Sign proposals submitted in
conjunction with the proposed construction of a new building or
addition to an existing building that requires review by the
Planning Commission shall be shown on the site plan.
(2) Building Official review. The Building Inspector shall review the
sign permit application for any proposed sign.
C. Application fees. All applicants shall pay to the Borough at the time of
application a fee in the amount established in the fee schedule adopted
by resolution of the Borough Council. In the event an application
requires a request to Borough Council for consideration of a conditional
use or to the Zoning Hearing Board for consideration of a variance or
appeal of a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer, each applicant
shall pay to the Borough the appropriate application fee in the amount
established in the Fee Schedule.
A. The Zoning Officer shall be empowered to revoke a permit if he has
evidence that the activity for which the permit was granted is not
occurring in accordance with the information provided with application
for that permit.
B. The revoking of a permit shall require the former permit holder to cease
and desist any activity previously allowed to occur while his permit was
§ 260-157 IRWIN CODE § 260-159
1:594
§ 260-160. Expiration of permit.
If any activity authorized by a permit shall not have been commenced within
six months after the issuance of such permit, the permit shall be said to
have expired and be invalid. Under such conditions neither the permit fee
nor any part thereof shall be returned to such permit holder, and if at
any further time such permit holder shall make application for another
permit for the same activity, he shall follow the same procedure and pay
the same fee as if no previous permit had been issued. The Zoning Officer
is responsible for tracking permits and maintaining a list of the permits
outstanding.
§ 260-161. Enforcement notice.
§ 260-162. Enforcement remedies.
in effect or which was occurring in violation of this chapter and the
terms under which his permit had been granted.
A. The Zoning Officer is hereby authorized and directed, in the name of
the Borough, to enforce the provisions of this article and to institute
civil enforcement proceedings as provided in this chapter when acting
within the scope of his or her employment.
B. If it appears that a violation of this chapter has occurred, the Zoning
Officer shall initiate enforcement proceedings by sending an
enforcement notice as provided herein. The enforcement notice shall be
sent to the owner of record of the parcel on which the violation has
occurred.
C. The enforcement notice shall state the following:
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Borough intends to take action.
(2) The location of the property violation.
(3) The specific violation with a description of the requirements which
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions
of this chapter.
(4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(5) Recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the Zoning
Hearing Board within a period of 10 days.
(6) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.
§ 260-159 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-162
1:595
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of provisions of this chapter shall, upon being
found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the Borough, pay a judgment that covers any expenses the Borough
shall incur to rectify the violation, plus court costs, including
reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough as a result thereof.
No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the
date of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial District
Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules
of civil procedure. Each day a violation shall continue shall constitute a
separate violation unless the Magisterial District Judge determining
that there has been a violation further determines that there was a good
faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating this
chapter to have believed that there was no such violation, in which
event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until
the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the
Magisterial District Judge; thereafter each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation.
B. The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final adjudication
of the violation and judgment.
C. When a property owner, partnership or corporation within the Borough
of Irwin has violated an ordinance or ordinances, the Borough will send
out three notices to notify the property owner, partnership or
corporation of the violation(s), and after the third notice the Borough
has the authority to hire personnel to rectify the violation at the
expense of the property owner, partnership or corporation. Upon being
found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the Borough, the property owner, partnership or corporation shall pay a
judgment that covers any expenses the Borough shall incur plus any
court and attorneys' costs the Borough incurs.
§ 260-162 IRWIN CODE § 260-162
1:596
ARTICLE XX
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 260-163. Establishment of Board.
§ 260-164. Procedures.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall consist of three residents of the
Borough appointed by resolution of the Borough Council. The terms of
office shall be three years and shall be so fixed that the term of office of
one member shall expire each year. At the adoption of this chapter,
Zoning Hearing Board members continue in office pursuant to their
current terms. Board members shall hold no other Borough office. Any
member of the Board may be removed for cause by Borough Council
upon written notice and charges after a public hearing. Vacancies shall
be filled for unexpired terms in the same manner as those for original
appointments.
B. The Borough Council may appoint, by resolution, from one to three
residents of the Borough to serve as alternate members of the Board for
three-year terms. Alternates shall hold no other Borough office.
Alternates may participate in any proceeding or discussion of the Board
but shall not be entitled to vote or be compensated unless designated by
the Chairperson to sit on the Board in order to provide a quorum.
Designation of alternates to sit on the Board shall be made case by case
in rotation according to declining seniority among all alternates.
A. Officers. The Board shall elect from its own membership a Chairperson
and Vice Chairperson, who shall serve annual terms as such and may
succeed themselves. The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and
forms for its procedures consistent with the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, and this
chapter.
B. Within the limit of funds appropriated by the Borough Council, the
Board may employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel,
consultants and other technical and clerical services. Members of the
Board may receive compensation for the performance of their duties as
may be fixed by the Borough Council, but in no case shall it exceed the
rate of compensation authorized to be paid to the members of the
Borough Council.
C. Public notice. The Board shall keep full public records of its business,
which records shall be the property of the municipality, and shall
submit a report of its activities to the governing body as requested by
the governing body.
D. Removal of Board members. Any Board member may be removed for
malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for other just
cause by a majority vote of the governing body which appointed the
member, taken after the member has received 15 days' advance notice
§ 260-163 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-164
1:597
§ 260-165. Zoning hearings.
§ 260-166. Jurisdiction.
of the intent to take such a vote. A hearing shall be held in connection
with the vote if the member shall request it in writing.
A. All hearings by the Zoning Hearing Board shall be conducted in
accordance with the procedure contained in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act of 1968, as reenacted and
amended.136
B. In addition to a fee charged with respect to an application for relief to
the Zoning Hearing Board, the applicant shall also be solely responsible
for all costs and expenses incurred for advertising, posting of the
subject property, and for establishing, on a case-by case-basis, a
reasonable estimate of anticipated advertising and posting expenses,
which shall be collected by the Borough at the time of application to the
Zoning Hearing Board. At the conclusions of the hearing, the Borough
shall submit to the applicant an invoice itemizing the actual costs
incurred for advertising and posting, and the applicant shall either be
reimbursed for any overpayment made or pay to the Borough any
deficiency for said advertising and posting costs and expenses.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudications in the following matters:
(1) All applications for approvals of planned residential developments
under Article VII of the MPC pursuant to the provisions of Section
702 of the MPC.137
(2) Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance,
except those brought before the Borough Council pursuant to
Sections 609.1 and 916.1(a)(2) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.138
(3) Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising
procedural questions or alleged defects in the process of
enactment or adoption, which challenges shall be raised by an
appeal taken within 30 days after the effective date of said
ordinance. Where the ordinance appealed from is the initial zoning
ordinance of the Borough and a Zoning Hearing Board has not been
previously established, the appeal raising procedural questions
shall be taken directly to court.
(4) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including,
but not limited to, the granting or denial of any permit or failure to
136. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
137. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10702.
138. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and 10916.1(a)(2).
§ 260-164 IRWIN CODE § 260-166
1:598
act on the application therefor, the issuance of any cease and desist
order or the registration or refusal to register any nonconforming
use, structure or lot.
(5) Appeals from a determination by the Borough Engineer or the
Zoning Officer with reference to the administration of any
floodplain or flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a
land use ordinance.
(6) Applications for variances from the terms of this chapter and flood
hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance
pursuant to Section 910.2 of the MPC.139
(7) Applications for special exceptions under this chapter or floodplain
or flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use
ordinance pursuant to Section 912.1 of the MPC.140
(8) Appeals from the determination of any officer or agency charged
with the administration of any transfers of development rights or
performance density provisions of this chapter.
(9) Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination under Section
916.2 of the MPC.141
(10) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Borough
Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or
provision thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion
control and stormwater management insofar as the same relate to
development not involving applications under Article V or VII of the
MPC.
B. The Borough Council shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudications in the following matters:
(1) All applications for approvals of planned residential developments
under Article VII of the MPC pursuant to the provisions of Section
702 of the MPC.142
(2) All applications pursuant to Section 508 of the MPC143 for approval
of subdivisions or land developments under Article V of the MPC.
(3) Applications for conditional use under the express provisions of this
chapter.
(4) Applications for curative amendment to this chapter or pursuant to
Section 609.1 and 916.1(a) of the MPC.144
139. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10910.2.
140. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10912.1.
141. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
142. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10702.
143. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
144. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and 10916.1(a).
§ 260-166 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-166
1:599
§ 260-167. Parties appellant before Board.
Appeals raising the substantive validity of any land use ordinance (except
those to be brought before the Borough Council pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code); procedural questions or
alleged defects in the process of enactment or adoption of a land use
ordinance; or from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including, but
not limited to, the granting or denial of any permit or failure to act on
the application therefor, the issuance of any cease and desist order or the
registration or refusal to register any nonconforming use, structure or lot;
from a determination by the Borough Engineer or the Zoning Officer with
reference to the administration of any floodplain or flood hazard ordinance
or such provisions within a land use ordinance; from the determination
of any officer or agency charged with the administration of any transfers
of development rights or performance density provisions of this chapter;
from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Borough Engineer in the
administration of any land use ordinance or provision thereof with reference
to sedimentation and erosion control and stormwater management insofar
as the same relate to development not involving subdivision and land
development or planned residential development may be filed with the
Zoning Hearing Board in writing by the landowner affected, any officer or
agency of the Borough, or any person aggrieved. Requests for a variance
and for special exception may be filed with the Board by any landowner or
any tenant with the permission of such landowner.
§ 260-168. Variances.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear requests for variances where it is
alleged that the provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship upon
the applicant. The Board may by rule prescribe the form of application and
(5) All petitions for amendments to land use ordinances pursuant to
the procedures set forth in Section 609 of the MPC.145
(6) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or the
Borough Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance
or provisions thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion
control and stormwater management insofar as the same relate to
applications for land development under Articles V and VII of the
MPC. Where such determination relates only to development not
involving Article V or VII, the appeal from such determination of
the Zoning Officer or the Borough Engineer shall be to the Zoning
Hearing Board pursuant to this section. Where the applicable land
use ordinance vests jurisdiction for final administration of
subdivision and land development applications in the Planning
Commission, all appeals from determinations under this subsection
shall be to the Planning Commission, and all appeals from the
decision of the Planning Commission shall be to court.
145. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609.
§ 260-166 IRWIN CODE § 260-168
1:600
may require preliminary application to the Zoning Officer. The Board may
grant a variance, provided that all of the following findings are made, where
relevant in a given case:
§ 260-169. Special exceptions.
Where the Borough Council in this chapter has stated special exceptions
to be granted or denied by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to express
standards and criteria contained in Article XVIII of this chapter, the Board
shall hear and decide requests for such special exceptions in accordance
with such standards and criteria. In granting a special exception, the Board
may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those
expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to implement the
purposes of this chapter and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.
§ 260-170. Effect of Board decision.
A. That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including
irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or shape, or
exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the
particular property, and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such
conditions and not the circumstances or conditions generally created by
the provisions of this chapter in the neighborhood or district in which
the property is located.
B. That because of such physical circumstances or conditions there is no
possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with
the provisions of this chapter and that the authorization of a variance is
therefor necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property.
C. That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the applicant.
D. That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of
the neighborhood or district in which the property is located nor
substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or
development of adjacent property nor be detrimental to the public
welfare.
E. That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance
which will afford relief and represent the least modification possible of
the regulation in issue.
F. In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to
implement the purposes of this chapter and the MPC.
A. A party aggrieved by a decision of the Board may appeal to the Court of
Common Pleas within 30 days after the Board's decision.
§ 260-168 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-170
1:601
B. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to deny to the
appellant the right to proceed directly to court, where allowed by other
laws.
C. The Board shall require the Zoning Officer to issue an appropriate
permit after reaching a decision on any appeal, challenge, variance
request or request for special exception, where such permit was
necessarily withheld until the Board's hearing on the case and the
decision of the Board would allow the land activity to commence or
continue.
§ 260-170 IRWIN CODE § 260-170
1:602
ARTICLE XXI
Amending Zoning Ordinance or Map
§ 260-171. Amendments.
§ 260-172. Enactment of Zoning Ordinance amendments.
A. Amendments to this chapter shall become effective only after a public
hearing held pursuant to public notice. A brief summary setting forth
the principal provisions of the proposed amendment and a reference to
the place within the Borough where copies of the proposed amendment
may be secured or examined shall be incorporated in the public notice.
Unless the proposed amendment shall have been prepared by the
Planning Commission, the Borough Council shall submit the
amendment to the Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to the
hearing on such amendment to provide the Planning Commission an
opportunity to submit recommendations. In addition, at least 30 days
prior to the public hearing on the amendment, the Borough Council
shall submit the proposed amendment to the Westmoreland County
planning agency for recommendations.
B. Within 30 days after adoption, the Borough Council shall forward a
certified copy of the amendment to the county planning agency.
C. Proposed amendments shall not be enacted unless notice of proposed
enactment is given in the manner set forth in this section, and shall
include the time and place of the meeting at which passage will be
considered, a reference to a place within the Borough where copies of
the proposed amendment may be examined without charge or obtained
for a charge not greater than the cost thereof. The Borough Council
shall publish the proposed amendment once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Borough not more than 60 days or less than seven
days prior to passage. Publication of the proposed amendment shall
include either the full text thereof or the title and a brief summary
prepared by the Borough Solicitor and setting forth all the provisions in
reasonable detail. If the full text is not included:
(1) A copy thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of general
circulation in the Borough at the time the public notice is
published.
(2) An attested copy of the proposed amendment shall be filed in the
county law library (or other county office designated by the County
Commissioners).
D. In the event substantial amendments are made in the proposed
amendment before voting upon enactment the Borough Council shall,
at least 10 days prior to enactment, readvertise in one newspaper of
general circulation in the Borough a brief summary setting forth all the
provisions in reasonable detail together with a summary of the
amendments.
§ 260-171 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-172
1:603
A. The Borough Council may from time to time amend, supplement or
repeal any of the regulations and provisions of this chapter for the
preparation of amendments to zoning ordinances; the procedure set
forth in Section 607 of the MPC for the preparation of a proposed
zoning ordinance shall be optional.146
B. Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the Borough Council
shall hold a public hearing thereon pursuant to public notice. In
addition, if the proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map change,
notice of said public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by the
municipality at points deemed sufficient by the municipality along the
tract to notify potentially interested citizens. The affected tract or area
shall be posted at least one week prior to the date of the hearing.
C. In addition to the requirement that notice be posted where the
proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map change, notice of the
public hearing shall be mailed by the municipality at least 30 days prior
to the date of the hearing by first class mail to the addresses to which
real estate tax bills are sent for all real property located within 300 feet
of the area being rezoned, as evidenced by tax records within the
possession of the municipality. The notice shall include the location,
date and time of the public hearing. A good faith effort and substantial
compliance shall satisfy the requirements of this subsection.
D. The above Subsection C shall not apply when the rezoning constitutes a
comprehensive rezoning.
E. In the case of an amendment other than that prepared by the Planning
Commission, the Borough Council shall submit each such amendment
to the Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to the hearing on
such proposed amendment to provide the planning agency an
opportunity to submit recommendations.
F. If after any public hearing held upon an amendment the proposed
amendment is changed substantially or is revised to include land
previously not affected by it, the Borough Council shall hold another
public hearing, pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to vote on
the amendment.
G. If a county planning agency shall have been created for the county in
which the municipality proposing the amendment is located, then at
least 30 days prior to the public hearing on the amendment by the local
governing body the Borough shall submit the proposed amendment to
the Westmoreland County Planning Department for recommendations.
H. Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to the zoning
ordinance shall be forwarded to the Westmoreland County Planning
Department.
146. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10607.
§ 260-172 IRWIN CODE § 260-173
1:604
§ 260-173. Procedure for landowner curative amendments.
A. A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the
validity of this chapter or the Zoning Map or any provision thereof
which prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in which he
has an interest may submit a curative amendment to the Borough
Council with a written request that his challenge and proposed
amendment be heard and decided as provided in Section 916.1 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.147 The curative amendment
and challenge shall be referred to the Planning Commission and the
county planning agency, as provided in Section 609,148 and notice of the
hearing thereon shall be given as provided in Sections 610 and 916.1 of
the MPC.149
B. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Section 908 of the
MPC,150 and all references therein to the Zoning Hearing Board shall,
for purposes of this section be references to the Borough Council. If the
Borough does not accept a landowner's curative amendment brought in
accordance with this subsection and a court subsequently rules that the
challenge has merit, the court's decision shall not result in a declaration
of invalidity for this entire chapter and the Zoning Map, but only for
those provisions which specifically relate to the landowner's curative
amendment and challenge.
C. The Borough Council, if it determines that a validity challenge has
merit, may accept a landowner's curative amendment, with or without
revision, or may adopt an alternative amendment which will cure the
challenged defects. The Borough Council shall consider the curative
amendments, plans and explanatory material submitted by the
landowner and shall also consider:
(1) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools and other public service facilities.
(2) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the proposal
upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of the proposal
in providing housing units of a type actually available to and
affordable by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully excluded by
the challenged provisions of this chapter or the Zoning Map.
(3) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by the
site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers,
natural resources and other natural features.
(4) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and natural
features; the degree to which these are protected or destroyed; the
147. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.1.
148. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609.
149. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10610 and 10916.1.
150. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10908.
§ 260-173 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-173
1:605
§ 260-174. Procedure for Borough curative amendments.
If the Borough determines that this chapter or any portion hereof is
substantially invalid, it shall take the following actions:
tolerance of the resources to development and any adverse
environmental impacts.
(5) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture and
other land uses which are essential to public health and welfare.
A. The Borough shall declare by formal action this chapter or portions
hereof substantially invalid and propose to prepare a curative
amendment to overcome such invalidity. Within 30 days of such
declaration and proposal the Borough Council shall:
(1) By resolution make specific findings setting forth the declared
invalidity of this chapter, which may include:
(a) References to specific uses which are either not permitted or
not permitted in sufficient quantity;
(b) Reference to a class of use or uses which requires revision; or
(c) Reference to this entire chapter which requires revisions.
(2) Begin to prepare and consider a curative amendment to this
chapter to correct the declared invalidity.
B. Within 180 days from the date of the declaration and proposal, the
Borough shall enact a curative amendment to validate or reaffirm the
validity of this chapter pursuant to the provisions of Section 609 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, in order to cure the
declared invalidity of this chapter.151
C. Upon the initiation of the procedures as set forth in Subsection A, the
Borough Council shall not be required to entertain or consider any
landowner's curative amendment filed under Section 609.1 of the
MPC,152 nor shall the Zoning Hearing Board be required to give a report
requested under Section 909.1 or 916.1 of the MPC,153 subsequent to
the declaration and proposal based upon the grounds identical or
substantially similar to those specified by the resolution required by
Subsection A(1). Upon completion of the procedures set forth in
Subsections A and B, no rights to a cure pursuant to the provisions of
Section 609.1 and 916.1154 shall, from the date of the declaration and
proposal, accrue to any landowner on the basis of the substantive
151. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609.
152. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609.1.
153. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10909.1 or 10916.1, respectively.
154. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and 10916.1.
§ 260-173 IRWIN CODE § 260-174
1:606
§ 260-175. Additional procedures for amendment of Zoning Map.
invalidity of this chapter for which there has been a curative
amendment pursuant to this section.
D. The Borough, having utilized the procedures set forth in this section,
may not again utilize said procedure for a period of 36 months following
the date of enactment of a curative amendment or reaffirmation of the
validity of this chapter; provided, however, if after the date of
declaration and proposal there is a substantially new duty imposed
upon the Borough by virtue of a change in statute or by virtue of a
Pennsylvania Appellate Court decision, the Borough may utilize the
provisions of this section to propose a curative amendment to this
chapter to fulfill said duty or obligation.
A. Borough Council may, from time to time, amend the Official Zoning
Ordinance Map to rezone portions of the Borough so that the zoning
district boundaries, as shown on the Map, are no longer correct.
B. At such times, the Borough Secretary shall forward the Official Zoning
Ordinance Map, together with a copy of the rezoning amendment
describing the district boundary changes and any other related
materials, to the Borough Engineer.
C. The Borough Secretary shall forward these materials to the Borough
Engineer within one week of the adoption of the rezoning amendment.
D. The Borough Engineer shall see that the Official Zoning Ordinance Map
is properly redrafted or otherwise changed to include the rezoning. He
shall also note on the Map the ordinance number of the amending
ordinance, the date of adoption of that ordinance, and the date on
which he corrected the map. The Borough Engineer shall affix his
signature certifying that the changes made are in accordance with the
amendment as passed by Council.
E. All notes on the Official Zoning Ordinance Map of the kind required by
Subsection D above which relate to previous rezoning amendments and
map changes shall remain on the Map to serve as a reference history
tracing past rezonings.
F. The Borough Engineer shall complete the correcting of the Official
Zoning Ordinance Map and return it to the Borough Secretary as
quickly as possible.
G. It shall be deemed a violatiion of this chapter for any person to alter or
attempt to alter the Official Zoning Ordinance Map except by the
procedures set forth in this Part.
§ 260-174 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-175
1:607

Part 5
[Added 3-8-2017 By OrdS. pNeoc.i fi94c 9L;a Anmd eUnsdeesd 6-14-2017 By Ord. No.
952]
ARTICLE XXII
Wireless Communications Facilities
§ 260-176. Purposes; findings of fact; intent.
A. The purpose of this article is to establish uniform standards for the
location, siting, design, permitting, maintenance, and use of wireless
communications facilities within the Borough of Irwin. The Borough of
Irwin recognizes the importance of wireless communications and their
attendant facilities in providing high-quality communications service to
the Borough's residents, businesses, and emergency management and
response organizations. The Borough of Irwin also has a responsibility
to protect the public, to enhance public safety, and to minimize the
adverse visual and dangerous effects of such facilities through the
standards set forth in this article.
B. It is the Borough of Irwin's intent to:
(1) Accommodate the need for wireless communications facilities
while regulating their location and number so as to ensure the
provision for necessary services;
(2) Provide for the managed development of wireless communications
facilities in a manner that enhances the benefits of wireless
communications and accommodates the needs of both Borough
residents and wireless carriers in accordance with federal and
state laws and regulations;
(3) Establish procedures for the design, location, siting, construction,
installation, maintenance and removal of both tower-based and
non-tower-based wireless communications facilities in the
Borough, including facilities both inside and outside the public
rights-of-way;
(4) Address new wireless technologies, including, but not limited to,
distributed antenna systems, data collection units, cable Wi-Fi and
other wireless communications facilities;
(5) Minimize the adverse visual and dangerous effects and the number
of such facilities through proper design, location siting, screening,
material, color and finish and by requiring that competing
providers of wireless communications services co-locate their
commercial communications antennas and related facilities on
existing towers;
(6) Promote the health, safety and welfare of the Borough's residents.
§ 260-176 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-177
1:609
§ 260-177. General requirements for non-tower wireless
communications facilities.
A. The following regulations shall apply to all non-tower WCFs:
(1) Permitted only as a special exception in all zones subject to the
following regulations. Non-tower WCFs are permitted in all zones
subject to the restrictions and conditions prescribed below and
subject to applicable permitting by the Borough. No non-tower
WCFs shall be constructed without a special exception permit.
(2) Prohibited on certain structures. Non-tower WCFs may not be
located on single-family detached residences, single-family
attached residences, or any residential accessory structure.
(3) Noncommercial usage exemption. Borough residents utilizing
satellite dishes and antennas for the purpose of maintaining
television, phone, radio and/or Internet connections at their
respective residences shall be exempt from the design regulations
enumerated in this article of the Zoning Ordinance. This exemption
shall include amateur radio operators.
(4) Nonconforming wireless support structures. Non-tower WCFs shall
be permitted to co-locate upon nonconforming tower-based WCFs
and other nonconforming structures existing on the effective date
of this article. Co-location of WCFs upon existing tower-based
WCFs is encouraged even if the tower-based WCF is
nonconforming as to use within a zoning district.
(5) Standard of care. Any non-tower WCF shall be designed,
constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and
removed in strict compliance with all current applicable technical,
safety and safety-related codes, including but not limited to the
most recent editions of the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) Code, National Electrical Safety Code, and National
Electrical Code. Any WCF shall at all times be kept and maintained
in good condition, order and repair by qualified maintenance and
construction personnel, so that the same shall not endanger the life
of any person or any property in the Borough of Irwin.
(6) Wind. All non-tower WCF structures shall be designed to withstand
the effects of wind gusts of at least 100 miles per hour in addition to
the standard designed by the American National Standards
Institute as prepared by the engineering departments of the
Electronics Industry Association and Telecommunications Industry
Association (ANSI/TIA-222, as amended).
(7) Aviation safety. All non-tower WCFs shall comply with all federal
and state laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
(8) Public safety communications. Non-tower WCFs shall not interfere
with public safety communications or the reception of broadband,
§ 260-177 IRWIN CODE § 260-177
1:610
television, radio or other communication services enjoyed by
occupants of nearby properties.
(9) Radio frequency emissions. A non-tower WCF shall not, by itself or
in conjunction with other WCFs, generate radio frequency
emissions in excess of the standards and regulations of the FCC,
including, but not limited to, the FCC Office of Engineering
Technology Bulletin 65 entitled "Evaluating Compliance with FCC
Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio Frequency
Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
(10) Removal. In the event that use of a non-tower WCF is discontinued,
the owner shall provide written notice to the Borough of its intent
to discontinue use and the date when the use shall be discontinued.
Unused or abandoned WCFs or portions of WCFs shall be removed
as follows:
(a) All abandoned or unused WCFs and accessory facilities shall be
removed within two months of the cessation of operations at
the site unless a time extension is approved by the Borough.
(b) If the WCF or accessory facility is not removed within two
months of the cessation of operations at a site, or within any
longer period approved by the Borough, the WCF and/or
associated facilities and equipment may be removed by the
Borough and the cost of removal assessed against the owner of
the WCF.
(11) Timing of approval for co-location applications. The following time
frames shall apply to applications for co-located non-tower WCFs:
(a) Applications for co-located non-tower WCFs that do not
substantially change the dimensions of the underlying wireless
support structure or that otherwise do not fall under the
Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocations Act. Within 30
calendar days of the date that an application for a non-tower
WCF is filed with the Borough, the Borough shall notify the
WCF applicant in writing of any information that may be
required to complete such application. Within 90 calendar days
of receipt of a complete application, the Borough shall make its
final decision on whether to approve the application and shall
advise the WCF applicant in writing of such decision.
(b) Applications for co-locations that do substantially change the
dimensions of the underlying wireless support structure, or
that otherwise fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband
Collocations Act. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an
application for a non-tower WCF is filed with the Borough, the
Borough shall notify the WCF applicant in writing of any
information that may be required to complete such application.
Within 60 calendar days of receipt of a complete application,
the Borough shall make its final decision on whether to
§ 260-177 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-177
1:611
approve the application and shall advise the WCF applicant in
writing of such decision.
(12) Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a non-tower WCF
shall provide the Borough with a certificate of insurance evidencing
general liability coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000
per occurrence and property damage coverage in the minimum
amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering the non-tower WCF.
(13) Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a non-tower
WCF shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, defend and hold
harmless the Borough of Irwin, its elected and appointed officials,
employees and agents, at all times against any and all claims for
personal injury, including death, and property damage arising in
whole or in part from, caused by or connected with any act or
omission of the person, its officers, agents, employees or
contractors arising out of, but not limited to, the construction,
installation, operation, maintenance or removal of the non-tower
WCF. Each person that owns or operates a non-tower WCF shall
defend any actions or proceedings against the Borough in which it
is claimed that personal injury, including death, or property
damage was caused by the construction, installation, operation,
maintenance or removal of a non-tower WCF. The obligation to
indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include, but not be
limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities,
damages, reasonable attorneys' fees, reasonable expert fees, court
costs and all other costs of indemnification.
(14) Maintenance. To the extent permitted by law, the following
maintenance requirements shall apply:
(a) The non-tower WCF shall be fully automated and unattended
on a daily basis and shall be visited only for maintenance or
emergency repair.
(b) Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the upkeep of
the facility in order to promote the safety and security of the
Borough's residents.
(c) All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing less than the
best available technology for preventing failures and
accidents.
B. In addition to the general requirements for non-tower wireless
communications facilities, the following regulations shall apply to all
co-located non-tower WCFs that do not substantially change the
physical dimensions of the wireless support structure to which they are
attached and/or fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband
Collocation Act:
(1) Building permit required, excepted from the special exception
authorization requirement. WCF applicants proposing the
§ 260-177 IRWIN CODE § 260-177
1:612
modification of an existing tower-based WCF shall obtain a building
permit from the Borough. In order to be considered for such
permit, the WCF applicant must submit a permit application to
the Borough in accordance with applicable permit policies and
procedures. The Borough shall issue a determination on the
building permit within 90 days of the date of the receipt of a
completed application.
(2) Related equipment. Ground-mounted related equipment greater
than three cubic feet shall not be located within 50 feet of a lot in
residential use or zoned residential.
(3) Permit fees. The Borough may assess appropriate and reasonable
permit fees directly related to the Borough's actual costs in
reviewing and processing the application for approval of a nontower
WCF.
C. The following regulations shall apply to all non-tower WCFs that do
substantially change the wireless support structure to which they are
attached and/or that otherwise do not fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act:
(1) Special exception authorization required. Any WCF applicant
proposing the construction of a new non-tower WCF, or the
modification of an existing non-tower WCF, shall first obtain a
special exception from the Borough. New constructions,
modifications, and replacements that do fall under the WBCA shall
be not subject to the special exception process. The special
exception application shall demonstrate that the proposed facility
complies with all applicable provisions in the Borough of Irwin
Code.
(2) Historic buildings. No non-tower WCF may be located upon any
property, or on a building or structure that is listed on either the
National or Pennsylvania Registers of Historic Places, or is listed on
the official historic structures and/or historic districts list
maintained by the Borough, or has been designated by the Borough
to be of historical significance.
(3) Permit fees. The Borough may assess appropriate and reasonable
permit fees directly related to the Borough's actual costs in
reviewing and processing the application for approval of a nontower
WCF, as well as related inspection, monitoring and related
costs.
(4) Development regulations. Non-tower WCFs shall be co-located on
existing wireless support structures, such as existing buildings or
tower-based WCFs, subject to the following conditions;
(a) The total height of any wireless support structure and mounted
WCF shall not exceed 20 feet above the maximum height
§ 260-177 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-177
1:613
permitted in the underlying zoning district, unless the WCF
applicant applies for, and subsequently obtains, a variance.
(b) In accordance with industry standards, all non-tower WCF
applicants must submit documentation to the Borough
justifying the total height of the non-tower WCF. Such
documentation shall be analyzed in the context of such
justification on an individual basis.
(c) If the WCF applicant proposes to locate the related equipment
in a separate building, the building shall comply with the
minimum requirements for the applicable zoning district, and
landscaping shall be required to screen as much of the
equipment building as possible.
[1] Landscaping. An evergreen screen shall surround the site.
The screen can be either a hedge (planted three feet on
center maximum) or a row of evergreen trees (planted 10
feet on center maximum). The evergreen screen shall be a
minimum height of six feet at planting and shall grow to a
minimum of 15 feet at maturity.
(5) Design regulations.
(a) Non-tower WCFs shall employ stealth technology and be
treated to match the wireless support structure in order to
minimize aesthetic impact. The application of the stealth
technology chosen by the WCF applicant shall be subject to the
approval of the Borough.
(b) Omnidirectional or whip communications antennas shall not
exceed 20 feet in height or seven inches in diameter.
(c) Directional or panel communications antennas shall not exceed
eight feet in height or three feet in width.
(d) Cylinder-type antennas shall not exceed 10 feet in length and
not exceed 12 inches in diameter and shall be of a color that is
identical or similar to the color of the supporting structure to
make the antenna and any related accessory equipment
visually unobtrusive.
(e) Satellite and microwave dishes shall not exceed 10 feet in
diameter. Dish antennas greater than three feet in diameter
shall be screened with an appropriate architectural treatment
that is compatible with or integral to the architecture or
building to which they are attached. This screening
requirement shall not apply to dishes located upon towers.
(f) A security fence with a minimum height of eight feet shall
surround any separate communications equipment building.
Vehicular access to the communications equipment building
§ 260-177 IRWIN CODE § 260-177
1:614
§ 260-178. General and specific requirements for all power-based
wireless communications facilities.
shall not interfere with the parking or vehicular circulations on
the site for the principal use.
(6) Removal, replacement and modification.
(a) The removal and replacement of non-tower WCF and/or
accessory equipment for the purpose of upgrading or repairing
the WCF is permitted, so long as such repair or upgrade does
not substantially change the overall size of the WCF or the
numbers of antennas.
(b) Any material modification to a WCF shall require notice to be
provided to the Borough and possible supplemental permit
approval to the original permit or authorization.
(7) Inspection. The Borough reserves the right to inspect any WCF to
ensure compliance with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and
any other provisions found within the Borough Code or state or
federal law. The Borough and/or its agents shall have the authority
to enter the property upon which a WCF is located at any time,
upon reasonable notice to the operator, to ensure such compliance.
(8) Retention of experts. The Borough may hire any consultant(s) and/
or expert(s) necessary to assist the Borough in reviewing and
evaluating the application for approval of the WCF and, once
approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential violations of
the terms and conditions of these WCF provisions. The WCF
applicant and/or owner of the WCF shall reimburse the Borough for
all costs of the Borough's consultant(s) in providing expert
evaluation and consultation in connection with these activities.
A. The following regulations shall apply to all tower-based wireless
communications facilities:
(1) Standard of care. Any tower-based WCF shall be designed,
constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and
removed in strict compliance with all current applicable technical,
safety and safety-related codes, including, but not limited to, the
most recent editions of the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) Code, National Electrical Safety Code, National Electrical
Code, as well as the accepted and responsible workmanlike
industry practices of the National Association of Tower Erectors.
Any tower-based WCF shall at all times be kept and maintained in
good condition, order and repair by qualified maintenance and
construction personnel, so that the same shall not endanger the life
of any person or any property in the Borough.
(2) Notice. Upon submission of an application for a tower-based WCF
and the scheduling of the public hearing upon the application, the
§ 260-177 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-178
1:615
WCF applicant shall mail notice to all owners of every property
within 500 feet of the proposed facility. The WCF applicant shall
provide proof of the notification to the Borough.
(3) Special exception authorization required. Tower-based WCFs are
permitted in certain zoning districts and subject to said zone
districts' restrictions. No WCF applicant shall have the right under
these regulations to erect a tower to the maximum height specified
in this or any other section of the Zoning Code unless it proves the
necessity for such height. The WCF applicant shall demonstrate
that the tower-based WCF is the minimum height necessary for the
service area.
(a) Prior to the Borough Zoning Hearing Board's approval of a
special exception authorizing the construction and installation
of tower-based WCFs, it shall be incumbent upon the WCF
applicant for such special exception approval to prove to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the WCF applicant
cannot adequately extend or in fill its communications system
by the use of equipment such as redoes, repeaters, antenna(s)
and other similar equipment installed on existing structures,
such as utility poles or their appurtenances and other available
tall structures. The WCF applicant shall further demonstrate
that the proposed tower-based WCF must be located where it
is proposed in order to serve the WCF applicant's service area
and that no other viable alternative location exists.
(b) The special exception application shall be accompanied by a
propagation study evidencing the need for the proposed tower
or other communications facilities and equipment, a
description of the type and manufacturer of the proposed
transmission/radio equipment, the frequency range
(megahertz band) assigned to the WCF applicant, the power in
watts at which the WCF applicant transmits, and any relevant
related tests conducted by the WCF applicant in determining
the need for the proposed site and installation.
(c) The special exception application shall also be accompanied by
documentation demonstrating that the proposed tower-based
WCF complies with all state and federal laws and regulations
concerning aviation safety.
(d) Where the tower-based WCF is located on a property with
another principal use, the WCF applicant shall present
documentation that the owner of the property has granted an
easement for the proposed WCF and that vehicular access will
be provided to the facility.
(e) The special exception application shall be accompanied by
documentation demonstrating that the proposed tower-based
WCF complies with all applicable provisions in this section.
§ 260-178 IRWIN CODE § 260-178
1:616
(4) Engineer certification. Prior to the Borough's issuance of a permit
authorizing construction and erection of a tower-based WCF, a
structural engineer registered in Pennsylvania shall issue to the
Borough a written certification of the proposed WCF's ability to
meet the structural standards offered by either the Electronic
Industries Association or the Telecommunication Industry
Association and certify the proper construction of the foundation
and the erection of the structure. This certification shall be
provided during the Zoning Hearing Board hearing(s) or at a
minimum be made as a condition attached to any approval given
such that the certification be provided prior to issuance of any
building permits.
(5) Visual appearance and land use compatibility. Tower-based WCFs
shall employ stealth technology, which may include the tower
portion to be painted silver or another color approved by the
Zoning Hearing Board, or shall have a galvanized finish. All towerbased
WCFs and related equipment shall be aesthetically and
architecturally compatible with the surrounding environment and
shall maximize the use of a like facade to blend with the existing
surroundings and neighboring buildings to the greatest extent
possible. The Zoning Hearing Board shall consider whether its
decision upon the subject application will promote the harmonious
and orderly development of the zoning district involved; encourage
compatibility with the character and type of development existing
in the area; benefit neighboring properties by preventing a
negative impact on the aesthetic character of the community;
preserve woodlands and trees existing at the site to the greatest
possible extent; and encourage sound engineering and land
development design and construction principles, practices and
techniques.
(6) Co-location and siting. An application for a new tower-based WCF
shall demonstrate that the proposed tower-based WCF cannot be
accommodated on an existing or approved structure or building.
The Zoning Hearing Board may deny an application to construct a
new tower-based WCF if the WCF applicant has not made a good
faith effort to mount the commercial communications antenna(s) on
an existing structure. The WCF applicant shall demonstrate that it
contacted the owners of tall structures, buildings, and towers
within a 1/4 mile radius of the site proposed, sought permission to
install an antenna on those structures, buildings, and towers and
was denied for one of the following reasons:
(a) The proposed antenna and related equipment would exceed
the structural capacity of the existing building, structure or
tower, and its reinforcement cannot be accomplished at a
reasonable cost.
(b) The proposed antenna and related equipment would cause
radio frequency interference with other existing equipment for
§ 260-178 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-178
1:617
that existing building, structure, or tower, and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
(c) Such existing buildings, structures, or towers do not have
adequate location, space, access, or height to accommodate
the proposed equipment or to allow it to perform its intended
function.
(d) A commercially reasonable agreement could not be reached
with the owner of such building, structure, or tower.
(7) Permit required for modifications. To the extent permissible under
applicable state and federal law, any WCF applicant proposing the
modification of an existing tower-based WCF, which increases the
overall height of such WCF, shall first obtain a permit from the
Borough. Nonroutine modifications shall be prohibited without a
permit.
(8) Gap in coverage. A WCF applicant for a tower-based WCF must
demonstrate that a significant gap in wireless coverage or capacity
exists with respect to all wireless operators in the applicable area
and that the type of WCF being proposed is the least intrusive
means by which to fill that gap in wireless coverage. The existence
or nonexistence of a gap in wireless coverage shall be a factor in
the Borough's decision on an application for approval of towerbased
WCF.
(9) Additional antennas. As a condition of approval for all tower-based
WCFs, the WCF applicant shall provide the Borough with a written
commitment that it will allow other service providers to co-locate
antennas on tower-based WCF where technically and economically
feasible. The owner of a tower-based WCF shall not install any
additional antennas without obtaining the prior written approval of
the Borough, subject to the provisions of this article.
(10)Wind. Any tower-based WCF structures shall be designed to
withstand the effects of wind gusts of at least 100 miles per hour in
addition to the standard designed by the American National
Standards Institute as prepared by the engineering departments of
the Electronics Industry Association, and Telecommunications
Industry Association (ANSI/EIA/TIA-222, as amended).
(11) Height. Any tower-based WCF shall be designed at the minimum
functional height. All tower-based WCFs shall comply with the
height restrictions applicable to the zone district. The applicant
may request a variance to the height restrictions of the zone
district, for a maximum height of 150 feet.
(12) Related equipment. Either 1) one single-story wireless
communications equipment building not exceeding 500 square feet
in area or 2) up to five metal boxes placed on a concrete pad not
exceeding 10 feet by 20 feet in area housing the receiving and
§ 260-178 IRWIN CODE § 260-178
1:618
transmitting equipment may be located on the site for each
unrelated company sharing commercial communications antenna
space on the tower-based wireless communications facility.
(13) Public safety communications. No tower-based WCF shall interfere
with public safety communications or the reception of broadband,
television, radio or other communications services enjoyed by
occupants of nearby properties.
(14) Maintenance. The following maintenance requirements shall apply:
(a) Any tower-based WCF shall be fully automated and unattended
on a daily basis and shall be visited only for maintenance or
emergency repair.
(b) Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the upkeep of
the WCF in order to promote the safety and security of the
Borough's residents and utilize the best available technology
for preventing failures and accidents.
(15)Radio frequency emissions. A tower-based WCF shall not, by itself
or in conjunction with other WCFs, generate radio frequency
emissions in excess of the standards and regulations of the FCC,
including, but not limited to, the FCC Office of Engineering
Technology Bulletin 65 entitled "Evaluating Compliance with FCC
Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio Frequency
Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
(16) Historic buildings or districts. A tower-based WCF shall not be
located upon a property and/or on a building or structure that is
listed on either the National or Pennsylvania Registers of Historic
Places, or eligible to be so listed, or is included in the official
historic structures and/or historic districts list maintained by the
Borough.
(17) Signs. All tower-based WCFs shall post a sign in a readily visible
location identifying the name and phone number of a party to
contact in the event of an emergency. The only other signage
permitted on the WCF shall be those required by the FCC or any
other federal or state agency.
(18) Lighting. No tower-based WCF shall be artificially lighted, except
as required by law. If lighting is required, the WCF applicant shall
provide a detailed plan for sufficient lighting, demonstrating as
unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as is permissible under state
and federal regulations. The WCF applicant shall promptly report
any outage or malfunction of FAA-mandated lighting to the
appropriate governmental authorities and to the Borough Code
Enforcement Officer.
(19) Noise. Tower-based WCF shall be operated and maintained so as
not to produce noise in excess of applicable noise standards under
§ 260-178 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-178
1:619
state law and the Borough Code, except in emergency situations
requiring the use of a backup generator, where such noise
standards may be exceeded on a temporary basis only.
(20) Aviation safety. Tower-based WCF shall comply with all federal and
state laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
(21) Retention of experts. The Borough may hire any consultant and/or
expert necessary to assist the Borough in reviewing and evaluating
the application for approval of the tower-based WCF and, once
approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential violations of
the terms and conditions of these provisions. The WCF applicant
and/or owner of the WCF shall reimburse the Borough for all costs
of the Borough's consultant(s) in providing expert evaluation and
consultation in connection with these activities.
(22) Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an
application for a tower-based WCF is filed with the Borough, the
Borough shall notify the WCF applicant in writing of any
information that may be required to complete such application. All
applications for tower-based WCFs shall be acted upon within 150
days of the receipt of a fully completed application for the approval
of such tower-based WCF, and the Borough shall advise the WCF
applicant in writing of its decision. If additional information was
requested by the Borough to complete an application, the time
required by the WCF applicant to provide the information shall not
be counted toward the one-hundred-fifty-day review period.
(23) Nonconforming Uses. Nonconforming tower-based WCFs which
are hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason or cause
may be repaired and restored at their former location but must
otherwise comply with the terms and conditions of this section.
(24) Removal. In the event that use of a tower-based WCF is planned to
be discontinued, the owner shall provide written notice to the
Borough of its intent to discontinue use and the date when the use
shall be discontinued. Unused or abandoned WCFs or portions of
WCFs shall be removed as follows:
(a) All unused or abandoned tower-based WCFs and accessory
facilities shall be removed within 90 days of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by
the Borough.
(b) If the WCF and/or accessory facility is not removed within 90
days of the cessation of operations at a site, or within any
longer period approved by the Borough, the WCF and
accessory facilities and equipment may be removed by the
Borough and the cost of removal assessed against the owner of
the WCF.
§ 260-178 IRWIN CODE § 260-178
1:620
(c) Any unused portions of tower-based WCFs, including antennas,
shall be removed within 90 days of the time of cessation of
operations. Borough approval must be obtained for all
replacements of portions of a tower-based WCF previously
removed.
(25) Permit fees. The Borough may assess appropriate and reasonable
permit fees directly related to the Borough's actual costs in
reviewing and processing the application for approval of a towerbased
WCF, as well as related inspection, monitoring, and related
costs.
(26)FCC license. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based
WCF over 40 feet in height shall submit a copy of its current FCC
license, including the name, address, and emergency telephone
number for the operator of the facility.
(27) Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based WCF
greater than 40 feet in height shall provide the Borough with a
certificate of insurance evidencing general liability coverage in the
minimum amount of $5,000,000 per occurrence and property
damage coverage in the minimum amount of $5,000,000 per
occurrence covering the tower-based WCF. Each person that owns
or operates a tower-based WCF 40 feet or less in height shall
provide the Borough with a certificate of insurance evidencing
general liability coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000
per occurrence and property damage coverage in the minimum
amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering each tower-based
WCF.
(28) Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based
WCF shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, defend and hold
harmless the Borough, its elected and appointed officials,
employees and agents, at all times against any and all claims for
personal injury, including death, and property damage arising in
whole or in part from, caused by or connected with any act or
omission of the person, its officers, agents, employees or
contractors arising out of, but not limited to, the construction,
installation, operation, maintenance or removal of the tower-based
WCF. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based WCF shall
defend any actions or proceedings against the Borough in which it
is claimed that personal injury, including death, or property
damage was caused by the construction, installation, operation,
maintenance or removal of tower-based WCF. The obligation to
indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include, but not be
limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities,
damages, reasonable attorneys' fees, reasonable expert fees, court
costs and all other costs of indemnification.
§ 260-178 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-178
1:621
(29) Engineer signature. All plans and drawings for a tower-based WCF
shall contain a seal and signature of a professional structural
engineer, licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(30) Financial security. Prior to receipt of a zoning permit for the
construction or placement of a tower-based WCF, the WCF
applicant shall provide to the Borough financial security sufficient
to guarantee the removal of the tower-based WCF. Said financial
security shall remain in place until the tower-based WCF is
removed.
(31) Development regulations.
(a) Tower-based WCFs shall not be located in, or within 100 feet
of, an area in which all utilities are primarily located
underground.
(b) Tower-based WCFs shall only be located within the I Industrial
and C-H Commercial-Highway Business Zoning Districts by
special exception, subject to the above prohibition.
(c) Sole use on a lot. A tower-based WCF shall be permitted as a
sole use on a lot, provided that the underlying lot meets
minimum size requirements, as established in the Zoning
Ordinance.
(d) Combined with another use. A tower-based WCF may be
permitted on a property with an existing use, or on a vacant
parcel in combination with another use, subject to the
following conditions:
[1] The existing use on the property may be any permitted use
in the applicable district and need not be affiliated with the
WCF.
[2] Minimum lot area. The minimum lot shall comply with the
requirements for the applicable district and shall be the
area needed to accommodate the tower-based WCF and
guy wires, the equipment building, security fence, and
buffer planting if the proposed WCF is greater than 40 feet
in height.
[3] Minimum setbacks. The minimum distance between the
base of a tower-based WCF and any adjoining property line
or street right-of-way line shall be equal to the total height
of the tower-based WCF or the minimum setback of the
underlying zoning district, whichever is greater. Where the
site on which a tower-based WCF is proposed to be located
is contiguous to an educational use, child day-care facility,
or agriculture or residential use, the minimum distance
between the base of a tower-based WCF and any such
adjoining uses shall equal 250 feet, regardless of the
§ 260-178 IRWIN CODE § 260-178
1:622
height of the tower-based WCF, unless it is demonstrated
to the reasonable satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board
that in the event of failure the WCF is designed to collapse
upon itself within a setback area less than the required
minimum setback without endangering such adjoining
uses and their occupants.
(32) Design regulations.
(a) The WCF shall employ the most current stealth technology
available in an effort to appropriately blend into the
surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic impact.
Application of the stealth technology chosen by the WCF
applicant shall be subject to the approval of the Borough.
(b) Any proposed tower-based WCF shall be designed structurally,
electrically, and in all respects to accommodate both the WCF
applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for future
users.
(c) Any tower-based WCF over 40 feet in height shall be equipped
with an anticlimbing device, as approved by the manufacturer.
(33) Surrounding environs.
(a) The WCF applicant shall ensure that the existing vegetation,
trees and shrubs located within proximity to the WCF structure
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
(b) The WCF applicant shall submit a soil report to the Borough
complying with the standards of Appendix I: Geotechnical
Investigations, ANSI/EIA-222, as amended, to document and
verify the design specifications of the foundation of the towerbased
WCF, and anchors for guy wires, if used.
(34) Fence/screen.
(a) A security fence with a minimum height of eight feet shall
completely surround any tower-based WCF greater than 40
feet in height, as well as guy wires, or any building housing
WCF equipment.
(b) Landscaping shall be required to screen as much of a newly
constructed tower-based WCF as possible. The Zoning Hearing
Board may permit any combination of existing vegetation,
topography, walls, decorative fences or other features instead
of landscaping, if, in the discretion of the Board, they achieve
the same degree of screening. Existing vegetation shall be
preserved to the maximum extent possible.
[1] An evergreen screen shall be required to surround the
site. The screen can either be a hedge (planted three feet
from center maximum) or a row of evergreen trees
§ 260-178 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-178
1:623
(planted 10 feet on center maximum). The evergreen
screen shall be a minimum height of six feet at planting
and shall be grown to a minimum of 15 feet at maturity.
(35) Accessory equipment.
(a) Ground-mounted related equipment associated to, or
connected with, a tower-based WCF shall be placed
underground or screened from public view using stealth
technologies, as described above.
(b) All related equipment, utility buildings and accessory
structures shall be architecturally designed to blend into the
environment in which they are situated and shall meet the
minimum setback requirements of the underlying zoning
district.
(36) Access road. An access road, turnaround space and parking shall
be provided to ensure adequate emergency and service access to
tower-based WCF. The access road shall be a dust-free all-weather
surface for its entire length. Maximum use of existing roads,
whether public or private, shall be made to the extent practicable.
Road grades shall closely follow natural contours to assure minimal
visual disturbance and minimize soil erosion. Where applicable, the
WCF owner shall present documentation to the Borough that the
property owner has granted an easement for the proposed facility.
(37) Parking. For each tower-based WCF greater than 40 feet in height,
there shall be two off-street parking spaces.
(38) Inspection. The Borough reserves the right to inspect any towerbased
WCF to ensure compliance with the Zoning Ordinance and
any other provisions found within the Borough Code or state or
federal law. The Borough and/or its agents shall have the authority
to enter the property upon which a WCF is located at any time,
upon reasonable notice to the operator, to ensure such compliance.
§ 260-178 IRWIN CODE § 260-178
1:624
ARTICLE XXIII
Medical Marijuana Organizations
[Added 6-14-2017 by Ord. No. 952]
§ 260-179. Applicability.
Article XXIII of the Zoning Code of the Borough of Irwin shall apply to
all medical marijuana organizations, unless noted otherwise herein. Where
state law, rules, and/or regulations provide more strict standards, the state
law, rules, and/or regulations shall be controlling over this article. Should
any provision of this article be preempted by state law, rules, and/or
regulations, be invalidated, or deemed unconstitutional, that offending
provision herein shall be stricken and the remainder of this article shall
remain in full force and effect.
§ 260-180. Definitions.
Refer to the definitions in Irwin Code § 260-9, as well as the definitions set
forth in 35 P.S. § 10231.103, as amended. The definitions set forth in § 260-9
shall be controlling where in conflict with 35 P.S. § 10231.103.
§ 260-181. Intent.
It is the intent of the Borough of Irwin to provide reasonable and
responsible controls for medical marijuana organizations located within the
Borough of Irwin. The Borough understands that medical marijuana has the
opportunity to provide countless individuals within the commonwealth and
this Borough with the treatment and medication that they need. However,
the Borough of Irwin must treat medical marijuana organizations like all
other land uses within the Borough and regulate their operations as
permitted by law, in order to maintain and enhance the public health, safety,
and welfare.
§ 260-182. Permit required; requirements.
A. Special exception permit required. Medical marijuana organizations
shall be permitted to operate within the Borough of Irwin upon issuance
of a special exception permit, pursuant to the terms and provisions of
this Article XXIII of Chapter 260 and §§ 260-152 and 260-153 of the
Irwin Code.
B. Siting. Medical marijuana organizations shall not be located within 200
feet of any property with a Residential Low Density, Residential
Medium Density, or Residential High Density Zone District. Medical
marijuana organizations shall not be located in nor shall they abut or be
adjacent to any building that has any residential tenants at the time of
the medical marijuana organization's application for a special exception
permit under this article of the Irwin Code. Special exception status
shall not be rescinded solely because a residential tenant moved into a
building abutting, adjacent to, or housing a medical marijuana
§ 260-179 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-182
1:625
organization following the filing of a completed application for a special
exception.
C. Home business. Medical marijuana organizations shall not be operated
as a home business.
D. Compliance. Medical marijuana organizations shall operate in
compliance with the Medical Marijuana Act,155 Act No. 16 of 2016, as
amended, and all regulations promulgated pursuant thereto. Should a
medical marijuana organization be in violation of the Medical
Marijuana Act, their special exception permit may be revoked upon
motion of the Borough Council upon the recommendation by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
E. Permit. Medical marijuana organizations may not operate unless and
until they have obtained a permit or other authorization issued by the
Department of Health of the commonwealth to conduct activities under
the Medical Marijuana Act, Act No. 16 of 2016, as amended. A medical
marijuana organization may not apply for a special exception under this
article unless it demonstrates that it is qualified to apply for a permit to
be issued by the Department of Health of the commonwealth under the
Medical Marijuana Act, Act No. 16 of 2016.
F. Indoor operations. All activities related to medical marijuana shall be
conducted by medical marijuana organizations inside of a building or
fully enclosed structure. No activities related to the dispensing,
growing, or processing of medical marijuana shall take place outside
the envelope of a building or fully enclosed structure. The
transportation of medical marijuana from one location to another shall
not be subject to this prohibition.
G. Signs. Medical marijuana organizations shall comply with the Borough
of Irwin's sign requirements, as set forth in Article XVI of Irwin Code
Chapter 260.
H. Security. All medical marijuana organizations shall secure their
locations.
(1) All possible methods of egress and ingress shall be locked to the
public at all times, with the exception of one public entrance to the
location, which may be unlocked during the hours of operation of
the facility. The building shall otherwise comply with the Property
Maintenance Code, the Fire Code, and all other applicable codes to
structures located within the Borough of Irwin to ensure that the
structure is safe and provides adequate exits for safety and in the
event of an emergency.
(2) The building must contain a video surveillance system that
monitors the area of the building open to the public, the location of
all marijuana, processed medical marijuana, and by-product,
155. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10231.101 et seq.
§ 260-182 IRWIN CODE § 260-182
1:626
§ 260-183. Medical marijuana dispensaries.
regardless of form, and all exits and entrances to the building. All
exits and entrances to the building shall be illuminated at all times
to allow for video surveillance. The video surveillance system shall
contain sufficient storage to retain a minimum of seven days' worth
of footage.
(3) The building must be covered by a security system that alerts the
business owner and law enforcement should there be any
unauthorized access to the building housing the medical marijuana
organization.
(4) Medical marijuana organizations must comply with all electronic
security and surveillance requirements as implemented by the
commonwealth and the Department of Health of the
commonwealth, as required by the Medical Marijuana Act,156 Act
No. 16 of 2016, as amended.
A. Medical marijuana. All medical marijuana shall be stored in a locked
location not accessible or visible to the public. Excepted from this
requirement is medical marijuana on display for purchase. Medical
marijuana on display for purchase must be secured in a locked case.
Medical marijuana can be in a locked display case during the
dispensary's hours of operation, plus a reasonable period of time before
and after the store is open. An employee for the medical marijuana
dispensary shall be in the room housing the medical display case at all
times when the case is housing medical marijuana and the dispensary is
open to the public. Medical marijuana shall only be removed from the
display case when it is being dispensed to a patient holding a
certification issued pursuant to the Medical Marijuana Act, Act No. 16
of 2016,157 as amended, or it is being transported to or from the secure
medical marijuana storage location in the building or another medical
marijuana organization.
B. Location. In addition to the requirements of § 260-182, medical
marijuana dispensaries:
(1) Shall only be located in the Commercial-Business-Residential,
Commercial-Highway, and Industrial Zone Districts.
(2) Shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any public, private, or
parochial school (kindergarten through 12th grade) or day-care
center. This prohibition does not apply to any post-secondary
educational facilities. This prohibition only applies to land uses
existing on the date of special exception application pursuant to
Chapter 260.
156. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10231.101 et seq.
157. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10231.101 et seq.
§ 260-182 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-183
1:627
§ 260-184. Medical marijuana grower/processor.
(3) May be located on the same site as a medical marijuana grower/
processor.
C. Services and supplies.
(1) Medical marijuana dispensaries may sell medical devices and
instruments which are needed to administer medical marijuana
under the Medical Marijuana Act.
(2) Medical marijuana dispensaries may sell services approved by the
Department of Health of the commonwealth related to the use of
medical marijuana.
(3) Medical marijuana may be consumed on site, if the medical
marijuana dispensary provides a private space within the building
for on-site consumption. This private space must have water
available to the patient free of charge. The on-site physician,
pharmacist, physician's assistant or certified registered nurse
practitioner must consent to the on-site consumption prior to the
same, which can be denied due to any medical or safety concern. If
on-site consumption is permitted, the medical marijuana
dispensary shall also have a restroom available for public use.
A. Marijuana.
(1) All marijuana, whether in seed form, a living plant, a plant that is
being processed, a plant that has been processed, medical
marijuana (as defined by 35 P.S. § 10231.103), the remains of the
plant following processing, or any other form, shall be kept at all
times in a locked location not open to the public. Medical marijuana
being transported to or from any other medical marijuana
organization pursuant to the Medical Marijuana Act, Act No. 16 of
2016,158 shall be exempt from this requirement.
(2) All refuse generated from the growing and production of medical
marijuana shall be stored in a locked location not open to the
public. It shall be disposed of in such a manner that the refuse not
be accessible to the public at large.
B. Location. In addition to the requirements of § 260-182, medical
marijuana growers/processors:
(1) Shall only be located in the Commercial-Highway and the Industrial
Zone Districts.
(2) May be located on the same site as a medical marijuana dispensary.
158. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10231.101 et seq.
§ 260-183 IRWIN CODE § 260-184
1:628
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1993 Code to 2014 Code
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. I.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title from 1993 Code Location in 2014 Code
Ch. 1, Administration and Government
Part 1, Officers
A. Elected Officials
§ 101, Compensation of Councilmen and
Mayor
Ch. 50, Art. I
§ 102, Tax Collector Compensation Ch. 55, Art. I
B. Appointed Officials Ch. 20
Part 2, Liability Insurance Ch. 24, Art. I
Part 3, Recreation Board Ch. 44
Part 4, Planning Commission Ch. 34
Part 5, Police Department
A. Establishment of Police Department Ch. 38
B. Police Pension, Death and Disability
Fund
Repealed by Ord. No. 902
(see now Ch. 30, Art. I)
Part 6, Full-Time, Nonuniformed Employees
Pension Plan
Repealed by Ord. No. 903
(see now Ch. 30, Art. II)
Part 7, Firemen's Relief Association Ch. 12
Part 8, Basic Cable Commission Ch. 6
Part 9, Third Party Billing and Service
Charges for Emergency Service and
Equipment
Ch. 130, Art. I
Ch. 2, Animals
Part 1, Keeping of Pigs, Inherently
Dangerous Animals
Ch. 88, Arts. I and IV
Part 2, Destruction of Pigeons Ch. 88, Art. II
Part 3, Animal Defecation Ch. 88, Art. III
Ch. 3, Bicycles (Reserved) Omitted
§ 260-184 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:629
Chapter/Title from 1993 Code Location in 2014 Code
Ch. 4, Buildings (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 5, Code Enforcement
Part 1A, BOCA National Building Code REP
Part 1B, Floodplain Provisions Superseded by Ord. No.
898 (see now Ch. 135)
Part 2, BOCA National Fire Prevention Code REP
Part 3, BOCA International Property
Maintenance Code
REP
Part 4, Adoption of Plumbing Code REP
Part 5, Adoption of National Electrical Code REP
Part 6, Adoption of CABO One- and Two-
Family Dwellings Code
REP
Part 7, Code Enforcement Officer Ch. 105
Part 8, Uniform Construction Code Ch. 110
Ch. 6, Conduct
Part 1, Obscene Matter Ch. 204, Art. I
Part 2, Massage Parlors Ch. 204, Art. II
Part 3, Prohibiting Discharge of Firearms
and Other Devices
Ch. 126
Part 4, Protection of Public Property Ch. 190, Art. I
Part 5, Prohibition of Throwing Objects in
Streets
Ch. 225, Art. I
Part 6, Littering Prohibited Ch. 158
Part 7, Establishment of Curfew Ch. 114
Part 8, Alcohol Use in Public Ch. 80, Art. I
Ch. 7, Fire Prevention and Fire Protection
(Reserved)
Omitted
Ch. 8, Floodplains Repealed by Ord. No. 898
(see now Ch. 135)
Ch. 9, Grading and Excavating
Part 1, Excavating, Grading and Fill Ch. 140
Ch. 10, Health and Safety
Part 1, Dangerous Sounds and Noises Ch. 165
Part 2, Junked Vehicles Ch. 169, Art. II
Part 3, Grass, Weeds and Other Vegetation Ch. 95
Part 4, Nuisance Abatement Ch. 169, Art. I
Part 5, Escrow of Insurance Proceeds Repealed by Ord. No. 880
(see now Ch. 150, Art. I)
§ DT-1 IRWIN CODE § DT-1
1:630
Chapter/Title from 1993 Code Location in 2014 Code
Ch. 11, Housing
Part 1, Landlord-Owner Reports Repealed by Ord. No. 904
(see now Ch. 195, Art. I)
Ch. 12, Libraries (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 13, Licenses, Permits and General
Business Regulations
Part 1, Transient and Non-Permanent
Wholesale Vendors
A. Fixed Location Ch. 180, Art. II
B. Door-to-Door Solicitation Ch. 180, Art. I
Part 2, Amusement Devices Ch. 84
Part 3, Advertising Matter Distribution Ch. 144
Part 4, Junk Dealers and Junkyards Ch. 154
Part 5, Bottle Clubs Ch. 80, Art. II
Ch. 14, (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 15, Motor Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 248
Ch. 16, Parks and Recreation
Part 1, Parks and Recreation Ch. 175, Art. I
Ch. 17, (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 18, Sewers and Sewage Disposal
Part 1, Sewer Connections Ch. 200, Art. II
Part 2, Sewer Rental Ch. 200, Art. I
Part 3, Treatment Charge Ch. 200, Art. IV
Part 4, Connection Outside Borough Limits Ch. 200, Art. III
Part 5, Delinquent Sewerage Accounts NCM
Ch. 19, Signs and Billboards
Part 1A and B, Temporary Political Signs Ch. 184, Arts. I and II
Ch. 20, Solid Waste
Part 1, General Regulations Ch. 212, Art. I
Ch. 21, Streets and Sidewalks
Part 1, Construction, Improvement and
Acceptance of Streets
Ch. 225, Art. V
Part 2, Street Excavations Ch. 225, Art. VI
Part 3, Sidewalk Curb Construction and
Repair
Ch. 225, Art. II
Part 4, Removal of Snow, Ice and Vegetation Ch. 225, Art. VII
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:631
Chapter/Title from 1993 Code Location in 2014 Code
Part 5, Obstructions on Streets and
Sidewalks
Ch. 225, Art. III
Part 6, Underground Installations Ch. 225, Art. IV
Ch. 22, Subdivision and Land Development
Part 1, Subdivision and Land Development Ch. 230
Ch. 23, Swimming Pools
Part 1, Private Swimming Pools Ch. 234
Ch. 24, Taxation; Special
Part 1, Realty Transfer Tax Ch. 238, Art. II
Part 2, Business Privilege Tax Ch. 238, Art. III
Part 3, Earned Income and Net Profits Ch. 238, Art. I
Ch. 25, Trees
Part 1, General Regulations Ch. 242
Ch. 26, Water
Part 1, Stormwater Management Ch. 220
Ch. 27, Zoning Repealed by Ord. No. 924
(see now Ch. 260)
Appendix
A. Annexation of Territory NI
B. Bond Issues and Loans NI
C. Franchises and Services NI
D. Governmental and Intergovernmental
Affair
NI
E. Plan Approval NI
F. Public Property NI
G. Sewers NI
H. Streets and Sidewalks NI
I. Water NI
J. Zoning; Prior Ordinances NI
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DT-1 IRWIN CODE § DL-1
1:632
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
925 8-13-2014 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
926 11-12-2014 Solid waste: collection and
disposal amendment
Ch. 212, Art. I
927 Not adopted
928 12-10-2014 Re-enacting taxes for 2015 NCM
929 12-10-2014 Fee schedule amendment NCM
930 12-10-2014 Sewers and sewage disposal:
sewer rental rates
amendment
Ch. 200, Art. I
931 12-10-2014 Nonuniformed Employees
Pension Plan amendment
See Ch. 30, Art. II
932 12-19-2014 2015 tax rate NCM
933 12-10-2014 Intergovernmental
agreement
NCM
934 11-11-2015 Solid waste: collection and
disposal amendment
Ch. 212, Art. I
935 12-9-2015 Reenacting taxes for 2016 NCM
936 12-9-2015 Fee schedule amendment NCM
937 12-9-2015 Sewers and sewage disposal:
treatment charge
amendment
Ch. 200, Art. IV
938 12-9-2015 Nonuniformed Employees
Pension Plan amendment
See Ch. 30, Art. II
939 12-19-2015 2016 tax rate NCM
940 4-13-2016 Intergovernmental
agreement
NCM
941 8-10-2016 Nonuniformed Employees
Pension Plan amendment
See Ch. 30, Art. II
942 11-9-2016 Solid waste: collection and
disposal amendment
Ch. 212, Art. I
943 11-9-2016 Sewers and sewage disposal:
treatment charge
amendment
Ch. 200, Art. IV
944 12-14-2016 2017 tax rate NCM
945 12-14-2016 Reenacting taxes for 2017 NCM
946 12-14-2016 Code enforcement
amendment
Ch. 105
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:633
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
947 12-14-2016 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 30, Art. I
948 1-11-2017 Nonuniformed Employees
Pension Plan amendment
See Ch. 30, Art. II
949 3-8-2017 Wireless communications
facilities in right-of-way;
zoning amendment
Ch. 252, Ch. 260
950 5-10-2017 Sewers and sewage disposal:
sewer connections
amendment
Ch. 200, Art. II
951 6-14-2017 Nonuniformed Employees
Pension Plan amendment
See Ch. 30, Art. II
952 6-14-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 260
953 8-9-2017 Street Acceptance NCM
954 9-13-2017 Stormwater Management Ch. 220
955 10-31-2017 Solid Waste: Collection and
Disposal Amendment
Ch. 212, Art. I
956 11-8-2017 Taxation: Occupation
Residence Tax
Ch. 238, Art. VII
957 11-8-2017 Taxation: Per Capita Tax Ch. 238, Art. VI
958 11-8-2017 Quality of Life Ch. 192
959 12-13-2017 2018 tax rate NCM
960 12-13-2017 Reenacting taxes for 2018 NCM
961 12-13-2017 Alarm Devices: False Alarm
Fees Amendment; Special
Events Amendment;
Taxation: Business Privilege
Tax Amendment; Trees
Amendment; Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 75, Art. I; Ch.
216; Ch. 238, Art.
III; Ch. 242; Ch.
248
962 12-13-2017 Sewers and Sewage
Disposal: Sewer Rental
Rates Amendment; Sewers
and Sewage Disposal:
Certificates of Compliance
Required for Real Estate
Transactions Amendment
Ch. 200, Art. I; Ch.
200, Art. V
963 1-10-2018 Intergovernmental
Agreement
NCM
964 1-10-2018 Intergovernmental
Agreement
NCM
§ DL-1 IRWIN CODE § DL-1
1:634
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
965 2-14-2018 Fees NCM
966 5-9-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 260
967 6-13-2018 Rental Property: Real Estate
Registration Lists
Amendment
Ch. 195, Art. I
968 6-13-2018 Police Pension Plan
Amendment
See Ch. 30, Art. I
969 6-13-2018 Intergovernmental
Agreement
NCM
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
970 9-12-2018 Alarm Devices: Smoke
and Carbon Monoxide
Detectors
Ch. 75, Art. II 4
971 9-12-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 248 4
972 9-12-2018 Construction Codes,
Uniform Amendment
Ch. 110 4
973 12-12-2018 Police Pension Plan
Amendment
See Ch. 30,
Art. 1
4
974 11-27-2018 Solid Waste
Amendment
Ch. 212 4
975 12-12-2018 Tax Rate NCM 4
976 12-12-2018 Fees NCM 4
977 12-12-2018 Tax Rate NCM 4
978 2-13-2019 Volunteer Service
Credit Program
Repealed by
Ord. No.
1-2020
4
979 2-13-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 248 4
980 5-8-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 260 4
981 5-8-2019 Parks and Recreation:
Rules and Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 175, Art.
I
4
982 6-12-2019 Political Signs
Repealer; Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 184,
reference
only; Ch. 260
4
983 8-14-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 260 4
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:635
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
984 8-14-2019 Streets and Sidewalks:
Street Excavations
Amendment
Ch. 225, Art.
VI
4
985 11-13-2019 Streets and Sidewalks:
Obstructions on
Streets and Sidewalks
Amendment; Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 225, Art.
III; Ch. 260
4
986 11-13-2019 Parks and Recreation:
Tobacco-Free Zones
Amendment
Ch. 175, Art.
II
4
987 12-19-2019 Sewers and Sewage
Disposal: Sewer Rental
Rates Amendment;
Treatment Charge
Amendment
Ch. 200, Art.
I; Ch. 200,
Art. IV
4
1-2020 1-6-2020 Fire Department:
Volunteer Service
Credit Program
Ch. 130, Art.
II
4
2-2020 3-11-2020 Sewers and Sewage
Disposal: Certificates
of Compliance
Required for Real
Estate Transactions
Amendment
Ch. 200, Art.
V
4
3-2020 5-13-2020 Agreement NCM 4
§ DL-1 IRWIN CODE § DL-1
1:636

ZONING
260 Attachment 2
Borough of Irwin
Table 2
Area and Bulk Standards
Zone
Lot Area
(minimum)
(square feet)
Lot Width
(minimum)
(feet)
Lot
Coverage
(maximum) Structure
Between
(minimum)
(feet)
Front
Setback
(minimum)
(feet)
Side
Setback
(minimum)
(feet)
Rear
Setback
(minimum)
(feet)
Building
Height
(maximum)
(feet/story)
R-L 7,500 50 30%
Principal
10
30 10 40 35/3
Accessory 30 10 10 18/1
R-M
5,000
 (1 family)
10,000
(2 family)
40 30%
Principal
10
20 10 30 45/3
Accessory 20 10 10 10/1
R-H 7,200 40 20%
Principal(s) 20 30 15 30 65/7
Accessory 10 30 10 10 10/1
C-B-R 5,000 40 50%
Principal(s) 20 30 10 20 65/7
Accessory 10 30 10 10 25/1
C-H 7,200 60 50%
Principal(s) 20 30 10 20 65/7
Accessory 10 30 10 20 25/2
I 7,200 60 50%
Principal(s) 20 30 10 20 65/7
Accessory 10 30 10 30 45/3
S-R-C 20,000 100 25%
Principal(s) 25 50 20 20 35/3
Accessory 10 50 20 20 18/1
PA-O 7,500 50 30%
Principal(s) 10 30 10 10 35/3
Accessory 10 30 10 10 18/1
260 Attachment 2:1 04 - 01 - 2014