Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 4-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-02]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1008(b) of the Borough Code [53 P.S. § 46008(b)], the
codification of a complete body of legislation for the Borough of Indiana,
County of Indiana, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as revised, codified
and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by General Code,
and consisting of Chapters 1 through 460, together with an Appendix, are
hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of
the Borough of Indiana, which shall be known and is hereby designated as
the "Code of the Borough of Indiana," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of
the prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued
in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by
the Borough Council of the Borough of Indiana, and it is the intention of
said Borough Council that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such
provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only
changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to be
enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of ordinances not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Borough of Indiana and in force on the date of the adoption
of this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the
effective date given in § 1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 6-4-2009.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Borough prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Borough or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Borough.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Borough or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Borough or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Borough.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
§ 1-4 INDIANA CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted ordinances.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Borough or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance, portion of an ordinance or resolution establishing a
specific fee amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the
Borough.
S. Any currently effective ordinance regulating subdivision and land
development.
T. Any ordinance or resolution establishing or relating to parking meter
rates or parking garage rates.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the Borough for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code
as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature, as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part
hereof,1 are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions
included in the Code. These changes are enacted to bring provisions
into conformity with the desired policies of the Borough Council, and it
is the intent of the Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed have
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-6B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this local law are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, repealed) 4-6-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-02." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in
the Borough offices.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copy of Code.
At least one copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with
the Ordinance Book in the office of the Borough Manager and shall remain
been previously formally amended to read as such. All such changes
and revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of
the Code specified in § 1-15.
C. Nomenclature. The following nomenclature changes have been made
throughout the Code:
(1) "Justice of the Peace," "District Magistrate" or "District Justice" is
changed to "Magisterial District Judge."
(2) "Department of Environmental Resources" is changed to
"Department of Environmental Protection" and "DER" to "DEP."
(3) "Department of Community Affairs" is changed to "Department of
Community and Economic Development."
(4) "Zoning Board of Adjustment" is changed to "Zoning Hearing
Board."
(5) U.S. Department of Agriculture's "Soil Conservation Service (SCS)"
is changed to "Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)."
(6) "Master Plan" is changed to "Comprehensive Plan."
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-6 INDIANA CODE § 1-9
1:6
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copy or
copies shall be certified to by the Borough Manager, as provided by law, and
such certified copy or copies shall remain on file in the office of the Borough
Manager, available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times
while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Borough Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the postbound
book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Manager or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copy or copies
of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the
Borough Manager for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Borough Council subsequent to
the effective date of this codification which the Borough Council shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances or resolutions
are printed as supplements to said Code books, at which time such
supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Borough Manager, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the
notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability
of a copy or copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed,
held and considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the
Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Borough
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
thereof, by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 1-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough Council that this
ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after April 7, 2010.
§ 1-14 INDIANA CODE § 1-15
1:8
Chapter 13
COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 360. Stormwater management — See Ch. 395.
§ 13-1. Statutory authority; purpose.2
Indiana Borough shall enter into an agreement with Blairsville Borough
for the creation of a Council of Governments, as provided for in the
Intergovernmental Cooperation Act of 1996, P.L. 1158, No. 177 (53
Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.) as amended, for the purpose of acquiring
equipment for use on the sanitary and storm sewer systems located within
each municipality.
§ 13-2. Duration; termination.
The duration of the Council of Governments shall be for five years, and
shall continue for additional five-year terms thereafter unless terminated
by Blairsville Borough or Indiana Borough. Blairsville Borough and Indiana
Borough shall each have the right to terminate the agreement upon notice
to the other party 12 months in advance of the date the termination is to be
effective.
§ 13-3. Financing of equipment.
Financing of any equipment purchased under the Council of Governments
shall be accomplished by Indiana Borough supplying 60% of the funds
necessary for acquisition and Blairsville Borough supplying 40% of the
funds necessary for acquisition. Any income earned or costs incurred in
the operation, maintenance, use or disposal of the equipment owned by the
Council of Governments shall be allocated 60% to Indiana Borough and 40%
to Blairsville Borough.
§ 13-4. Council Board; membership.
The organizational structure necessary to implement the agreement shall
consist of a COG Board, which shall have two members appointed by
Indiana Borough and two members appointed by Blairsville Borough.
§ 13-5. Council property.
A. Any property, real or personal, owned by the Council of Governments
shall be titled as "Blairsville Borough/Indiana Borough/Council of
Governments."
2. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-5
1:9
§ 13-6. Assignment of rights.
Indiana Borough consents to Blairsville Borough assigning all of its rights
and obligations hereunder to another entity, providing written consent is
given by Indiana Borough which shall not be unreasonably withheld.
§ 13-7. Power to enter contracts.
The entity created under this chapter shall be empowered to enter into
contracts for policies of group insurance and employee benefits, including
social security, for its employees.
Chapter 28
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firemen's Relief Association — See Ch. 32. Alarms — See Ch. 126.
B. Property, real or personal, of the Council of Government shall be
acquired, managed, licensed or disposed of by action of the COG Board
and as provided in the agreement referred to above.
§ 13-5 INDIANA CODE § 13-7
1:10
ARTICLE I
Authority of Members
[Adopted 5-5-1953 by Ord. No. 616 (Ch. VIII, Part 2, Sec. 51, of the
1971 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 28-1. Authorized duties.
In addition to actually fighting fires or while going to or returning from any
fire, the members of the Indiana Fire Department are authorized to do the
following things:
A. Answer any type of fire alarm or call, whether general alarm, private
call or investigation of fire report or emergency call of any type, inside
or without the Borough of Indiana.
B. Engage in any type of drill, training, ceremonial, practice, test or
parade when duly called or authorized by a proper officer or officers of
the Indiana Fire Department.
C. Engage in the performance of any duty authorized by any officer or
officers of the Indiana Fire Department.
§ 28-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-1
1:11

ARTICLE II
Reimbursement for Services
[Adopted 3-5-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-02]
§ 28-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Any person, firm, corporation, association, partnership,
consortium, joint venture, commercial entity, or other legal body or entity
recognized by law.
PROVIDER — Indiana Fire Association or any other volunteer fire company
providing services within Indiana Borough, Indiana County, Pennsylvania,
that has a cooperation agreement or mutual aid agreement with Indiana
Borough.
§ 28-3. Authorization to seek reimbursement.
The Borough of Indiana does hereby authorize any provider to seek
reimbursement for expenses when dispatched to an accident site in Indiana
Borough, Indiana County, Pennsylvania.
§ 28-4. Reasonable use of equipment and manpower.
The provider shall only use such equipment, vehicles, manpower, and
supplies as it deems reasonably necessary to address or deal with the
accident or occurrence in a proper and safe manner.
§ 28-5. Fee schedule.
Reimbursement for services so provided shall be based on a fee schedule
approved by the Borough Council, by resolution, at a regular meeting of the
Borough Council.
§ 28-6. Reimbursable accidents and occurrences.
Providers shall only be entitled to receive reimbursement for accidents or
occurrences responded to by those individuals who are properly trained
in accordance with applicable law and standards and who are properly
requested and dispatched by a legally constituted authority, including a 911
dispatcher.
§ 28-7. Invoice.
The provider shall send an invoice to the party liable for the accident
or occurrence providing that the payment shall be made within 30 days
from the receipt of the invoice. The invoice shall be in a form approved
by resolution by the Borough Council at a regular meeting of the Borough
Council.
§ 28-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-8
1:13
§ 28-8. Collection of reimbursable expenses.
Any person who fails to make timely payment shall be in violation of this
article. In the event that a provider is not paid in accordance with this
article, the provider shall have the right to bring an action before the
Magisterial District Judge to collect reimbursable expenses together with
the costs of the action.
§ 28-8 INDIANA CODE § 28-8
1:14
Chapter 32
FIREMEN'S RELIEF ASSOCIATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 28. Pensions and social security — See Ch. 32.
§ 32-1. Appropriation of foreign fire insurance tax.3
There is hereby appropriated to the Indiana Firemen's Relief Association
of Pennsylvania any and all sums of money which may be received from
the State Treasurer on account of the 1/2 of the two-percent tax paid upon
premiums by foreign fire insurance companies doing business within the
Borough of Indiana, according to the provisions of 53 P.S. § 895.701 et seq.
§ 32-2. Duties of Borough Treasurer.
The Treasurer of the Borough of Indiana is hereby authorized to turn over
to the Treasurer of the Indiana Firemen's Relief Association of Pennsylvania
any voucher, check or sum of money which he has or may hereafter receive
from the State Treasurer on account of the 1/2 of the two-percent tax paid
upon premiums by foreign fire insurance companies doing business within
the Borough of Indiana.
Chapter 44
LIBRARY
§ 44-1. Designation of public library.
The Indiana Free Library is hereby designated and authorized the library to
act as the agent of the Borough of Indiana to provide public library service
to the residents and taxpayers of the Borough of Indiana for and on behalf
of the Council of the Borough of Indiana.
§ 44-2. Maintenance.
The Council of the Borough of Indiana will assist in the maintenance of the
Indiana Free Library in accordance with the provisions of Section 401 of
The Library Code, Act of June 14, 1961, P.L. 324.4
§ 44-3. Appointment of Board of Directors.
The Council of the Borough of Indiana will, in accordance with Section 411
of The Library Code,5 appoint two persons to serve as its representatives on
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
4. Editor's Note: See 24 P.S. § 4401.
§ 28-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-3
1:15
the Board of Directors of the Indiana Free Library, each representative to
serve three years, the terms expiring in different years.
§ 44-4. Treasurer's bond.
The Treasurer of the Board of Directors shall give bond to the Borough of
Indiana with sufficient surety in accordance with the provisions of Section
412 of The Library Code.6
§ 44-5. Reports to Council.
The Board of Directors of the Indiana Free Library shall prepare and
present to the Council of the Borough of Indiana by November 1 of each
year a budget for the following calendar year and such other reports as are
required by Sections 413 and 414 of The Library Code7 and shall provide
library service as provided in Section 415 of The Library Code.8
Chapter 55
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions and social security — See Ch. 67. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 99.
5. Editor's Note: See 24 P.S. § 4411.
6. Editor's Note: See 24 P.S. § 4412.
7. Editor's Note: See 24 P.S. §§ 4413 and 4414.
8. Editor's Note: See 24 P.S. § 4415.
§ 44-3 INDIANA CODE § 44-5
1:16
ARTICLE I
Borough Manager
[Adopted 2-3-1954 by Ord. No. 623 (Ch. I, Part 2, Secs. 11 to 19, of
the 1971 Code of Ordinances); amended in its entirety 4-5-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-04]
§ 55-1. Office created.
The office of Borough Manager is hereby created, subject to the right of the
Borough, by ordinance, at any time to abolish said office.
§ 55-2. Appointment; removal.
As soon as practicable after the passage of this article, and thereafter, from
time to time, whenever a vacancy shall occur in the office of the Borough
Manager, the Borough Council, by vote of a majority of all the members
thereof, shall appoint one person to the office of Borough Manager, subject
to removal by the Council at any time by a vote of the majority of all the
members thereof.
§ 55-3. Qualifications and residence.
The Borough Manager shall be a citizen of the United States, at least
21 years of age, and during his/her terms of office she/he shall establish
residency within one year of hire in accordance with the job description.
§ 55-4. Manager's bond.
The Borough Manager is required to become bonded upon assuming the
appointed office. The Borough Manager's employment shall terminate in the
event he/she becomes ineligible for bonding. Any premiums associated with
said Bond shall be paid by the Borough.
§ 55-5. Manager's salary.
The yearly salary of the Borough Manager of the Borough of Indiana shall be
negotiated at the time of his/her hiring and thereafter during annual budget
preparation for each subsequent year effective payable monthly during the
regular monthly pay periods as established by Council.
§ 55-6. Powers and duties.
Subject to recall or amendment at any time by resolution of Council, serve
as the chief executive officer of the Borough administration and operations
and shall carry on the business of the Borough under the direction of the
Council exercising his/her powers and duties as established by Council and
within the authority vested under the Borough Code of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
§ 55-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-7
1:17
§ 55-7. Authority of Council to amend, modify or repeal.
The Borough reserves the right at any time, by ordinance, to amend or
otherwise modify or repeal this Ordinance in any particular.
§ 55-8. through § 55-9. (Reserved)
§ 55-7 INDIANA CODE § 55-8
1:18
ARTICLE II
Independent Auditor
[Adopted 9-3-1968 by Ord. No. 9159 (Ch. I, Part 2, Secs. 20 to 22, of
the 1971 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 55-10. Office created.
There is hereby created for the Borough of Indiana the office or position of
Independent Auditor.
§ 55-11. Appointment; tenure.
The Auditor shall be appointed annually by resolution by the Council of the
Borough of Indiana.
§ 55-12. Duties.
The duties of such Auditor shall be those duties set forth in the Borough
Code relating to auditors.
9. Editor's Note: Sec. 4 of this ordinance provided that the Independent Auditor was to begin
his duties January 1, 1969.
§ 55-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-12
1:19
Chapter 67
PENSIONS AND SOCIAL SECURITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 55. Police Department — See Ch. 84.
§ 55-12 INDIANA CODE § 55-12
1:20
ARTICLE I
Social Security
[Adopted 7-8-1952 by Ord. No. 611 (Ch. I, Part 7, Subpart A, Secs.
81 to 83, of the 1971 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 67-1. Coverage authorized.
The proper officers of the Borough of Indiana are hereby authorized to
execute and deliver to the Secretary of Labor and Industry of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the state agency, a plan or plans and
agreement, required under Section 6 of said enabling Act and the Social
Security Act, to extend coverage to employees and officers of the Borough
of Indiana and do all other necessary things to effectuate coverage of
employees and officers under the Old Age and Survivors Insurance System.
§ 67-2. Authorization of payroll deductions.
The Clerk is hereby authorized to establish a system of payroll deductions
to be matched by payments by the Borough of Indiana to be made into the
contribution fund of the Social Security Act through the office of the state
agency, and to make charges of this tax to the fund or funds from which
wage or salary payments are issued to employees of the Borough of Indiana.
Such payments are to be made in accordance with the provisions of the law
and regulations promulgated by the state agency and the Federal Security
Administrator. Such payments which are delinquent shall bear interest at
the rate of 1/2 of 1% per month until such time as payments are made.
§ 67-3. Appropriation; commencement of coverage.
Appropriation is hereby made from the proper fund or funds of the Borough
of Indiana in the necessary amount to pay into the contribution fund as
provided in Section 4 of the enabling Act and in accordance with the plan
or plans and agreement. Authority is given to the proper officials of the
Borough of Indiana to enter into an agreement with the state agency, which
agreement shall be in accordance with Act No. 491 and with paragraph 218
of the Social Security Act. Such plan and agreement shall provide that the
participation of the Borough of Indiana shall commence as of January 1,
1951.
§ 67-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-3
1:21

ARTICLE II
Pension Committees
[Adopted 10-4-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-06]
§ 67-4. Appointment.
Notwithstanding any provision of any plan document for the three
aforementioned retirement plans,10 the President of the Borough Council
shall appoint for each plan a Pension Committee.
§ 67-5. Membership.
The Pension Committee for each plan shall consist of three members of
Council, the Borough Manager, and an employee who is a participant in the
plan.
§ 67-6. Adoption of investment policy.
Each Pension Committee shall adopt an investment policy statement for the
plan and shall advise Council and the plan trustee on matters related to the
plan.
§ 67-7. Election of officers; duties.
Each Pension Committee shall annually elect, by simple majority, a
Chairman and Secretary. The Chairman shall schedule all meetings and
shall notify all Committee members of the scheduled meetings. The
Secretary shall keep a record for each meeting, shall transcribe the record
of the meeting, shall distribute the minutes of the meeting to the Committee
members, and shall deliver to Borough Council the minutes of any such
meeting together with any recommendations from the Committee.
10.Editor's Note: The preamble of Ord. No. 2005-06 references the Borough's three currently
maintained pension plans, including the Police Pension Plan, the Management Employees
Pension Plan, and the Nonmanagement Employees Pension Plan.
§ 67-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-7
1:23

ARTICLE III
Police Pension Plan
[Legislation establishing the Police Pension Plan is on file in the Borough
offices and is available for review during regular office hours.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-7
1:25

ARTICLE IV
General Employees Pension Plan
[Legislation establishing the Nonmanagement Employees Pension Plan is
on file in the Borough offices and is available for review during regular
office hours.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-7
1:27

ARTICLE V
Management Employees Pension Plan
[Legislation establishing the Management Employees Pension Plan is on
file in the Borough offices and is available for review during regular office
hours.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-7
1:29
Chapter 78
PLANNING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 170.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 405.
Zoning — See Ch. 460.
§ 67-7 INDIANA CODE § 67-7
1:30
ARTICLE I
Planning Commission
§ 78-1. Establishment.
A Planning Commission consisting of five members is hereby created and
established for Indiana Borough, Pennsylvania, pursuant to the provisions
of Article II, Section 201, of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
as established by the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as amended
and reenacted.11
§ 78-2. Composition; terms of office.
The Planning Commission shall be comprised of five members who shall be
appointed for terms of office of four years, except that the terms of office for
three of the original members shall be fixed at one year, two years and three
years, respectively, and the terms of office for two of the original members
shall be fixed at four years, to be established on a series of overlapping
terms with one term expiring each year, except for one year in which two
terms shall expire.
§ 78-3. Powers and duties. [Amended 12-8-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-06; 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
The Planning Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
A. Upon request of Borough Council, review and revise the
Comprehensive Plan for the development of the municipality and
present it for consideration to Borough Council through the Planning
Department.
B. Promote public interest in, and understanding of, the Comprehensive
Plan and planning.
C. Review and make recommendations to the Planning Department to
present to Borough Council on any existing zoning or land use
regulations.
D. Make recommendations to the Borough Council concerning the
adoption or amendment of an Official Map.
E. Prepare, revise or recommend any other long-range or capital plan to
the Planning Department to present to Borough Council.
F. Present testimony before any board.
G. Prepare agendas and maintain records and minutes of all meetings and
present them monthly to Borough Council. All records and files of the
planning agency shall be in the possession of the governing body.
11.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 78-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-3
1:31
H. Review the Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance, Official Map, provisions for planned residential
development, and such other ordinances and regulations governing the
development of land no less frequently than it reviews the
comprehensive plan.
§ 78-3 INDIANA CODE § 78-3
1:32
ARTICLE II
Planning Department
§ 78-4. Establishment.
A Planning Department is hereby created and established for Indiana
Borough, Pennsylvania, pursuant to the provisions of Article II, Section 201,
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as established by the Act
of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as amended and reenacted.12
§ 78-5. Staffing. [Amended 12-8-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-06]
The Planning Department shall consist of a Director appointed by Borough
Council, and upon recommendation of the Borough Manager additional staff
positions may be approved by Council.
§ 78-6. Authority and duties. [Amended 12-8-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-06; 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
The Planning Department shall perform the duties and responsibilities
assigned by Council, including but not limited to:
A. Serve as an advisor/consultant to the Planning Commission and provide
technical assistance and coordination for review and revision of the
Comprehensive Plan.
B. Serve as a liaison between Council and the Planning Commission.
C. Review plans submitted to the Planning Department and report its
recommendations to Borough Council for approval or denial of an
application as set forth in the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance [Part II, Chapters 405 and 460 of the Code of the Borough of
Indiana] and planned residential development regulations, as required.
D. Present plans to committees of Borough Council.
E. Advise the Planning Commission of regulation updates.
F. Prepare, review or revise an existing zoning or land use regulation, and
make recommendations to Borough Council on proposed amendments.
G. Maintain an operational schedule that includes regular office hours, the
number and times of which to be established in consultation with the
Borough Manager or his designee.
H. Act as Zoning Officer as described in Chapter 460, Zoning, Article IX,
§ 460-54 D, E, and F.
I. Prepare recommendations for land and real estate development that
ensure they are in conformity with the comprehensive plan.
12.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 78-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-6
1:33
§ 78-7. Legislative authority.
The authority for the adoption of these articles is the Borough Code, 53 P.S.
§ 45101 et seq. and the Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
J. Regularly attend meetings of the Community Development Committee
in order to keep them abreast of planning and development issues.
K. Report activities directly to the Borough Manager or his designee and
complete planning related tasks and other general tasks as assigned by
the Manager.
L. Maintain and keep on file records of its action. All records and files of
the planning agency shall be in the possession of the governing body.
M. Prepare and present to Borough Council an environmental study.
N. Promote public interest in, and understanding of, the Comprehensive
Plan and planning.
O. Present testimony before any board.
P. Review the Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance, Official Map, provisions for planned residential
development, and such other ordinances and regulations governing the
development of land no less frequently than it reviews the
comprehensive plan.
§ 78-6 INDIANA CODE § 78-7
1:34
Chapter 84
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Pension Plan — See Ch. 67, Art. III. Police and code enforcement services — See
Ch. 314.
§ 84-1. Establishment.
A Police Department is hereby established in and for the Borough of
Indiana.
§ 84-2. Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police shall be the chief executive of the Police Department. He
shall, under the direction of the Mayor, be in charge of the police force and
have supervision over its members in the exercise of their powers, duties,
and authority.
§ 84-3. Subordinate classifications.
Subordinate to the Chief of Police, in the Police Department, classifications
of Lieutenant, Sergeant, Corporal and patrolman, and other such
classifications that are necessary in recognition of operational needs, are
hereby established or shall be established to which Council shall at any
specific time have appointed one or more police officers. The number of
each persons to serve in each of such subordinate classifications, on a
full-time and/or part-time basis, and the compensation of each shall be as
determined by the Borough Council from time to time.
§ 84-4. Special policemen.
Nothing herein contained shall affect the authority of the Mayor to appoint
special policemen during emergencies.
Chapter 90
PURCHASING, COOPERATIVE
§ 90-1. Request to participate in commonwealth purchase
contracts.
The Borough of Indiana requests that it be authorized to participate in
purchase contracts of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of
Property and Supplies, or any other administrative department authorized
to make direct purchases of materials, supplies and equipment, in
accordance with the terms of Act No. 31 of July 9, 1971.13
§ 78-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-2
1:35
§ 90-2. Conditions; responsibility for payment.
The Borough of Indiana agrees that it will be bound by such terms and
conditions as the Department of Property and Supplies may prescribe and
that it will be responsible for payment directly to the vendor under each
purchase contract.
Chapter 99
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 55.
13.Editor's Note: 71 P.S. § 633(h) was repealed 2002, Dec. 3, P.L. 1147, No. 142, § 21(a)(1).
§ 90-2 INDIANA CODE § 90-2
1:36
ARTICLE I
Tax Collector's Commission
[Adopted 3-4-1969 by Ord. No. 935 (Ch. I, Part 1, Sec. 2, of the 1971
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 99-1. Amount of commission.
The commission to be paid to the Tax Collector for the collection of Borough
taxes from and after January 1, 1970, shall be as follows:
A. For all taxes collected at discount or at face: a commission of 1%;
B. For all taxes collected after the date where a penalty shall be added
thereto: a commission of 1%.
§ 99-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-1
1:37

ARTICLE II
Mayor
[Adopted 12-18-1973 by Ord. No. 1096 (Ch. I, Part 1, Sec. 1, of the
1971 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 99-2. Salary. [Amended 7-8-1975 by Ord. No. 1129; 12-19-1978 by
Ord. No. 1225; 3-3-1981 by Ord. No. 1284]
The salary of the Mayor of the Borough of Indiana, effective the first
Monday of January 1981 is hereby fixed at the sum of $4,000 per annum
payable in monthly installments.
§ 99-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-2
1:39
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 120
AIRCRAFT, LANDING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 440. Zoning — See Ch. 460.
§ 120-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AIRCRAFT — Any aeroplane, airplane, gas bag, flying machine or balloon
used or designed for the navigation or flight in the air and capable of
carrying one or more people.
§ 120-2. Unlawful landing of aircraft.
Except in the case of an emergency, no person shall land any aircraft in the
limits of the Borough of Indiana.
§ 120-3. Violations and penalties.14
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined to pay the sum not exceeding $600 or
imprisonment not exceeding 30 days in default of payment of said fine.
Chapter 126
ALARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 28. Police Department — See Ch. 84.
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 99-2 INDIANA CODE § 120-3
1:40
ARTICLE I
False Alarms
[Adopted 7-6-1993 by Ord. No. 1585]
§ 126-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FALSE ALARM — Any burglary, holdup, carbon monoxide detector, or fire
alarm received from an alarm system and transmitted to the Police or
Fire Department and, upon response by the appropriate personnel, it is
determined that no actual burglary, holdup, carbon monoxide problem or
fire had occurred.[Amended 12-8-1998 by Ord. No. 1741]
§ 126-2. Notice to correct; violations and penalties.
§ 126-3. Emergencies.
Emergencies shall be a defense to any charge under this article that the
false alarm was caused by a public emergency.
§ 126-4. Billing and payment of charges.
All charges hereunder shall be paid within 30 days after the user is sent a
bill by the appropriate Borough official.
§ 126-5. Action upon nonpayment.
In the event that any individual, partnership or corporation shall fail to pay
the charges in a timely manner, the Borough shall have the right to:
A. After three false alarms are received from the effective date of this
article, the user of the alarm system(s) from which the false alarms are
received shall be notified in writing to take the necessary action to
correct the cause of the false alarm within 30 days.
B. A person that owns, uses or possesses an alarm device or automatic
dialing device may not, after causing or permitting three false alarms to
occur in a consecutive twelve-month period, cause or permit a
subsequent false alarm to occur in the same consecutive twelve-month
period. A person that violates this section commits a summary offense
and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$300 pursuant to 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 7511.15
A. Sue the individual, partnership or corporation for the appropriate
charges together with attorneys' fees and costs; and
B. The right to terminate any service to said individual, partnership or
corporation in regard to their alarm systems.
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 126-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-5
1:41
Chapter 133
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 133-1. Definitions; word usage.
§ 133-2. License required.
No person shall at any time display for public patronage or keep for
operation within the Borough of Indiana any amusement devices without
first having procured a license therefor as hereinafter provided in this
chapter.
§ 133-3. Application for license.
Any person desiring to procure a license, as required by this chapter, shall
apply in writing to the Borough Manager or his designee upon a form to be
supplied by the Borough for that purpose. The application shall contain the
following information:
A. The following words, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
hereby ascribed thereto, unless the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any mechanical and/or electronic device,
machine or apparatus whatsoever for the playing of music, games
and amusement. Said mechanical and/or electronic devices, etc., shall
include, but are not limited to, combination film and music machines,
jukeboxes, music boxes, phonographs, pinball machines and electronic
video games upon which baseball, football or other games are played
by the insertion therein of a coin or any other metal disc, slug or token
whatsoever.
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm or
corporation.
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. Name of applicant.
B. Address of applicant.
C. Age, date and place of birth.
D. Name and address of owner of machine or device.
E. Place where machine or device is to be displayed or operated and the
business conducted at that place.
F. Description of machine to be covered by the license: name of
manufacturer and serial number, if any.
§ 126-5 INDIANA CODE § 133-4
1:42
§ 133-4. Minimum age of applicant; citizenship.
Every applicant for a license shall be not less than 21 years of age and a
citizen of the United States.
§ 133-5. Ownership of device.
The applicant for the license required by this chapter shall be construed
as being the owner of such device, machine or apparatus unless otherwise
indicated in the application, but payment of the fee herein provided for by
any person who is in fact the owner, or in whose place of business any such
machine is located, shall be deemed a compliance with this section.
§ 133-6. Waiting period; investigation.
No license shall be granted until a period of seven days shall have elapsed
from the date of application, during which time the Borough Manager or his
designee may, at his discretion, investigate or cause to be investigated the
facts set forth in the application.
§ 133-7. Gambling devices not permitted.
Nothing in this chapter shall in any way be construed to authorize, license
or permit any gambling device whatsoever, or any mechanism that has been
judicially determined to be a gambling device or in any way contrary to the
law, or that may be contrary to any further laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 133-8. License fee; duration.16
No license shall be issued until an annual license fee for each machine shall
have been paid by the applicant to the office of the Borough Manager in
the amount, as set from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council,
for each device installed or used on the premises located in the Borough of
Indiana, which amount shall be a license fee until December 31 of that year.
Borough Council, by resolution, may change from time to time the annual
licensing fee to be charged for each amusement device installed or used
within the Borough of Indiana.
§ 133-9. Issuance of license, sticker and permit; display.
If the applicant has complied with the requirements of this chapter and has
paid the licensing fees provided for in this chapter, the Borough Manager
or his designee may issue an official sticker setting forth the number of
the license for each machine so licensed, which official sticker shall be
attached and affixed to the respective machine or device so that it is clearly
observable and readable. The Borough Manager or his designee shall also
issue a permit, which shall at all times be displayed in a prominent place in
the room where the machine or device is kept or operated.
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 133-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-10
1:43
§ 133-10. Transfer of license.
§ 133-11. Violations and penalties.17
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, for each
and every offense, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment
of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Each
and every day that any machine or device, under the terms of this chapter,
shall be operated and used in violation thereof shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense and shall be subject to separate and distinct penalties
thereunder.
§ 133-12. License required regardless of mechanical condition.
Each machine on the premises, whether the same is operational or not,
must be licensed.
Chapter 138
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 184. Noise — See Ch. 275.
A. The licensee shall not transfer a license from one amusement device to
another amusement device within the Borough without first having
obtained the approval for such a transfer from the Borough Manager or
his designee. The Borough Manager or his designee may, in his
discretion, investigate the requested transfer or cause the same to be
investigated before approving the transfer of the license.
B. If the licensee shall move his place of business to another location
within the Borough, the license may be transferred to such new location
upon application to the Borough Manager, giving the street and number
of the new location. The Borough Manager or his designee may, in his
discretion, investigate the new location or cause the same to be
investigated before approving the transfer of the license.
C. A license shall not be transferable from person to person, except that if
there is a bona fide sale of the licensee's business and stock-in-trade,
including machines or devices which are licensed under this chapter
and the purchaser continues the business at the same location, then the
license for each such machine or device may be transferred to the
purchaser upon application to the Borough Manager or his designee,
giving the name and address of the transferor and the transferee and
the description, name of manufacturer, and serial number of the
machine or device transferred.
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 133-10 INDIANA CODE § 133-12
1:44
ARTICLE I
Animal Nuisances
[Adopted 11-7-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-08]
§ 138-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Any person, individual, firm, corporation, partnership, or any
other entity that owns, has control of, or is in possession of any of the
animals mentioned herein.
§ 138-2. Prohibited acts.
§ 138-3. Exemption.
Any person with impaired eyesight or hearing who relies upon a dog
specifically trained for the purpose of assisting that person shall be exempt
A. No person shall keep any pig, hog, chicken, horse, or nondomestic
animal at any place within the Borough of Indiana.
B. No person shall keep or harbor any dog, cat, or other animal in the
Borough of Indiana so as to create offensive odors, excessive noise, or
unsanitary conditions which are a menace to or affect the health,
comfort, or safety of the public.
C. No personal shall permit any dog, cat, or other animal which by
frequent and habitual barking, howling, screeching, yelping, baying, or
in any way or manner disturbing the quiet of any person in the
community.
D. No person shall permit any dog, cat, or other animal to enter any
enclosure or fenced-in area on another person's property where
domestic animals are confined, provided that the enclosure is adequate
for the purpose intended.
E. No person shall permit any dog, cat, or other animal to run at large
within the Borough of Indiana. Any animal on a leash or similar
apparatus shall not be considered at large, providing that the leash is
no more than 15 feet long.
F. No person shall permit any dog, cat, or other animal to scratch, dig, or
defecate upon any other person's property, including, but not limited to,
buildings, lawns, trees, hedges, shrubs, plants, flowers, or any growing
things, whether the property is public or private, without the
permission of the owner of the property. In the event that the person in
charge or control of the animal immediately removes all feces deposited
by such animal and disposes of the same in a sanitary manner, such
nuisance shall be considered abated.
§ 138-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-3
1:45
from § 138-2F of this article if that person is alone with the dog when the
act is committed.
§ 138-4. Violations and penalties.18
Any owner of any dog, cat, or other animal who permits the violation
or violates a provision of this article shall be, upon conviction before a
Magisterial District Judge, sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600, plus
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days. Each day that each section
is violated shall be considered a separate violation.
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 138-3 INDIANA CODE § 138-4
1:46
Chapter 152
BURIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 460.
§ 152-1. Human burial prohibited.
The burial or interment of the bodies of human beings at any location within
the limits of the Borough of Indiana is hereby prohibited.
§ 152-2. Animal burial restricted.
The burial of any dog or larger animal at any location within the Borough
of Indiana is hereby prohibited, and the burial of any animal smaller than a
dog or any bird shall be permitted only if the said dead animal or bird shall
be covered with at least three feet of earth.
§ 152-3. Violations and penalties.19
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment thereof, to imprisonment for
not more than 30 days.
Chapter 170
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 327.
Sewers — See Ch. 360.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 400.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
405.
Zoning — See Ch. 460.
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 138-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-3
1:47

ARTICLE I
Uniform Construction Code (UCC) Administration and Enforcement
[Adopted 6-8-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-06]
§ 170-1. Election to administer and enforce.
The Borough of Indiana hereby elects to administer and enforce the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35
P.S. §§ 7210.101 through 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its
regulations.
§ 170-2. Adoption and incorporation by reference. [Amended
4-3-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-0220]
The Uniform Construction Code as established by the Pennsylvania
Department of Labor and Industry, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters
401 through 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference as the municipal building code of the
Borough of Indiana.
§ 170-3. Contracts. [Amended 4-3-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-02]
Administration and enforcement of the Uniform Construction Code within
the Borough of Indiana shall be undertaken by the Code Enforcement
and Planning/Zoning Departments of Indiana Borough and a third-party
inspection company, in accordance with a contract approved by the
Borough.
§ 170-4. Board of Appeals. [Amended 4-3-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-02]
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of Indiana Borough in
conformity with the requirements of the relevant provisions of the UCC, as
amended from time to time, and for the purposes set forth therein.
§ 170-5. Effect on other regulations.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of July 1, 2004, and whose requirements are less than the
minimum requirements of the UCC, are hereby amended to be
consistent with the UCC provisions. [Amended 4-3-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-02]
B. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of the Borough of
Indiana not governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
20.Editor's Note: This ordinance also changed the title of this article from “Uniform
Construction Code Administration and Enforcement” to “Uniform Construction Code
(UCC) Administration and Enforcement.”
§ 170-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-6
1:49
§ 170-6. Fees. [Amended 4-3-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-02]
Fees assessable to the administration and enforcement undertaken
pursuant to this article and the code shall be established by the Borough of
Indiana and may be amended from time to time.
§ 170-7. Applicability.
This article shall be effective with all applications for building permits
received on July 1, 2004, and later.
§ 170-6 INDIANA CODE § 170-7
1:50
Chapter 176
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 184.
§ 176-1. Curfew established for children under 17. [Amended
6-8-1971 by Ord. No. 100621]
It shall be unlawful for any child who has not reached his or her 17th
birthday to be or remain in or upon any public highway, park, streets or
other public places, or in any enclosure or vehicle which is on or in close
proximity to any such public place in the Borough between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. on any night preceding a school day and between
the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. on any night not preceding a school
day, unless such child be accompanied by a parent, guardian or other
person having the legal care or custody of such child, or unless such child be
lawfully employed so as to make it necessary to use public highways during
such times for the exclusive use of such employment, provided such child
shall have a certificate to that effect signed by the Police Chief.
§ 176-2. Curfew siren.
As a warning, a siren shall be sounded at 15 minutes to 10 on each night
preceding a school day and at 15 minutes to 11 each night not preceding a
school day, to be known as the "curfew siren," after which all children who
have not reached their 17th birthday shall be required to be at home or off
the streets, except as provided in §§ 176-1 and 176-8.
§ 176-3. Responsibility of parents; violations and penalties.
[Amended 6-8-1971 by Ord. No. 1006]
A. It is hereby made unlawful for any parent, guardian or the person
having the legal care or custody of a child who has not reached his or
her 17th birthday to allow or permit such child to violate any provision
of this chapter.
B. Any parent, guardian or person having the legal custody of any child,
who allows him to be on any street, park or public place in violation of
§ 176-1 of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $5 or less than $1 and costs of prosecution,
and, in default of payment thereof, to imprisonment for not more than
five days, and a like fine or imprisonment shall be imposed on any
person aiding or abetting in the violation of the intent and purpose of
this chapter.
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 170-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-4
1:51
§ 176-4. Taking children into custody; record. [Amended 6-8-1971
by Ord. No. 100622]
Any child who has not reached his or her 17th birthday found upon the
Borough streets, parks or public places in violation of § 176-1 of this chapter
shall be taken into custody by the Borough police and delivered to his or
her parents, guardian or person having the legal custody of said child, and
report thereof shall be made immediately, or as soon thereafter as possible,
to the Police Chief who shall make a record thereof in a book to be kept for
that purpose.
§ 176-5. Detention for questioning and investigation. [Amended
6-8-1971 by Ord. No. 100623
If any child, violating the provisions of this chapter, does not immediately
disclose his place of residence, or if the residence be not in the Borough, the
police officer shall take such child to the office of the Police Chief or other
place of detention for questioning and investigation.
§ 176-6. Determining age.
The police officers of the Borough, in taking children into custody, shall
use their discretion in determining age and in doubtful cases may require
positive proof, and until such proof is furnished the officer's judgment shall
prevail.
§ 176-7. Third and subsequent offenses.
Any child, whether a resident or nonresident of the Borough, who shall
violate the provisions of this chapter three or more times, shall be reported
to a society or organization whose purpose is to take charge of incorrigibles
and delinquents, and proceedings shall be then taken in the Court of
Quarter Sessions for their permanent welfare. A like proceeding shall be
taken in cases where the arrest of the parent or guardian shall not be
effective or where for any other reasons the provisions of § 176-3 of this
chapter cannot be made effective by fines and penalties imposed
thereunder.
§ 176-8. Authority to suspend curfew or extend hours. [Amended
6-8-1971 by Ord. No. 100624]
The Police Chief, with the approval of the Public Safety Committee or other
authorized committee of the Borough Council, may from time to time issue
proclamations or notices temporarily suspending this chapter or extending
the hour of the same, so as to permit children who have not reached their
17th birthday to be upon the streets or other public places for special school
functions or other special occasions.
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 176-4 INDIANA CODE § 176-8
1:52
Chapter 184
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firearms — See Ch. 210.
Noise — See Ch. 275.
Urination in public — See Ch. 434.
§ 184-1. Disorderly conduct prohibited.
Disorderly conduct is hereby prohibited within the Borough of Indiana. Any
person who shall willfully make or cause to be made any loud, boisterous
and unseemly noise or disturbance to the annoyance of the peaceable
residents nearby, or near to any public street or alley, or public ground
within the Borough, whereby the public peace is broken or disturbed, or the
traveling public annoyed, shall be guilty of disorderly conduct.
§ 184-2. Disturbance of peace prohibited; open containers of
alcohol; licenses for waivers. [Amended 4-2-1985 by Ord. No. 1376]
A. Disturbance of the peace is hereby prohibited within the Borough of
Indiana. Any person who shall be guilty of any wilful act causing or
tending to cause a disturbance of the peace and good order of the
Borough, or causing or tending to cause any danger, discomfort or
annoyance to inhabitants of the Borough or to users of any of the public
streets or alleys in the Borough; or who shall fight or quarrel or incite
others to fight or quarrel; or who shall publicly make use of obscene or
indecent language; or who shall loaf or loiter or congregate upon any of
the public streets or alleys or public grounds in the Borough, to the
annoyance of the peaceable residents nearby or traveling upon any
street or alley or being lawfully upon any of the public grounds in the
Borough, whereby the public peace is broken or disturbed or the
traveling public annoyed; or who shall drink any malt or brewed or
vinous or alcoholic beverage while being in or upon any of the public
streets or alleys or parks or other public grounds in the Borough, shall
be guilty of disturbance of the peace.
B. Any person who shall have in his possession an open container, bottle or
can, containing any malt, brewed, vinous or alcoholic beverage while
being in or upon any public streets, alleys, parks or other public
grounds in the Borough of Indiana, shall be guilty of disturbing the
peace. [Amended 6-8-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-03]
(1) The Borough Council, by resolution, may establish and revise
regulations to permit the possession of an open container of alcohol
in public places on such terms, at such times, and at such locations
as are established by regulations.
§ 176-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-2
1:53
§ 184-3. Possession of open containers in nonconformance with
regulations. [Added 6-8-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-0325]
Any person, group, or establishment that does not conform to the provisions
of the regulations adopted pursuant to § 184-2B(1) shall be guilty of
disturbing the peace when a violation of possessing an open container on a
public place occurs as a result of nonconformance with the regulations.
§ 184-4. Revocation of license. [Added 6-8-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-03]
Any person, group, or establishment, that has been issued a license, that
does not abide by the regulations adopted by the Council shall be subject
to the penalties contained in § 184-5, and, in addition, may have the license
revoked by the Borough Manager.
§ 184-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-2-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-03]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 and
not more than $300 for the first offense, $300 for the second and any
subsequent offenses, together with costs of prosecution. In default of
payment of such fine and costs, such person shall be sentenced to
imprisonment for not more than 10 days.
Chapter 210
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 184.
§ 210-1. Use restricted.
No person shall, except in necessary defense of person or property or a
law enforcement officer discharging a firearm in the line of duty, fire or
discharge any gun or other firearm within the limits of the Borough of
Indiana.
(2) Any person, group, or establishment desiring to obtain a waiver of
the provisions of § 184-2B shall submit an application to the
Borough to obtain a license for such waiver.
25.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also redesignated former § 184-3 as § 184-5.
§ 184-2 INDIANA CODE § 210-2
1:54
§ 210-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
Chapter 212
FIRES, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 28.
§ 212-1. Starting outdoor fire prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to start or maintain any outdoor fire
within the Borough of Indiana, except in accordance with this chapter.
§ 212-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Shall include any individual, partnership, association, or other
entity recognized by law.
§ 212-3. Fires for outdoor cooking.
Fires contained in a fireplace, fire ring, cooking grill or similar devices or
structures that are designed and built for the purpose of outdoor cooking
shall be permitted.
§ 212-4. Conditions under which fires permitted.
Outdoor fires, except those in accordance with § 212-3, are not permitted
unless all of the following conditions are met:
A. The fire is in a fire-retardant container or the area of the fire is less than
one square yard, and there shall not be combustible material within a
radius of five feet from the center of the fire with the exception of the
area of the fire.
B. At all times a responsible adult, 18 years of age or older, must be
present.
C. Only nontreated wood may be burned in the fire, and no toxic material
may be burned.
§ 210-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-4
1:55
§ 212-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction before a District
Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of $50 for the first offense, $250 for
the second offense, and $500 for the third or subsequent offense, together
with costs of prosecution. In default of payment of the fine and costs, the
violator shall be committed to the Indiana County Jail for a period not to
exceed five days. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense. The
Indiana Borough Council may, by resolution, change the provisions dealing
with fines.
Chapter 220
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 170.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 395.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
405.
Zoning — See Ch. 460.
D. The Borough Manager or his designee must be notified and give prior
consent for the fire.
§ 212-4 INDIANA CODE § 212-5
1:56
ARTICLE I
Authority
§ 220-1. Statutory authority.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,26 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Borough Council of the Borough of Indiana does
hereby order as follows.
26.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 220-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-1
1:57

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 220-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 220-3. Applicability.
§ 220-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions that may be in
effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 220-5. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the Borough of Indiana unless a permit
has been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
B. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not
imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas or that land uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
Indiana or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
§ 220-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-5
1:59
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
§ 220-5 INDIANA CODE § 220-5
1:60
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 220-6. Designation of floodplain administrator.
The Manager of the Borough of Indiana is the person designated to
administer and enforce this chapter. The Floodplain Administrator may
delegate these duties to qualified technical personnel, the Zoning Officer, or
other employees.
§ 220-7. Permit required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the Borough of Indiana.
§ 220-8. Duties and responsibilities of floodplain administrator.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this chapter and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended);27 the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended);28 the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);29 and the U.S. Clean
Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued
until this determination has been made.
C. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
history of repairs to the subject building so that any repetitive loss
issues can be addressed before the permit is issued.
D. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
E. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
27.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
28.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
29.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 220-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-8
1:61
§ 220-9. Application procedures and requirements.
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
F. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Borough Manager for
whatever action he considers necessary.
G. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain all records associated with
the requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to,
permitting, inspection and enforcement.
H. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of 34 Pa.
Code and the 2009 International Building Code and the 2009
International Residential Code or latest revisions thereof.
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the Borough of Indiana.
Such application shall contain the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the owner of the land on which the
proposed construction is to occur.
(3) The name and address of the contractor.
(4) The site location, including address.
(5) A listing of other permits required.
(6) A brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including
a breakout of the flood-related cost and the market value of the
building before the flood damage occurred where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform to the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances;
§ 220-8 INDIANA CODE § 220-9
1:62
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement;
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant;
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and/or
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways;
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale, showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2009 International Building Code or the 2009
International Residential Code.
§ 220-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-9
1:63
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood elevation;
(b) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations;
(c) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within a special floodplain area (see § 220-16B),
when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the base flood elevation more
than one foot at any point;
(d) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood elevation. Such statement shall include a
description of the type and extent of floodproofing measures
that have been incorporated into the design of the structure
and/or the development;
(e) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 220-21F, Storage, and § 220-22, Development that may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 220-21F and 220-22 which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 220-22
during a base flood.
(f) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development";
(g) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan to
implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control
meeting the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection.
(5) Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to
the municipality based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the Floodplain Administration.
§ 220-9 INDIANA CODE § 220-10
1:64
§ 220-10. Changes to application, permit or plans.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests
for any such change shall be in writing and shall be submitted by the
applicant to Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
§ 220-11. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard
which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit and the date of
its issuance and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 220-12. Start of construction; time limits.
§ 220-13. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance and shall be completed within 12
months after the date of issuance of the permit or the permit shall
expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain
Administrator. The "actual start of construction" means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
B. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request which sets
forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the Floodplain Administrator
to approve such a request is submitted by the applicant.
A. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
§ 220-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-13
1:65
§ 220-14. Appeals.
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order or direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of an misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall pay a fine
to the Borough of Indiana, of not less than $25 nor more than $600 plus
costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions
are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any
violation of or noncompliance with this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue, and all such
persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
or relocated in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by the
Borough Council to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter may appeal to the Borough Manager. Such appeal must be
filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or
action of the Floodplain Administrator. The Borough manager will
consider the appeal and respond to the complaint in writing within 30
days.
B. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Borough
Manager concerning the administration of the provisions of this chapter
may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be filed, in
writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or action of the
Borough Manager.
C. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall set a time
and place, within not less than 10 or not more than 30 days, for the
§ 220-13 INDIANA CODE § 220-14
1:66
purpose of considering the appeal. Notice of the time and place at
which the appeal will be considered shall be given to all parties.
D. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to a court, as provided by the laws of
this state, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.30
30.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 220-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-14
1:67

ARTICLE IV
Floodplain Areas
§ 220-15. Identification.
§ 220-16. Description; special requirements.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of the Borough of
Indiana classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate
Maps (FIRMs) dated April 3, 2012, and issued by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or the most recent revision
thereof, including all digital data developed as part of the Flood
Insurance Study.
B. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments, are hereby adopted by the Borough of Indiana and
declared to be a part of this chapter.
A. The Floodway Area/District shall be those areas identified as floodway
on the FIRM as well as those areas which have been identified in other
available studies or sources of information for those special floodplain
areas where no floodway has been identified in the FIS. The floodway
represents the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land areas
that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by more than one
foot at any point.
(1) Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development,
shall not be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) No new construction or development shall be allowed unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
B. The AE Area/District without floodway shall be those areas identified as
an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for
which base flood elevations have been provided in the FIS but no
floodway has been delineated.
(1) In AE Area/District without floodway, no new development shall be
permitted unless it can be demonstrated that the cumulative effect
of all past and projected development will not increase the base
flood elevation by more than one foot.
§ 220-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-16
1:69
§ 220-17. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Borough
Council where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or
person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such
change, approval must be obtained from FEMA. Additionally, as soon as
practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information
becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA of the changes by
submitting technical or scientific data.
§ 220-18. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Indiana Borough Planning
Commission, and any party aggrieved by this decision or determination may
appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. The burden of proof shall be on the
appellant.
(2) No permit shall be granted for any construction, development, use,
or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway unless it is
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development would not, together with all other existing and
anticipated development, increase the base flood elevation more
than one foot at any point.
C. The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the
FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no onepercent-
annual-chance flood elevations have been provided. For these
areas, elevation and floodway information from other federal, state, or
other acceptable source shall be used when available. Where other
acceptable information is not available, the elevation shall be
determined by using the elevation of a point on the boundary of the
identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site. In lieu
of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to determine
the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques.
Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers, or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the municipality.
§ 220-16 INDIANA CODE § 220-18
1:70
ARTICLE V
Technical Provisions
§ 220-19. General requirements.
§ 220-20. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality and until all required permits or approvals have first
been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. Technical or scientific data shall be submitted by the applicant to FEMA
for a letter of map revision (LOMR) as soon as practicable but within six
months of any new construction, development, or other activity
resulting in changes in the base flood elevation. The situations when an
LOMR or a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is required are:
(1) Any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations
within the floodway; or
(2) Any development occurring in Zones A1-30 and Zone AE without a
designated floodway which will cause a rise of more than one foot
in the base flood elevation; or
(3) Alteration or relocation of a stream (including but not limited to
installing culverts and bridges).
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
D. Within any identified floodplain area (see § 220-16), no new
construction or development shall be located within the area measured
50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
A. Residential structures.
§ 220-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-20
1:71
(1) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to or above the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to or above
the regulatory flood elevation in accordance with § 220-16C of this
chapter.
(3) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401
through 405, as amended) shall be utilized.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to or above the regulatory
flood elevation or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
floodproofed up to or above the regulatory flood elevation
determined in accordance with § 220-16C of this chapter.
(3) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as
amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent standard. All
plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be
accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect which states that the proposed design and
methods of construction are in conformance with the abovereferenced
standards.
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
§ 220-20 INDIANA CODE § 220-20
1:72
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401
through 405, as amended) shall be utilized.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement shall
be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces
on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also includes
crawl spaces.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Historic structures. See § 220-35, definitions of "historic structure" and
"substantial improvement," for requirements for the substantial
improvement of any historic structures.
E. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
§ 220-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-20
1:73
§ 220-21. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation or
movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the
entry and exit of floodwater for the purpose of equalizing
hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points;
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted;
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring, or settling;
(4) Be no steeper than one foot vertical to two feet horizontal, unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to and
approved by the Floodplain Administrator;
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall insure proper drainage along streets and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
§ 220-20 INDIANA CODE § 220-21
1:74
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any
identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all state
and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it or
contamination from it during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No.
348, Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages, and the
International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems, shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or in
times of flooding could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life and
that are not listed in § 220-22, Development That May Endanger
Human Life, shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation
and/or floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain, without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
§ 220-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-21
1:75
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be
finished with a marine or water-resistant paint or other finishing
material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405), as
amended, and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to the
above and other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent
that they are more restrictive and/or supplement the requirements of
this chapter:
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition
thereof: Sections 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612 and 3402 and
Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest
edition thereof: Sections R104, R105, R109 and R323 and Appendix
AE101, Appendix E and Appendix J.
§ 220-21 INDIANA CODE § 220-22
1:76
§ 220-22. Development that may endanger human life.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, and
the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which will be used for the production or storage of
any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or will be used
for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550
gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances on the premises; or will involve the production,
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances shall be subject
to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other applicable
provisions. The following is a list of materials and substances that are
considered dangerous to human life:
Acetone
Ammonia
Benzene
Calcium carbide
Carbon disulfide
Celluloid
Chlorine
Hydrochloric acid
Hydrocyanic acid
Magnesium
Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen
Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides)
Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.)
Phosphorus
Potassium
Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise
regulated
Sodium
Sulphur and sulphur products
B. Within any floodway area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A above shall be prohibited.
C. New or substantially improved structures within any floodplain area.
(1) Where permitted within any floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved structure of the kind described in
Subsection A above shall be:
§ 220-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-22
1:77
§ 220-23. Special requirements for subdivisions.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
conditional letter of map revision or letter of map revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 220-24. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
(a) Elevated, or in the case of a nonresidential structure elevated
or designed, and constructed to remain completely dry up to at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation;
(b) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity
during the course of a base flood.
(2) Any such structure or part thereof that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations (U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as amended March 1992), or
with some other equivalent watertight standard.
A. Within the identified floodplain, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-ofbank
of any watercourse.
B. Where permitted within any floodplain area, all manufactured homes,
and any improvements thereto, shall be:
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation.
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
C. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturer's installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 International
Residential Building Code or the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing, 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto, shall apply and
34 Pa. Code Chapters 401 through 405 shall apply.
§ 220-22 INDIANA CODE § 220-24
1:78
§ 220-25. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must either:
D. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 International Building Code and the 2009 International
Residential Code, or the most recent revisions thereto, and 34 Pa. Code,
as amended, where appropriate and/or applicable to units where the
manufacturer's standards for anchoring cannot be provided or were not
established for the units' proposed installation.
A. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
B. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
C. Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in § 220-24.
§ 220-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-25
1:79

ARTICLE VI
Special Permits
§ 220-26. Activities requiring special permits.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,31 the following activities shall
be prohibited within any identified floodplain area unless a special permit
has been issued by the Borough of Indiana:
§ 220-27. Application requirements.
Applicants for special permits shall provide five copies of the following
items:
A. The commencement of any of the following activities or the
construction enlargement or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of or any construction of a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
A. A written request, including a completed permit application form.
B. A small-scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site is
located.
C. A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch
being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(1) North arrow, scale and date;
(2) Topography based upon the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988, showing existing and proposed contours at
intervals of two feet;
(3) All property and lot lines, including dimensions, and the size of the
site expressed in acres or square feet;
(4) The location of all existing streets, drives, other accessways, and
parking areas, with information concerning widths, pavement types
and construction, and elevations;
31.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 220-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-27
1:81
(5) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
buildings, structures and other public or private facilities,
including railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural and
man-made features affecting, or affected by, the proposed activity
or development;
(6) The location of the floodplain boundary line, information and spot
elevations concerning the base flood elevation, and information
concerning the flow of water, including direction and velocities;
(7) The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities, and any
other improvements;
(8) Any other information which the municipality considers necessary
for adequate review of the application.
D. Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements,
clearly and legibly drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(1) Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings,
including floor plans, sections, and exterior building elevations, as
appropriate;
(2) For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and, as required, the elevation of any other
floor;
(3) Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors associated
with the base flood;
(4) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures;
(5) Cross-section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other
accessways, and parking areas, showing all rights-of-way and
pavement widths;
(6) Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives, and vehicular
accessways, including existing and proposed grades;
(7) Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems, and any other utilities and
facilities.
E. The following data and documentation:
(1) Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the
activity or development is proposed is an existing separate and
single parcel, owned by the applicant or the client he represents;
(2) Certification from a registered professional engineer, architect, or
landscape architect that the proposed construction has been
§ 220-27 INDIANA CODE § 220-27
1:82
§ 220-28. Application review procedures.
Upon receipt of an application for a special permit by the Borough of
Indiana, the following procedures shall apply in addition to those of Article
III:
adequately designed to protect against damage from the base
flood;
(3) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, landscape architect, or other qualified person, which
contains a complete and accurate description of the nature and
extent of pollution that might possibly occur from the development
during the course of a base flood, including a statement concerning
the effects such pollution may have on human life;
(4) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the effects the proposed development will
have on base flood elevation and flows;
(5) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the kinds and amounts of any loose buoyant
materials or debris that may possibly exist or be located on the site
below the base flood elevation and the effects such materials and
debris may have on base flood elevation and flows;
(6) The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental
Protection's "Planning Module for Land Development";
(7) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the
requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection to
implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control;
(8) Any other applicable permits, such as, but not limited to, a permit
for any activity regulated by the Department of Environmental
Protection under Section 302 of Act 1978-166;
(9) An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which the
site will be safely evacuated before or during the course of a base
flood.
A. Within three working days following receipt of the application, a
complete copy of the application and all accompanying documentation
shall be forwarded to the County Planning Commission by registered or
certified mail for its review and recommendations. Copies of the
application shall also be forwarded to the Borough of Indiana Planning
Commission and the Borough of Indiana's engineer for review and
comment.
§ 220-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-28
1:83
§ 220-29. Special technical requirements.
B. If an application is received that is incomplete, the Borough of Indiana
shall notify the applicant in writing, stating in what respect the
application is deficient.
C. If the Borough of Indiana decides to disapprove an application, it shall
notify the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval.
D. If the Borough of Indiana approves an application, it shall file written
notification, together with the application and all pertinent information,
with the Department of Community and Economic Development, by
registered or certified mail, within five working days after the date of
approval.
E. Before issuing the special permit, the Borough of Indiana shall allow the
Department of Community and Economic Development 30 days, after
receipt of the notification by the Department, to review the application
and decision made by the Borough of Indiana.
F. If the Borough of Indiana does not receive any communication from the
Department of Community and Economic Development during the
thirty-day review period, it may issue a special permit to the applicant.
G. If the Department of Community and Economic Development should
decide to disapprove an application, it shall notify the Borough of
Indiana and the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval,
and the Borough of Indiana shall not issue the special permit.
A. In addition to the requirements of Article V of this chapter, the following
minimum requirements shall also apply to any proposed development
requiring a special permit. If there is any conflict between any of the
following requirements and those in Article V of this chapter or in any
other code, ordinance, or regulation, the more restrictive provision
shall apply.
B. No application for a special permit shall be approved unless it can be
determined that the structure or activity will be located, constructed
and maintained in a manner which will:
(1) Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and any
occupants of the structure. At a minimum, all new structures shall
be designed, located, and constructed so that:
(a) The structure will survive inundation by waters of the base
flood without any lateral movement or damage to either the
structure itself or to any of its equipment or contents below the
base flood elevation.
(b) The lowest floor (including basement) will be elevated to at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
§ 220-28 INDIANA CODE § 220-29
1:84
(c) The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an
indefinite period of time and be safely evacuated at any time
during the base flood.
(2) Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood
levels or flows, or debris endangering life and property.
C. All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a through technical
review by the Borough of Indiana and the Department of Community
and Economic Development.
§ 220-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-29
1:85

ARTICLE VII
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 220-30. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 220-31 shall apply.
§ 220-31. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any floodway area that would cause any increase of the base
flood elevation.
B. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any special floodplain area that would, together with all other
existing and anticipated development, increase the base flood elevation
more than one foot at any point.
C. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement, of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall
be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
D. The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, and the 2009 International Building Code and the
2009 International Residential Code.
E. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of
its market value shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible.
§ 220-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-31
1:87

ARTICLE VIII
Variances
§ 220-32. Grant of relief authorized.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
the Borough of Indiana may, upon request, grant relief from the strict
application of the requirements.
§ 220-33. Procedures and conditions.
A. Requests for variances shall be considered by the Borough of Indiana in
accordance with the procedures contained in § 220-14 and the
following:
(1) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any floodway area that would cause any
increase in the base flood elevation.
(2) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any special floodplain area that would,
together with all other existing and anticipated development,
increase the base flood elevation than one foot at any point.
(3) Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the
other requirements pertaining specifically to development
regulated by special permit (Article VI) or to development that may
endanger human life (§ 220-22).
(4) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(5) In granting any variance, the Borough of Indiana shall attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers
necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare
and to achieve the objectives of this chapter.
(6) Whenever a variance is granted, the Borough of Indiana shall notify
the applicant in writing that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(7) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Borough of Indiana
shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
§ 220-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-33
1:89
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will neither result in an
unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public
expense nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the
public, or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
(8) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the Borough of Indiana. In addition, a report of all
variances granted during the year shall be included in the annual
report to the FEMA.
B. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent-annual-chance flood.
§ 220-33 INDIANA CODE § 220-33
1:90
ARTICLE IX
Definitions
§ 220-34. Interpretation of terms.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 220-35. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood that has a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood").
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXISTING STRUCTURE — A structure for which the start of construction
commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1,
§ 220-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-35
1:91
1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing structure" may also be
referred to as "existing construction."
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufacturing homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood
Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water
surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
§ 220-35 INDIANA CODE § 220-35
1:92
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed area,
used solely for the parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest
floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and built
so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles that are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting
public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after April, 3, 2012, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. Any construction started after May, 19,
1987, and before April 3, 2012, is subject to the ordinance in effect at the
time the permit was issued, provided that the start of construction was
within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 220-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-35
1:93
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — A flood-related damages sustained by a structure
on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds
25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails, and new manufactured home parks and subdivisions
and substantial improvements to such existing parks, when such
development is located in all or a designated portion of a floodplain.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days from the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. "Actual start" means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement,
"actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck;
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 220-35 INDIANA CODE § 220-35
1:94
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs,
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures that
have incurred substantial damage (or repetitive loss when a repetitive loss
provision is used) regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term
does not, however, include either:
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities, whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance requirement will
cause removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic
Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained from
the Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer.
Any exemption from ordinance requirements will be the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
B.
§ 220-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-35
1:95
specifically to various sections of the International Residential Code and the
International Building Code.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 220-35 INDIANA CODE § 220-35
1:96
ARTICLE X
Enactment
§ 220-36. Effective date.
This chapter shall be effective April, 3, 2012, and shall remain in full force
and effect until modified, amended or rescinded by the Borough of Indiana,
Indiana County, Pennsylvania.
§ 220-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-36
1:97
Chapter 234
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 234, Grass, Weeds and Other Vegetation, adopted
6-8-1971 by Ord. No. 1028 (Ch. XI, Part 3, Secs. 31 to 35, of the 1971
Code of Ordinances), as amended, was repealed 6-6-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-02. See now Ch. 327, Property Maintenance.]
Chapter 249
JUNK DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 301.
§ 249-1. Definitions; word usage.
§ 249-2. Annual license required. [Amended 12-30-1991 by Ord. No.
1528; 8-6-1996 by Ord. No. 169232]
No person shall engage in business as a junk dealer in the Borough of
Indiana without first having obtained a license from the Borough Manager,
for which license the fee shall be as set from time to time by resolution of
the Borough Council for each and every calendar year, such fee to be for the
use of the Borough. Such license shall be renewed annually on or before the
31st day of January for each year, provided in any case where a junk dealer's
business shall be established in the Borough on or after the first day of July
in any year, the license fee payable by such junk dealer for the remainder of
such year shall be at 1/2 the yearly rate.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNK — Any discarded material or article such as is not ordinarily
disposed of as rubbish or refuse, and shall include, but not be limited
to, scrap metal and scrapped motor vehicles, and shall not include any
garbage or other organic waste, or any paper, rubbish, rags or other
flammable article or material.
JUNK DEALER — Any person as hereinafter defined who shall engage
in the business of selling, buying and dealing in junk.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm or corporation.
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 220-36 INDIANA CODE § 249-3
1:98
§ 249-3. Issuance of license; posting on premises and vehicle.
The license provided for in § 249-2 of this chapter shall be issued by the
Borough Manager after application shall have been made therefor by the
person desiring to be licensed. Such license shall state the name of the
person to whom such license is issued and the premises from which such
business is to be conducted. Such license shall be posted conspicuously
upon the premises licensed thereunder. The name of the licensed junk
dealer and the number of the license under which he operates shall be
placed in a conspicuous place on the outside of every vehicle used for
business purposes by such dealer.
§ 249-4. Restrictions on activities of licensed junk dealers.
No person licensed under this chapter shall, by virtue of one license, keep
more than one place of business within the Borough of Indiana for the
purpose of buying, selling and dealing in junk. Nor shall any such person
engage in business as a junk dealer in any place other than the place
designated upon his license. Nor shall any such person, or any other person,
operate upon any of the streets of the Borough, whether from a vehicle or
upon foot, as a scavenger or an itinerant buyer or seller of junk.
§ 249-5. Transfer of license.33
No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable from one person
to another person except when the ownership of a licensed premises shall
change. In any such case, the new owner shall apply for a transfer of such
license to him and shall pay a transfer fee as set from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 249-6. Records required; inspection.
Every junk dealer shall provide and shall constantly keep a book in which
shall be fairly written down in the English language at the time of the
purchase of any junk a description of every article or material purchased
or received by him, the date and hour of such purchase or receipt, and the
person from whom such article or material was purchased or received. Such
book and all junk purchased, received or handled by any junk dealer shall
at all times be subject to the inspection of the Chief of Police and any other
official of the Borough of Indiana.
§ 249-7. Required retention period.
Every junk dealer, licensed under this chapter, shall keep and retain upon
the licensed premises, for a period of 48 hours after the purchase or receipt
thereof, all junk received or purchased by him, and he shall not disturb or
reduce the same or alter the original form, shape or condition until such
period of 48 hours shall have elapsed.
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 249-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 249-8
1:99
§ 249-8. Maintenance of premises.
Every junk dealer licensed under this chapter shall constantly maintain the
licensed premises in the manner prescribed by this section as follows:
§ 249-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-8-1971 by Ord. No.
100934]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, for each
and every such violation, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $600 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days,
provided each day's violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute
a separate violation.
Chapter 263
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 327.
Solid waste — See Ch. 388.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 400.
A. Such premises shall at all times be maintained so as not to constitute a
nuisance or a menace to the health of the community or of residents
nearby, or a place for the breeding of rodents and vermin.
B. No garbage or other organic waste, and no papers, rubbish, rags or
other flammable articles or materials shall be stored in such premises.
C. Whenever any motor vehicle shall be received in such premises as junk,
all gasoline and oil shall be drained and removed therefrom, and none
shall be permitted to remain upon the premises.
D. The manner of storage and arrangement of junk and the drainage
facilities of the premises shall be such as to prevent the accumulation of
stagnant water upon the premises and to facilitate access for firefighting
purposes.
E. Such premises shall not be open for business nor shall any work be
done therein in connection with the storage, processing and
transporting or removal of junk at any time of the first day of the week,
commonly called "Sunday," or on any other day of the week before 7:00
a.m. or after 6:00 p.m.
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 249-8 INDIANA CODE § 263-1
1:100
§ 263-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Indiana Borough Anti-
Litter Ordinance."
§ 263-2. Definitions; word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
AIRCRAFT — Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or
designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The word "aircraft" shall
include helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Indiana.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any sample
or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other
printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of
literature:
Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or
thing; and
A.
Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or
B.
Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission
fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms
of this subsection shall not apply where an admission fee is charged
or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses
incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event
of any kind, when either of the same is held, given or takes place in
connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted
under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety
and good order, provided that nothing contained in this subsection
shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of
any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind,
without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law
of this state, or under any ordinance of this Borough; or
C.
Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter,
is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain
of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
D.
§ 263-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-2
1:101
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined herein and all other
waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to
create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general
law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the
United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any
newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by
general law; and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical
or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per
year, and sold to the public.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any
sample, or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine,
paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or
copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of
a commercial handbill or newspaper.
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, recreation center or any other
public area in the Borough, owned or used by the Borough and devoted to
active or passive recreation.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure
designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant,
and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule
or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or
other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery
and similar materials.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 263-2 INDIANA CODE § 263-3
1:102
§ 263-3. Litter in public places.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place within the Borough except in public receptacles or in
authorized private receptacles for collection.
§ 263-4. Placement of litter in receptacles.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in private receptacles shall do
so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the
elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private
property.
§ 263-5. Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the Borough the accumulation of litter from any building or
lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of
litter.
§ 263-6. Merchants' duty to keep sidewalks free of litter.
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the Borough the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business
within the Borough shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business
premises free of litter.
§ 263-7. Litter thrown by persons in vehicles.
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the Borough or upon
private property.
§ 263-8. Truck loads causing litter.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the Borough
unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load,
contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or
other public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck
within the Borough, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in
any street, alley or other public place mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or
foreign matter of any kind.
§ 263-9. Litter in parks.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the Borough
except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of
§ 263-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-9
1:103
the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles
are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the
person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as
provided herein.
§ 263-10. Litter in streams and runs.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any stream, run or any other body
of water within the Borough.
§ 263-11. Handbills in public places.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the
Borough. Nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any commercial
handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful
on any sidewalk, street or other public place within the Borough for any
person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any
noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it.
§ 263-12. Handbills on vehicles.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that it shall not be
unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute, without
charge to the receiver thereof, a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of
a vehicle who is willing to accept it.
§ 263-13. Handbills on uninhabited or vacant premises.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or
continuously uninhabited or vacant.
§ 263-14. Distribution of handbills prohibited where posted.
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill upon any private premises, if requested by anyone
thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on said premises in a conspicuous
position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words: "No
Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisements," or any similar
notice, indicating in any matter that the occupants of said premises do not
desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any
such handbills left upon such premises.
§ 263-15. Handbills on inhabited private premises.
A. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are
inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly
to the owner, occupant, or other person then present in or upon such
§ 263-9 INDIANA CODE § 263-15
1:104
§ 263-16. Dropping litter from aircraft.
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the Borough
any litter, handbill or any other object.
§ 263-17. Posting notices on utility poles and trees prohibited.
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device,
calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamppost, public
utility pole or shade tree, or upon any public structure or building, except
as may be authorized or required by law.
§ 263-18. Litter on occupied private property.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property
within the Borough, whether owned by such person or not, except that the
owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized
private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property.
§ 263-19. Owner to maintain premises free of litter.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section
shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for
collection.
§ 263-20. Litter on vacant lots.
No persons shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the Borough whether owned by such person or not.
§ 263-21. Notice to remove; removal by Borough; collection of
costs.
private premises; provided, however, that in case of inhabited private
premises which are not posted, as provided in this chapter, such person,
unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place
or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises,
if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such
handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks,
streets or other public places, and except that mail boxes may not be so
used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations.
B. Exemption for mail and newspapers. The provisions of this section shall
not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to
newspapers (as defined herein) except that the newspapers shall be
placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being
carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other
public place or upon private property.
§ 263-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-21
1:105
§ 263-22. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-2-1966 by Ord. No.
851; 6-8-1971 by Ord. No. 1007; 9-2-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-03]
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, for each and every
such violation, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than $50 and not more than $100 for the first offense, $300 for the
second and subsequent offenses, together with costs of prosecution. In
default of payment of such fine and costs, such person shall be sentenced to
imprisonment for not more than 10 days, provided each day that any such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder, provided further any
violation of any provision of this chapter that shall also constitute a violation
of a specific provision of the laws of Pennsylvania or of any regulation of
the Commonwealth or any department or agency thereof having the effect
of law shall be prosecuted under said state law or regulation and not under
this chapter.
Chapter 275
A. Notice to remove. The Borough Manager is hereby authorized and
empowered to notify the owner of any open or vacant private property
within the Borough or the agent of such owner to properly dispose of
litter located on such owner's property which is dangerous to public
health, safety or welfare. Such notice shall be by registered mail,
addressed to said owner at his last known address.
B. Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any
owner or agent so notified, to properly dispose of litter dangerous to the
public health, safety or welfare within 10 days after receipt of written
notice provided for in Subsection A above, or within five days after the
date of such notice in the event the same is returned to the Borough
Post Office Department because of its inability to make delivery thereof,
provided the same was properly addressed to the last known address of
such owner or agent, the Borough Manager is hereby authorized and
empowered to pay for the disposing of such litter or to order its disposal
by the Borough.
C. Charge billed to property owner. When the Borough has effected the
removal of such dangerous litter or has paid for its removal, the actual
cost thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of 6% per annum from the
date of the completion of the work, if not paid by such owner prior
thereto, shall be charged to the owner of such property on a bill
forwarded to such owner by the Borough, and said charge shall be due
and payable by said owner at the time of payment of such bill.
D. Collect by assumpsit. Where the full amount due the Borough is not
paid by such owner within 30 days after the disposal of such litter, as
provided for in Subsections A and B above, then, and in that case, the
Borough Manager shall cause the same to be collected by an action of
assumpsit against the property owner.
§ 263-21 INDIANA CODE § 263-22
1:106
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 138.
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 184.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 301.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 440.
§ 275-1. Findings.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Indiana, Pennsylvania, hereby finds
and declares that:
§ 275-2. Loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or
continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either
annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or
safety of others within the limits of the Borough.
§ 275-3. Enumeration of loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises.
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter, but said enumeration shall
not be deemed to be exclusive; namely:
A. The making and creation of loud, unnecessary or unusual noises within
the limits of the Borough of Indiana is a condition which has existed for
some time and the extent and volume of such noise is increasing.
B. The making, creating or maintenance of such loud, unnecessary and
unnatural or unusual noises which are prolonged, unusual or unnatural
in their time, place and use affect and are detrimental to public health.
C. The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and prohibitions
hereinafter contained and enacted is declared as a matter of legislative
determination and public policy, and it is further declared that the
provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are in
pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public
health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity and the
peace and quiet of the Borough of Indiana and its inhabitants.
A. Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling
device on any motor vehicle, motorcycle, locomotive or other means of
conveyance within the limits of the Borough, except as a danger
warning; the creation by means of such signaling device of any
unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of any such device
for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. The use of any
signaling device except one operated by hand or by electricity; the use
§ 263-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-3
1:107
of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and
the use of any signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up.
B. Racing motors. The unnecessary or unnatural acceleration,
deceleration or racing of motors in motor vehicles, whether in motion
or at rest, within the limits of said Borough.
C. Exhausts. The discharge upon the open air of the exhaust of any steam
or diesel locomotive, stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat
or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will
effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
D. Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any motor vehicle, motorcycle or
other piece of machinery or equipment so out of repair or so loaded or
in such a manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding,
rattling or other noise.
E. Radios, phonographs, etc. The using, operating, playing, or permitting
to be played, used or operated any radio receiving sets, musical
instruments, sound amplifiers, phonographs, or other machines or
devices for the production or reproduction of sound in such a manner as
to disturb the peace, quiet, comfort and repose of the neighboring
inhabitants at any time with a louder volume than is necessary for
convenient hearing for the person or persons who are voluntary
listeners thereto. The operation of any such set instrument,
phonograph, machine, or device in such a manner as to be plainly
audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure, or vehicle
in which it is located shall be a violation of this section. [Amended
3-5-1996 by Ord. No. 1682]
F. Loud speakers, amplifiers for advertising. The using, operating or
permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set,
musical instrument, phonograph, loud speaker, sound amplifier or other
machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is
cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising
or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure.
G. Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on
the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet,
comfort or repose of persons in any school, church or office, or in any
dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any persons in the
vicinity.
H. Animals, birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird, which by causing
frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of
any persons in the vicinity.
I. Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The creating of a loud and
excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or
the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers.
§ 275-3 INDIANA CODE § 275-3
1:108
§ 275-4. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Amended 6-8-1971
by Ord. No. 1017; 3-5-1996 by Ord. No. 1682; 9-2-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-03]
J. Construction or repair of buildings, lands and streets. The erection
(including excavating), demolition, alteration, or repair of any streets,
highways, lands, and buildings shall be permitted within the Borough
only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday. Only owners and residents shall have the right to repair their
own properties on Sunday and only between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and
7:00 p.m. Such activities may be engaged in at other hours if
necessitated by concerns for public health and safety and then only
with the permit issued by the Borough Manager or his designee, which
permit shall be granted for a period not to exceed three days or less
while the emergency continues and the permit may be renewed for
periods of three days or less while the emergency continues. The
Borough Manager or his designee in order to grant such permit, the
Borough Manager or his designee must determine that the public
health and safety will not be impaired by the granting of the permit.
[Amended 8-2-1994 by Ord. No. 1633; 4-6-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-02]
K. Hawkers, peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and
vendors which disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
L. Railway, operation thereof. The causing, permitting or continuing any
excessive, unnecessary and avoidable noise in the operation of any
railway locomotive or railway car or train of cars.
M. Amplified noises. To create or cause to be created amplified noise that
can be heard by persons of normal hearing acuity within 50 feet of any
boundary of the property on which the noise is originating. Amplified
noise shall be considered any sound increased in volume by electronic
means so as to be discernible more than 50 feet from the edge of the
property on which the electronic amplification is located. [Added
3-5-1996 by Ord. No. 1682]
A. The Borough Council, or any officer or employee designated thereby for
the purpose, is authorized to enforce this chapter.
B. Any person, persons, firm or corporation who shall violate any
provisions of this chapter between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than $300 for the first offense, a fine of not less than $500 for the
second or subsequent offense, together with costs of prosecution. In
default of payment of such fine and costs, such person shall be
sentenced to imprisonment for not more than 30 days, provided that if
any person or persons shall permit a violation of this chapter to
continue after notice to desist, each additional violation shall be a
separate offense. [Amended 4-3-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-03]
§ 275-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-5
1:109
§ 275-5. Exceptions. [Added 3-5-1996 by Ord. No. 1682]
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit or make unlawful the natural and
usual noises associated with athletic events, parades, or other such affairs
open to the public, or affairs by which a permit has been issued by the
Borough to use public streets and/or property.
Chapter 288
PARKING METERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking on private property — See Ch. 293.
Permit parking — See Ch. 305.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 440.
§ 288-1. Parking meter zones and lots established; days and hours
of operation. [Amended 11-7-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-09]
It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor or other vehicle
to park such vehicle between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday
through Saturday, and all days prior to holidays when merchants are open
for business in the evening, for more than the time designated on the meter
erected at the parking space to be occupied upon the portion of the streets
and lots herein described and designated as parking meter zones:
Free Zone
Philadelphia Street, from Fifth Street to Eighth Street
A Zone
Philadelphia Street, from Eighth Street to Ninth Street7
Carpenter Avenue, from Philadelphia Street to Church Street
Sixth Street, from Church Street to Water Street
Seventh Street, from Church Street to Water Street
Eighth Street, from Church Street to Water Street
Municipal Parking Lot No. 6, located at the northwest corner of Eighth
Street and Church Street
On the west side of Fifth Street, from Philadelphia Street to Church
Street [Added 5-4-1993 by Ord. No. 1582]
B Zone
Church Street, from Sixth Street to Eighth Street
Water Street, from Sixth Street to Ninth Street
Seventh Street, from School Street to Church Street [Amended
11-16-1993 by Ord. No. 1594]
§ 275-5 INDIANA CODE § 288-1
1:110
South 7th Street, along the east curb between Locust Street and South
Avenue [Added 9-4-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-09]
C Zone
Philadelphia Street, from Ninth Street to Clymer Avenue
Carpenter Avenue, from School Street to Church Street
Eighth Street, from School Street to Church Street
Ninth Street, from Church Street to Philadelphia Street
On the east side of Tenth Street, from Oakland Avenue to Philadelphia
Street [Added 5-4-1993 by Ord. No. 1582]
On the north side of School Street between Tenth Street and Oakland
Avenue [Added 5-4-1993 by Ord. No. 1582]
D Zone
Philadelphia Street, from Clymer Avenue to Tenth Street
E Zone
Church Street, from Fifth Street to Sixth Street
Water Street, from Fifth Street to Sixth Street
Fifth Street, from Church Street to Water Street
Taylor Avenue, from Church Street to Water Street
F Zone
Gompers Avenue Municipal Parking Lot No. 1 [Amended 6-5-1973 by
Ord. No. 1079; 11-5-1985 by Ord. No. 1391]
Philadelphia Street, from Coulter Avenue to Fifth Street [Added
1-6-1998 by Ord. No. 1716]
Philadelphia Street, from Coulter Avenue to Fourth Street [Added
1-6-1998 by Ord. No. 1716]
Washington Street, from Tenth Street to Eleventh Street [Added
1-6-1998 by Ord. No. 1716]
G Zone
The G Zone shall be located on the north side of Nixon Avenue between
Seventh Street and Eighth Street [Added 7-6-1993 by Ord. No. 1583]
§ 288-2. Parking rates and time limitations. [Added 11-5-1985 by
Ord. No. 1391]
The cost of parking any motor or other vehicle in any parking space located
within the parking meter zones herein designated and the maximum
amount of time which any motor or other vehicle may be parked or
otherwise allowed to remain parked within parking meter zones herein
designated shall be as follows:
§ 288-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-2
1:111
Free Zone [Amended 7-5-1994 by Ord. No. 1626]
It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of motor vehicle or other
vehicle to park such vehicle between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m., Monday through Saturday, in the free zone for a period of more
than two hours.
A Zone
Motor or other vehicles may be parked in a parking space within the A
Zone for a maximum of two hours at the cost or rate of $0.30 per hour.
B Zone
Motor or other vehicles may be parked in a parking space within the B
Zone for a maximum of two hours at the cost or rate of $0.20 per hour.
C Zone
Motor or other vehicles may be parked in a parking space within the C
Zone for a maximum of four to six hours at the cost or rate of $0.20 per
hour.
D Zone
Motor or other vehicles may be parked in a parking space within the D
Zone for a maximum of five hours at the cost or rate of $0.20 per hour.
E Zone
Motor or other vehicles may be parked in a parking space within the
E Zone for varied lengths of time, said times to be designated on the
parking meters erected at the parking spaces within said parking zone,
at a cost or rate of $0.20 per hour.
F Zone
Motor or other vehicles may be parked in a parking space within the F
Zone for a maximum of four to six hours at the cost or rate of $0.30 per
hour.
G Zone [Added 7-6-1993 by Ord. No. 1583]
There is hereby created a G Zone in which vehicles may be parked a
maximum of 15 minutes at a rate of $0.05 for a fifteen-minute period.
After July 31, 1993, vehicles may be parked in the G Zone a maximum of
15 minutes at a rate of $0.25 for a fifteen-minute period.
§ 288-3. Designation of individual parking spaces; erection of
parking meters.
On streets so designated there shall be parking spaces approximately 12
feet in width and 22 feet in length for angular parking and spaces of
approximately 6 1/2 feet in width and 22 feet in length for parallel parking
marked by lines on the curb or pavement or by other appropriate markings;
and on the sidewalk adjacent to each curb parking space, there shall be
erected a parking meter, which upon the deposit of a coin or coins as
hereinafter provided will indicate the duration of the legal parking period
and the time when such period has elapsed.
§ 288-2 INDIANA CODE § 288-4
1:112
§ 288-4. Coin deposit.
In order that the police officers may properly compute the time during
which a vehicle is parked, the owner or operator shall upon entering such
parking space, during the time of limited parking, immediately deposit a
quarter, dime, nickel, penny or a combination of said coins in the parking
meter alongside of or next to said parking space in the amount required
in accordance with the instructions thereon and failing so to do shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 288-5. Unlawful parking in parking meter zones.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any such
vehicle registered in his or her name or custody or control to be parked in
parking meter zones herein designated in violation of the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 288-6. Vehicles to be parked wholly within parking spaces.
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any line or marking
designating a parking space or to park said vehicle in any way that same
shall not be wholly within a parking space as designated by said markings.
§ 288-7. Unlawful to deface or tamper with parking meters.
It shall be unlawful to deface or tamper with, damage, open or willfully
break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under
the terms of this chapter.
§ 288-8. Parking not permitted where otherwise prohibited.
Nothing contained in this chapter or in any ordinance hereafter establishing
parking meter zones shall be construed to permit parking of vehicles in
those spaces within any zone in which by other ordinances of the Borough
parking is prohibited.35
§ 288-9. Violations and penalties; parking tickets. [Amended
6-8-1971 by Ord. No. 1018; 6-5-1973 by Ord. No. 1080; 11-5-1985 by
Ord. No. 1391]
Any person violating any provision of this chapter or aiding or abetting
or assisting in the violation thereof shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $5 and not more than $10 and the
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment for not more than five days, provided the police officers or
meter maids of the Borough shall place a parking ticket with applicable
notice upon each vehicle parked at a parking meter indicating that the
period of legal parking shall have elapsed and upon every vehicle parked in
35.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 293, Parking on Private Property; Ch. 305, Permit Parking; and
Ch. 440, Vehicles and Traffic.
§ 288-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-9
1:113
the Free Zone for a period of time in excess of two hours, indicating that the
period of legal parking shall have elapsed and that the owner or operator of
said vehicle shall have the privilege within 48 hours from time of issuance
of the parking ticket by placing the said parking ticket together with the
sum of $5, if the vehicle was parked in the Free Zone, or the sum of $2, if
the vehicle was parked in a zone other than the Free Zone, in any one of
the courtesy boxes within the Borough or of turning in said ticket with the
appropriate sum at the Borough Police Station in full satisfaction of such
violation and in such case no prosecution shall be held for such violation. In
the event that said parking ticket shall not be paid in full within 48 hours of
its issuance, the violator shall pay the sum of $10, if the vehicle was parked
in the Free Zone, or the sum of $5, if the vehicle was parked in a zone other
than the Free Zone, provided further the placement of one parking ticket
upon a vehicle shall not excuse a continuance of overparking and the police
officer or meter maid shall have authority to place an additional parking
ticket in the aforementioned dollar amounts upon said vehicle whenever the
period of 60 minutes shall have elapsed following the prior placement of a
parking ticket thereon.
Chapter 293
PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 170.
Parking meters — See Ch. 288.
Permit parking — See Ch. 305.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 395.
Towing — See Ch. 421.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 440.
§ 293-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROVED PARKING LOCATION — Any parking space on private property
that has been approved by the Borough permit officer for parking use,
and has been improved to meet or exceed minimum Borough requirements
for construction of off-street parking areas in consideration of the use the
parking is intended to serve.
DRIVEWAY — A vehicular path improved to Borough standards connecting
the public street pavement and approved parking locations on the private
property the driveway serves. A driveway shall be considered an approved
parking location if constructed to Borough requirements for such approved
parking locations.
GRASS SURFACE — A natural ground surface, whether maintained as a
lawn or not, which is not prepared for motor vehicle parking. A gravel
surface contained along its edges by railroad ties or similar edging or
§ 288-9 INDIANA CODE § 293-1
1:114
a block surface allowing grass to penetrate through shall be considered
an acceptable parking surface for one- and two-family dwelling lots.
Unprepared surfaces leading to erosion and/or tracking of mud onto public
streets shall not be considered approved parking locations.36
PARKING — The placement of a motor vehicle in a stationary position when
the operator is not in or on the vehicle. Parking shall not be construed to
include placement of motor vehicles on grass areas for such purposes as
cleaning, loading and unloading.
PARKING SPACE — An approved parking location for one motor vehicle
according to the Borough's regulations.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm, corporation or other
entity.
§ 293-2. Unlawful parking.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle on private
property unless an approved parking location, on a surface other than a
grass surface, has been used continually prior to the enactment of this
chapter for parking. Grass areas shall not be considered an approved
parking location.
§ 293-3. Exemptions. [Added 9-3-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-08]
§ 293-4. Issuance of building permit.
Before a building permit can be issued for development of a property, or
for the expansion of existing development, or for the change of use of
A. Any Borough resident or any auctioneer conducting an auction within
Indiana Borough may request an exemption from § 293-2 so as to
permit parking that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.
B. Any request for an exemption from § 293-2 of this chapter shall be made
to the Borough Manager or his designee at least 72 hours prior to the
scheduled event.
C. At the time the request is made to the Borough Manager or his designee
the following information shall be provided:
(1) The location of the property for which the request is being made;
(2) The nature of the event; and
(3) The starting time and ending time of the event.
D. Exemptions may be granted at the discretion of the Borough Manager
or his designee for auctions, family reunions, picnics, garage sales, and
similar events where it can be reasonably expected that there will be a
need for additional temporary parking.
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 293-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 293-4
1:115
a property, or when a property owner wishes to increase the number of
parking spaces on his property, the property owner shall provide the permit
officer a scaled drawing of his property showing:
§ 293-5. Unpaved parking spaces.
Unpaved parking spaces are permitted on lots containing single-family or
two-family dwellings. Such unpaved spaces shall be surfaced with shale,
crushed limestone, or other material approved by the permit officer. The
edges of the surfaced area shall be contained by railroad ties, concrete
blocks, the side of a building, or other device that will prevent the scattering
of the surfacing material beyond the parking spaces.
§ 293-6. Violations and penalties.37
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15 together
with costs of prosecution; provided, however, each day's violation of any
provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. Any motor
vehicle that is parked in an unauthorized parking location on private
property may be removed by towing at the expense of the owner of the
vehicle.38
Chapter 301
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk dealers — See Ch. 249.
Noise — See Ch. 275.
Zoning — See Ch. 460.
A. The location of each proposed parking space and the access to it;
B. Proposed surfacing of the lot, including a description of the materials to
be used and their depth, and the method of preparing the site to receive
them;
C. Any earthmoving necessary to level the parking site;
D. Method to contain loose materials if the site is not to be paved;
E. Method of disposal of excess stormwater runoff on a paved site except
for one- and two-family dwellings;
F. Location and intensity of any lighting to be used to illuminate the
parking site.
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
38.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 421, Towing.
§ 293-4 INDIANA CODE § 293-6
1:116
ARTICLE I
Transient Retail Businesses
[Adopted 12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-0739
§ 301-1. Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LICENSEE — Any person who has been issued a transient retail business
license.
PERSON — When used as being a transient retail dealer, a person,
corporation, partnership or any other form of organization.
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS — The engaging, on a temporary basis,
in the purchase, sale, or bartering of personal property or services from
any location within the municipality, whether such personal property or
services are offered in a special going-out of-business sale, involves the
offering for sale of personal property or services brought into the location
specifically for the purposes of sales to the public, or the purchase of
personal property for resale. A retail business shall be considered transient
when such business is not located within the municipality with the intent
to remain in business indefinitely.[Amended 9-6-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-06]
TRANSIENT RETAIL DEALER — Any person who shall engage in a transient
retail business as defined above, also referred to as a "vendor."
§ 301-2. Restrictions.
A. Transient retail businesses are licensed to operate within the Borough
on private property with the consent of the property owner and under
the provisions set forth in code and zoning regulations.
B. It is determined that public ways, including sidewalks, streets, parking
spaces and lots, are reserved for the purposes of convenient, safe, and
efficient pedestrian and vehicle conveyance, travel and parking.
Therefore, the use of public ways for other purposes, including
transient retail businesses, is limited to the provisions herein:
(1) Under the provisions set forth in this chapter, Article II, § 301-9B
which licenses permanent businesses to conduct business in front
of a business owned by them.
(2) During special events in which a vendor, dealer, etc. has been
included in the special event application by the event sponsor and
approved under the provisions of Indiana Borough special event
regulations.
39.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Transient Retail Businesses,
adopted 6-8-1971 by Ord. No. 1029; amended in its entirety 12-2-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-010 (Ch. XIII, Part 3, Secs. 41 to 53, of the 1971 Code of Ordinances).
§ 301-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-2
1:117
(3) Farmers markets sponsored by Downtown Indiana, Inc., at places
preapproved by the Borough of Indiana.
(4) Upon submission and approval of application for one of the
specified places enumerated within this regulation.
C. Transient retail businesses shall not be licensed to conduct activities in
residential areas or any public parking lot, except that roving sales on
residential streets from vehicles stopping for short periods, e.g., ice
cream trucks, may be licensed under this chapter upon submission of
application and approval by the Manager. Otherwise, transient retail
business activity may be conducted on sidewalks and parking spaces
only at the following designated places: [Amended 9-6-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-06]
(1) Sidewalk vending.
Philadelphia and North 5th Street, up to 100 feet west of North
5th Street
Philadelphia and North 6th Street, up to 100 feet west of North
6th Street
Philadelphia and North 8th Street to 500 feet east of North 9th
Street
Philadelphia and South 8th Street 200 feet west of South 8th
Street
South 9th Street on east side at Philadelphia Street
Philadelphia and South 10th Street, southeast corner
Philadelphia and North 11th Street, north/west corner
North 5th Street, west side between Philadelphia and Nixon
Avenue
North 6th Street, west side between Philadelphia and Nixon
Avenue
South 6th Street, west side between Philadelphia and Gompers
Avenue
North 7th Street between Philadelphia and Nixon, upon
completion of the "people place"
South 7th Street, east side between Gompers Avenue and Church
Street
South 10th Street and School Street, west side up to 100 feet
south of School Street
Oakland Avenue, south side at 11th Street
Oakland Avenue southeast corner at 13th Street
Oakland Avenue southeast corner at Paper Mill
Oakland Avenue and South 13th Street and Maple Avenue,
southwest side
§ 301-2 INDIANA CODE § 301-2
1:118
§ 301-3. License required.
Every person, prior to beginning activity as a transient retail dealer within
the municipality, shall obtain a license as hereinafter provided:
(2) Parking space vending.
700 block Locust Street
800 block School Street
1000 block Washington Street
D. Transient retail businesses operating under the provisions of
§ 301-2B(3) are limited to operating Monday through Saturday 9:00
a.m. to 9:00 p.m. and Sunday 12:00 p.m. to dusk. [Amended 9-6-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-06]
E. Only one vendor is licensed to operate at any one of the designated
places at any given time. The desired location shall be specified in the
application, and locations will be approved in the order applications are
submitted and processed. A delay in processing due to inaccurate
information or inability to verify information does not reserve priority
for a location by virtue of the date of submission.
F. Vending carts authorized for use on sidewalks at an enumerated place
shall be of a size that will allow for a remaining four feet of
unobstructed walking space. Vending carts are subject to inspection by
the Code Department.
G. Trailers or vehicles authorized for use at a designated parking space
shall be no larger than can be legally parked within two parking spaces.
All trailers or vehicles used in this manner shall have a current
registration and inspection. The vending side of the vehicle shall be on
the curb side of the parking space.
H. Additional signage or other devices are not licensed to be displayed on
sidewalks or other public ways.
I. Licensees vending from a roving vehicle or cart shall not interfere with
vehicle and pedestrian traffic and must maneuver or stop in accordance
with the Pennsylvania vehicle code. [Amended 9-6-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-06]
A. Application: Application for a transient retail dealer's license shall be
made on a form provided by the municipality. The application shall be
completed in its entirety and signed by the applicant and shall be
submitted to the Manager. Transient retail business applicants
intending to vend food shall submit their Department of Agriculture
Safe Food certification with the application. [Amended 9-6-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-06]
B. Application process.
§ 301-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-3
1:119
§ 301-4. Fees.
The applicable fees payable to the municipality upon approval of the
application shall be provided for in the then-current Indiana Borough fee
schedule which is approved by Council. Metered parking spaces are subject
to current meter bag rental fees in addition to other applicable fees in this
article.
§ 301-5. Taxes.
It shall be the responsibility of every transient retail dealer to pay to the
Indiana Borough Earned Income Tax Collector the proper income taxes for
himself or any employee on income earned as a result of such activities.
§ 301-6. Suspension or revocation of licenses.
The Manager or his/her designee is hereby authorized to revoke or to
suspend any license issued under this article under the following
circumstances:
(1) Upon receipt of an application the information shall be reviewed by
the Police and Code departments who shall, prior to approval of the
application, submit information to the Manager pertaining to their
findings regarding the business.
(2) Within two weeks of submission of the application, the Manager
shall approve or deny the request and inform the applicant in
writing accordingly, including assessing the applicable fee.
(3) Upon approval and collection of the applicable fee, the Manager
shall issue a license to the transient retail dealer, which shall
clearly indicate the location and the expiration date.
C. The issued license shall be displayed by the transient retail dealer at all
times while conducting activities.
A. If the licensee or others named in the license are convicted of a felony
or misdemeanor during the approved operating period, or if the
licensee or others named in the license are arrested (including
summary offenses) while conducting activities.
B. If the Manager or the Manager's designee determines the status of the
business as represented in the application has changed.
C. If it is determined the licensee has given false information on the
application.
D. If unsafe or harmful goods are being sold to the public or if the business
operation creates a safety concern for members of the public.
§ 301-3 INDIANA CODE § 301-7
1:120
§ 301-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, before a Magisterial District Justice, be fined the sum of not more
than $600, together with costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of
the same shall be sentenced to imprisonment for not more than 30 days in
the Indiana County Jail. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 301-8. (Reserved)
§ 301-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-8
1:121

ARTICLE II
Soliciting and Canvassing
[Adopted 12-21-1993 by Ord. No. 1605]
§ 301-9. Registration required; permission to sell.
§ 301-10. Application requirements; identification card.
A. No person, association, partnership, firm or corporation shall, either
directly or indirectly, sell goods, wares, merchandise, magazines,
periodicals, books or other personal property by canvassing or
soliciting, or solicit or canvass for contribution, in the Borough of
Indiana without first having registered with the Police Department and
obtained an identification card from the Borough.
B. No person, association, partnership, firm or corporation shall directly
or indirectly sell goods, wares, merchandise, magazines, periodicals or
other personal property on a public way, except: [Amended
12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-07]
(1) In front of a business owned by them selling similar merchandise in
the Borough;
(2) Under the provisions set forth in Article I pertaining to transient
retail dealers.
A. Any person desiring to engage in canvassing and soliciting shall submit
a written application to the Police Department on a form to be furnished
by the Borough, accompanied by two photographs (two inches by three
inches minimum) of himself, taken within six months prior to the date of
the application.
B. The applicant shall state in such written application his name, age, sex,
home address, business address, name and address of employer, if any,
what he desires to canvass and solicit for, the length of time he wishes
to engage in this work, the make and type of vehicle, if any, he will use,
its registration number, the driver registration number, certificate of
automobile liability coverage and whether he has ever been convicted
of a felony, misdemeanor, or a crime of any kind.
C. In addition thereto, the application shall contain the signature of the
employer as well as of the applicant and shall contain therein the
stipulation and agreement on the part of the employer, in consideration
of the issuance of such license or permit, to become liable for any and
all acts of such solicitor while within the Borough of Indiana, in
violation of law or otherwise. Such employer liability shall be construed
to have no application to bona fide charitable organizations.
D. An identification card will not be issued to any person who has been
convicted of felony, misdemeanor or a crime of any kind involving moral
§ 301-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-10
1:123
§ 301-11. Investigation; issuance of identification card. [Amended
12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-07]
Promptly upon receiving any application for a license to canvass or solicit
within the Borough of Indiana, the Chief of Police shall initiate a cursory
investigation of such application and applicant. In the event that such
investigation should indicate that the granting of such license would or
might be injurious to the public interests, or to the public health, safety or
morals, the Chief of Police shall have, and is hereby given, the power and
authority to refuse to issue such license. In any instance where the Chief
of Police should deem it necessary or advisable to secure and check the
fingerprints of any such applicant, refusal of such applicant to voluntarily
furnish such fingerprints shall constitute, in and of itself, sufficient and valid
ground for refusal to issue such license. The Chief of Police will issue to the
applicant an identification card (to which one of the applicant's photographs
will be affixed) within 10 days from the date of filing of the application,
unless an extended investigation is necessary to clarify or verify information
received.
§ 301-12. Standards of conduct.
Every person to whom an identification card has been issued shall in the
conduct of his activity comply with the following standards of conduct.
turpitude, and such person shall not be allowed to engage in canvassing
and soliciting in the Borough of Indiana.
E. An identification card will be valid for the period specified and for which
the fee has been paid, based on a weekly, monthly, or annual term for
which it is issued. Such card may not be transferred from one person to
another and shall be considered a personal license. [Amended
12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-07]
A. He shall carry his identification card at all times and exhibit it upon
request to any police officer, ordinance officer of the Borough or to any
other person whom he shall call or with whom he shall talk.
B. He shall not permit any person to have possession of his identification
card and shall immediately report its loss to the Borough Police
Department. He shall not cause or permit his identification card to be
altered or defaced in any way.
C. He shall not enter or attempt to enter any dwelling without the
invitation or permission of the occupant and shall immediately leave
any premises upon request of the occupant.
D. He shall engage in canvassing and soliciting between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. Such activities shall be
unlawful on Sunday, legal holidays, or at times other than as designated
Monday through Saturday. [Amended 12-11-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-07]
§ 301-10 INDIANA CODE § 301-12
1:124
§ 301-13. Revocation of identification card.
Any identification card may be revoked by the Chief of Police if the holder
fails to comply with the standards of conduct contained in § 301-12 hereof,
or any of them, or ascertainment by the Chief of Police that the holder has
made a false statement in his application.
§ 301-14. Applicability.
E. He shall not be guilty of any false pretense or misrepresentation and,
particularly, he shall not represent his identification to be an
endorsement of himself or his goods or services or of the goods or
services of his employer.
F. He shall not engage in any breach of the peace or in violation of laws of
the commonwealth or ordinances of the Borough of Indiana during the
course of activities. [Added 12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-0740]
G. He shall immediately surrender his identification card to the Borough of
Indiana Chief of Police upon revocation thereof.
A. This article shall not apply to boys or girls under the age of 16 years,
who take orders for and deliver newspapers, greeting cards, candy, and
the like, or who represent the Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts or similar
organizations and take orders for and deliver cookies and the like.
B. Any person who works for an organization which has been registered
with the Pennsylvania Department of State, as required by Act. No. 337,
approved August 9, 1963,41 known as the "Solicitation of Funds for
Charitable Purposes Act," shall not have to register with the Borough of
Indiana, but such organization shall cause notice to be given to the
Chief of Police that such person will be canvassing and soliciting in the
Borough of Indiana; any such person shall carry an appropriate
identification card issued by the organization for which he works.
[Amended 4-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-02]
C. Any person soliciting funds for a charitable cause which is not within
the purview of the Solicitation of Funds for Charitable Purposes Act and
not registered thereunder shall be required to file an application as
required under this article, except that the Chief of Police may, at his
option, waive the requirements for the submission of photographs of
the applicant. Further, recognizing that no profit is derived by any
individual from such activity, no fee shall be charged for the issuance of
a license to solicit for bona fide charitable contributions. [Amended
4-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-02]
D. Canvassing for religious or political activities does not require a license,
unless such activity involves solicitation of funds and the person or
40.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection F as Subsection G.
41.Editor's Note: See 10 P.S. § 162.1 et seq.
§ 301-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-14
1:125
§ 301-15. Fees. [Amennded 4-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-02;
12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-07]
§ 301-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-6-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-02]
Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof before a Magisterial District Justice, be fined the sum of not more
than $600, together with costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of
the same, shall be sentenced to imprisonment for not more than 30 days in
the Indiana County Jail. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
organization is not registered as a nonprofit organization. [Added
12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-07]
A. Every person engaged in canvassing and soliciting in the Borough of
Indiana and not exempt from the requirements of this article shall pay
registration and motor vehicle registration fee as provided in the thencurrent
Indiana Borough fee schedule.
B. Every person engaged in the canvassing or soliciting in the Borough of
Indiana who utilizes a movable cart, trailer, or similar equipment to sell
goods, wares, or merchandise within Indiana Borough shall be charged
a fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 301-14 INDIANA CODE § 301-16
1:126
Chapter 305
PERMIT PARKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking meters — See Ch. 288.
Parking on private property — See Ch. 293.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 440.
§ 305-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITATION — Includes parking tickets and citations.
EMPLOYEE PERMIT PARKING AREA — A contiguous area of land all of
which is designated for the use of employees who work within Indiana
Borough, and who pay the Borough local services tax.42 Such area shall be
designated by Borough Council by resolution. The locations of the present
districts are as follows:[Added 11-16-1993 by Ord. No. 159543]
INVALIDATED PERMIT — A permit that has been marked null and void on
the Borough records though the sticker is still otherwise currently valid.
An expired sticker shall not be considered an invalidated sticker.[Added
7-5-1994 by Ord. No. 1629]
NONDRIVER PARKING PERMIT — A parking permit that shall be address
specific that may be purchased by a resident in a residential permit parking
district who is a nondriver and who is either physically handicapped or of
65 years of age or older, providing that the primary purpose of the permit
is for the care and benefit of the resident living at that address and that the
permit can only be used at such times as the resident is receiving a direct
and continuous benefit from the use of the permit.[Added 1-18-1994 by
Ord. No. 1608; amended 6-4-1996 by Ord. No. 1685]
PERMIT — A parking permit issued in accordance with this chapter.
On the south side of Maple Street from Penn Avenue for a distance of
approximately 300 feet westward to Fleming Avenue;
A.
On the north side of South Avenue from South Seventh Street to
Maryland Way;
B.
On the west side of South Seventh Street for a distance of 120 feet
south of the driveway located at 554 South Seventh Street; and
C.
D. On the east side of Fourth Street from Church Street to School Street.
42.Editor's Note: See Ch. 414, Art. VI.
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 301-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-1
1:127
PERMIT HOLDER — A property owner or designee of the property owner
who is entitled to use the parking permit.
PETITION — A written request to Borough Council signed by property
owners urging establishment or elimination of a residential parking district
with specific boundaries, executed by property owners in the proposed
residential parking district or that portion of the district to be eliminated,
representing at least 51% of the properties.
PROPERTY — An area of land on which are one or more dwelling units,
identified on the Indiana County assessment maps as a separate property
with distinct property number, described by a separate description in a deed
and abutting one or more public streets. Individual condominium units shall
not be considered separate properties.
RESIDENT — Any person who lives at a property located in Indiana
Borough. A resident who has been issued a driver's license shall prove
evidence of residency within Indiana Borough by displaying a driver's
license when applying for a permit.
RESIDENTIAL PARKING DISTRICT — A contiguous area of land all of which
is zoned in one or more residential classifications within which Borough
Council has established on-street parking restrictions affecting those who
do not have parking permits. Such districts shall be designated with specific
boundaries by Council. On streets that form boundaries, both sides of the
street shall be considered as within the district. Borough Council shall, by
resolution, designate the specific boundaries of residential parking districts.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon any street or highway.
§ 305-2. Issuance of permits. [Amended 11-16-1993 by Ord. No.
1595]
The Borough Manager or a Borough employee appointed as his designee
shall issue permits for on-street parking within any adopted residential
parking area or employee permit parking area, in accordance with the
following requirements:
A. A resident of a property within Indiana Borough shall be entitled to no
more that two permits; provided, however, that no more than two
permits shall be issued to each property. The resident who is entitled to
the permits may assign permits to tenants living at the property.
B. A permit shall not be construed to satisfy off-street parking
requirements of any applicable ordinance of the Borough of Indiana.
C. A resident is entitled to no more that two temporary permits for the use
by visitors during periods when restricted parking is in force.
Temporary permits shall be valid for one day between 7:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m. and shall be displayed as indicated on the permit. Renewal of
temporary permits shall be on a day-to-day basis.
§ 305-1 INDIANA CODE § 305-2
1:128
D. All handicapped residents of the Borough of Indiana shall be entitled to
one parking permit, upon application in accordance with this chapter,
as well as proof of the possession of a handicapped license or placard.
Any person desiring a parking permit shall have the right to request one
from the ad hoc parking committee, and if denied a parking permit by
the ad hoc parking committee, shall have the right to appeal to Borough
Council.
E. Permits shall be displayed as indicated on the permit.
F. The permit shall entitle the driver of the vehicle displaying the permit to
park on a street within the residential parking district during restricted
parking hours.
G. All parking permits shall expire on December 31 of each year. Permits
for the following year shall be applied for after December 1 of the prior
year.
H. The application for a permit shall include the name, address, state and
driver's license number of the applicant, and the respective assignee of
the permit, together with the make, model, year, color and license
number of the vehicle to which the permit will be affixed.
I. Replacement permits.
(1) It shall be unlawful to buy or sell permits from anyone other than
the Borough Manager or his designee. In the event that the vehicle
upon which the permit is affixed is sold or discarded, the owner of
the vehicle shall so notify the Borough Manager or his designee,
and shall serve a replacement permit which shall be effective until
the expiration date of the original permit. Before discarding or
selling a vehicle, the owner shall remove the permit and present it
to the Borough Manager or his designee as a condition of receiving
a replacement permit.
(2) If a replacement sticker is provided for any reason to a permit
holder, the permit holder shall supply adequate evidence of the
removal of the original sticker from the car. The Borough Manager
or a Borough employee appointed as his designee shall determine
whether the permit holder has provided adequate evidence of the
removal of the original sticker. If the Borough Manager or his
designee determines that there is not adequate evidence of the
removal of the sticker from the vehicle, the permit holder shall be
charged a fee, as set from time to time by resolution of the Borough
Council, for a replacement sticker and the original sticker shall be
invalidated on the Borough's books. [Added 7-5-1994 by Ord. No.
162944]
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 305-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-2
1:129
§ 305-3. Administration.
§ 305-4. Areas designated as permit parking. [Added 11-2-1999 by
Ord. No. 1999-08]
There shall be permit parking in the following areas:
§ 305-5. Unlawful acts.
J. No permit shall be issued until all outstanding parking or other vehicle
citations issued by the Borough against the applicant for the permit and
the applicant's designee have been paid in full.
A. Permit application fees.
(1) The following application fees shall be as set from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council: [Amended 11-16-1993 by
Ord. No. 1595; 1-18-1994 by Ord. No. 160845]
(a) Permit.
(b) Long-term permit.
(c) Temporary permit.
(d) Replacement permit.
(e) Annual permit fee for employee permit parking area, which
shall be effective January 1 of each year.
(f) Nondriver permits.
(2) Council shall have the right to establish a schedule of fees and to
change fees for permits by resolution.
B. Unless otherwise established by resolution by Borough Council,
restricted parking shall be enforced within the residential parking
district between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. prevailing time,
Monday through Friday, except for national holidays that fall on
weekdays.
A. The south side of Washington Street between Sixth Street and Wayne
Avenue.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership or corporation to park
any vehicle within any residential parking district or employee parking
area during restricted parking hours, without the appropriate permit;
providing, however, that Borough Council may, by resolution, provide a
two-hour grace period so that no violation will occur until after the
vehicle has been within a restricted area for a period of two hours,
45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 305-2 INDIANA CODE § 305-5
1:130
§ 305-6. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 314
POLICE AND CODE ENFORCEMENT SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 28.
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 184.
Littering — See Ch. 263.
Noise — See Ch. 275.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 327.
Solid waste — See Ch. 388.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 400.
Urination in public — See Ch. 434.
providing, however, that there shall be no two-hour grace period in
employee parking areas. [Amended 11-16-1993 by Ord. No. 1595]
B. Any person who manufactures, counterfeits, sells or aids in the
manufacturing, counterfeiting or sale of permits, except for the
Borough Manager or his designee, shall be in violation of this chapter.
C. A violation of Subsection A above shall be processed initially as a
parking violation. Other violations of this chapter shall be processed as
provided for by state law.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership or corporation to utilize
an invalidated permit while parking in a permitted zone. [Added
7-5-1994 by Ord. No. 1629]
A. Any person, partnership or corporation violating § 305-5A above shall,
upon conviction, be fined $10 together with costs, and, upon failure to
make payment of said fine and costs, be sentenced to imprisonment for
five days. Each day shall constitute a separate offense; providing,
however, that if the fine is paid by 12:00 p.m. of the following day by
delivery to the Borough Police Station or by placing the same in the
United States mail, postage prepaid to the Borough Police Station, the
sum of $5, no prosecution shall take place for such violation.
B. Any other violation of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less
than $300, upon conviction, together with costs, and, upon failure to
pay said fine and costs, to imprisonment for no more than 10 days.
§ 305-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-6
1:131

ARTICLE I
Disorderly Gatherings on Private Property
[Adopted 10-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-07]
§ 314-1. Purpose and intent.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Indiana determines as follows:
§ 314-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
CODE ENFORCEMENT SERVICES — Services rendered by the Code
Enforcement Department of the Borough of Indiana in connection with
inspections, violations of Borough ordinances, and/or violations of the
Property Maintenance Code.46
A. That certain private properties require a disproportionate amount of
attention from the Police Department and/or Code Enforcement
Department in order to properly protect the peace, health, safety, and
general welfare of the public.
B. That the municipal services of Indiana Borough are being strained and
the citizens of the Borough of Indiana are being unfairly burdened by
the conduct or misconduct occurring on certain properties by the
residents and/or visitors to those properties.
C. That the host of a disorderly party or other social event and those
persons attending such party or event should be held criminally
responsible for any public disturbances or other acts of disorderly
conduct.
D. The intent of this article is to gain a cooperative effort among property
owners in controlling adverse activities affecting the Borough citizens
that occur or may occur on their properties. The owners of private
properties are expected to minimize required police and code
enforcement services to maintain order and public peace and safety and
to stop public disturbances by diligent and strict management and
regulation of their properties. [Amended 9-2-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-02]
E. The owners of private properties are expected to minimize required
police and code enforcement services to maintain order and public
peace and safety and to stop public disturbances by diligent and strict
management and regulation of their properties.
F. The Borough of Indiana desires to minimize threats to the peace,
health, safety, and general welfare of the public.
46.Editor's Note: See Ch. 327, Property Maintenance.
§ 314-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 314-2
1:133
DISORDERLY GATHERING — A gathering at which any public disturbance
occurs.
GATHERING — A party or event involving a group of persons who have
assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or activity on private
property.
HOST — The person who is in possession or control of the private property
where the gathering takes place by virtue of owning the property, having
a lease on the property, or otherwise being in possession of the property
and/or who organized, sponsored, conducted, hosted, or permitted such
gathering, invited persons to attend such gathering, or was otherwise in
charge of such gathering.
OWNER — Any person, partnership, corporation, or similar entity that holds
record title to the private property.
POLICE SERVICE — Police service rendered in responding to a call at
a disorderly gathering or otherwise to maintain order, the public peace,
or public safety, as well as stopping a public disturbance at a disorderly
gathering.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any land, building, or other structure not owned by
a public entity.
PUBLIC DISTURBANCE — Includes instances where police and/or code
enforcement services are needed to respond to a public disturbance and/or
to the effects of a public disturbance. Any act by a host or those persons
attending a gathering, including, but not limited to, public drunkenness,
violation of the open container ordinance, underage drinking, public
urination or defecation, unlawful deposit of trash or litter on public or
private property, damage to or destruction of public or private property,
obstruction of public roads, highways, or sidewalks, interfering with
emergency or police services, violation of Chapter 275, Noise, of the Code
of the Borough of Indiana, indecent exposure, fighting, or violations of any
other Borough ordinance. As used in this article, a public disturbance shall
also include violations of the Property Maintenance Code47 caused by any
act by a host or those persons attending a gathering including, but not
limited to, those acts referred to herein.[Amended 9-2-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-02]
§ 314-3. Unlawful acts. [Amended 9-2-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-02]
A. No host or person attending a gathering shall commit any act
constituting a public disturbance. No host shall hold, conduct, or have a
gathering where any act of public disturbance has occurred or is
occurring.
B. No property owner shall permit a disorderly gathering to occur on his
or her or its private property after being notified pursuant to § 314-4 of
an offense of disorderly gathering on that property.
47.Editor's Note: See Ch. 327, Property Maintenance.
§ 314-2 INDIANA CODE § 314-4
1:134
§ 314-4. Notice to owner of violation. [Amended 9-2-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-02]
In an effort to inform the owners of private property of public disturbances
on their property and to hold owners accountable for repeating violations of
this article that occur on their property, whenever a person other than the
property owner is cited under the provisions of this article the owner will be
notified that a violation of this article occurred on their property.
§ 314-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-2-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-02]
A. Any host or person who violates § 314-3A of this article shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a Magisterial
District Judge under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be
guilty of a summary offense and upon first conviction shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than $300 and not more than $600 plus
court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in
the enforcement proceedings. Upon conviction of any subsequent
offense of disorderly gathering, the host or person shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $600 and not more than $1,000 plus court costs and
reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement
proceedings. Upon judgment against any host or person by summary
conviction, or by proceedings by summons on default of the payment of
the fine or penalty imposed and the costs, the defendant may be
sentenced and committed to the Borough lockup for a period not
exceeding 10 days or to the county jail for a period not exceeding 30
days.
B. Any owner who after being notified of an offense of disorderly gathering
pursuant to § 314-3B and on whose property occurs another offense
within six months of a notification of disorderly gathering pursuant to
§ 314-3B, shall be subject to the fines of not less than $300 and not
more than $1,000 plus court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees
incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. Upon
judgment against any host or person by summary conviction, or by
proceedings by summons on default of the payment of the fine or
penalty imposed and the costs, the defendant may be sentenced and
committed to the Borough lockup for a period not exceeding 10 days or
to the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days. The six-month time
period is calculated from the date of the violation looking back six
months.
§ 314-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 314-5
1:135

ARTICLE II
Nuisance Properties
[Adopted 10-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-08]
§ 314-6. Purpose and intent.
The Council of the Borough of Indiana determines as follows:
§ 314-7. Violations used to determine nuisance.
Violations of certain sections of the Property Maintenance Code and local
ordinances and state criminal statutes directly affect the safety, welfare,
and quality of life of the citizenry. Violations of the following sections shall
be utilized to determine whether a property is a nuisance property:
Indiana Borough Property Maintenance Code:49
PM-302.1 Sanitation
PM-302.3 Sidewalks
PM-302.4 Weeds
PM-302.9 Defacement of Property
PM-304.1 General
PM-305.1 General
PM-306.1 Accumulation of Rubbish and Garbage
PM-306.2 Disposal of Rubbish and Garbage
PM-306.3 Rubbish and Garbage Storage Facilities
PM-307-1 Accumulation of Rubbish and Garbage
A. That certain private properties require a disproportionate amount of
attention from the Code Enforcement Department and Police
Department in order to properly protect the Borough citizens' health,
safety, sanitation, and general welfare.
B. That the municipal services of Indiana Borough are being strained and
the citizens of the Borough of Indiana are being unfairly burdened by
repeated violations of the Property Maintenance Code48 and/or local
and state criminal statutes occurring on certain properties.
C. That the owners of private properties have the responsibility to
minimize required code enforcement and police services and to reduce
the burden on the citizens of Indiana Borough of the nuisances created
by Property Maintenance Code violations and/or public disturbances
originating from their properties.
D. "Property," as it pertains herein, shall include a specific address
regardless of the number of living units within the property.
48.Editor's Note: See Ch. 327, Property Maintenance.
49.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 327, Property Maintenance.
§ 314-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 314-7
1:137
PM-307.2 Disposal of Rubbish
PM-307.2.1 Rubbish Storage Facilities
PM-307.3 Disposal of Garbage
Chapters of the Code of the Borough of Indiana
Chapter 314, Article I Disorderly Gatherings on Private Property
Chapter 434 Urination in Public
Chapter 275 Noise
Statutes
Title 18 Section 550550 Public drunkenness
Title 18 Section 550351 Disorderly conduct
Title 18 Section 550252 Failure to disperse
Title 18 Section 630853 Underage drinking
§ 314-8. Repeat violations. [Amended 9-2-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-02]
It shall be a violation of this article if a property owner has four or more
violations listed in § 314-7, or a combination thereof, within a twelve-month
period.
§ 314-9. Violations and penalties; revocation of occupancy license.
[Amended 9-2-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-02]
Any property owner who violates § 314-8 of this article shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a Magisterial District
Judge under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of
a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000 plus court costs and attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings. Upon judgment against any person by summary
conviction, or by proceedings by summons on default of the payment of
the fine or penalty imposed and the costs, the defendant may be sentenced
and committed to the Borough lockup for a period not exceeding 10 days
or to the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day or
portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
50.Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5505.
51.Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5503.
52.Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5502.
53.Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 6308.
§ 314-7 INDIANA CODE § 314-10
1:138
§ 314-10. Notice of violation to property owner. [Amended 9-2-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-02]
Upon the third incident involving any of the violations enumerated under
§ 314-7, the property owner shall be notified, in writing, by the Borough
Manager or his designee. Upon a subsequent incident involving a violation
of any of the enumerated violations under § 314-7, the property owner shall
be charged in accordance with § 314-8 of this article. The property owner
shall also be notified of the penalties for subsequent violations, and shall be
informed that no further notifications will be sent. The Chief of Police and
Code Enforcement Office Director will provide information to the Manager
pertaining to repeated responses to a property under the provisions of this
article.
§ 314-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 314-10
1:139
Chapter 327
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 170.
Rental property — See Ch. 348.
Solid waste — See Ch. 388.
Zoning — See Ch. 460.
§ 327-1. Adoption of Property Maintenance Code. [Amended
4-7-1998 by Ord. No. 1725; 2-6-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01]
The BOCA National Property Maintenance Code, Fifth Edition, 1996, as
published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International,
Inc., and as adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the Borough of
Indiana, hereinafter "International Property Maintenance Code," shall be
amended as follows.
§ 327-2. Amendments, additions and deletions.
A. Section P.M.-702.3.1, shall be amended to read as follows: [Added
2-3-1998 by Ord. No. 1721; amended 2-6-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-01]
Section P.M.-702.3.1, Fire Escapes Required: For four stories or
more, shall meet all requirements of the current adopted
International Building Code.
B. Section P.M.-106.2 shall be amended to provide that penalties shall be
no less than $25 nor more than $300. Each day that a person fails to
comply with the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate
violation. [Added 4-7-1998 by Ord. No. 1725; Amended 2-6-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-01]
C. Section P.M.-111.2 shall be amended as follows: [Added 4-7-1998 by
Ord. No. 1725]
P.M.-111.2 Membership of the Board: The Board of Appeals shall
consist of three members who shall be residents of the Borough of
Indiana and who shall be appointed by the President of the Borough
Council, with the consent of Borough Council, as follows: one for
three years, one for two years, one for one year. Thereafter, each
new member shall serve for three years until a successor has been
appointed.
D. Section P.M.-111.2.1 shall be amended as follows: [Added 4-7-1998 by
Ord. No. 1725]
§ 314-10 INDIANA CODE § 327-2
1:140
P.M.-111.2.1 Qualifications: The Board of Appeals shall consist of
three individuals who are residents of the Borough of Indiana and who
are knowledgeable or have experience in one or more of the following
areas: architecture, construction trades, engineering, plumbing,
electrical, heating and air conditioning, fire protection, or government
service.
E. Section P.M.-111.2.2 shall be amended as follows: [Added 4-7-1998 by
Ord. No. 1725]
P.M.-111.2.2 Alternate Members: President of Borough Council
shall appoint, with the consent of Borough Council, two alternate
members who shall have the requisite qualifications and who shall
be called upon by the Board Chairman to hear appeals when other
members are absent or disqualified.
F. Section P.M.-111.5 shall be amended as follows: [Added 4-7-1998 by
Ord. No. 1725]
P.M.-111.5 Postponed Hearing: If there are not at least three
members of the Board present to hear an appeal, the appeal shall be
postponed until at least three members can be present.
G. Section P.M.-111.6 shall be amended as follows: [Added 4-7-1998 by
Ord. No. 1725]
P.M.-111.6 Board Decision: The Board shall affirm, modify, or
reverse a decision of the Code Official by a majority vote of the
members present at the hearing.
H. Section P.M.-111.7 shall be amended as follows: [Added 4-7-1998 by
Ord. No. 1725]
P.M.-111.7 Court Review: Any person who was previously a party to
the appeal shall have the right to apply to the Court of Common Pleas
of Indiana County, Pennsylvania, within 30 days from the date of the
decision is rendered, and mail to the parties in a manner as required
by law.
I. Section P.M.-705.5.4 shall be added to the International Property
Maintenance Code. [Added 12-8-1998 by Ord. No. 1741; amended
2-6-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01]
(1) In commercial, industrial, or institutional buildings, where persons
are regularly employed and/or the public or a membership group is
invited to enter, one carbon monoxide detector shall be required for
each 10,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof, with the
first detector located not closer than 15 feet nor more remote than
40 feet from the furnace and/or hot water heater.
§ 327-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 327-2
1:141
(2) Carbon monoxide detectors that are Underwriters Laboratories
approved shall be utilized. Electrically operated detectors with
battery backups are preferred.
(3) Carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed in accordance with
the provisions of this Subsection I in all leased dwellings,
commercial, industrial, and institutional buildings as required.
(4) Section R315- Carbon Monoxide Alarms. Shall meet all
requirements of the current International Residential Code.
J. Section P.M.-605.4.1 shall be added as follows: [Added 2-6-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-0154]
(1) Section E3902 Ground-fault and Arc-fault Circuit-Interrupter
Protection. Shall meet all requirements of the current adopted
International Residential Code.
(2) Section E3903 Lighting Outlets. Shall meet all requirements of the
current adopted International Residential Code.
K. Section P.M.-306.0 Rubbish, Garbage, and Recyclables. [Added
3-5-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-01; amended 1-2-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-01; 6-2-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-02; 2-6-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-01]
(1) Applicability of services. All residential customers in Indiana
Borough shall be required to use the services of the Borough of
Indiana and its approved licensed haulers to collect, transport,
haul, and remove all rubbish, garbage, and acceptable recycling
from the Borough of Indiana. "Residential customers" shall mean
all single-family dwelling units, duplexes, condominiums, and
multifamily residential dwellings with six units or less unless
specifically exempt by the Borough of Indiana or such other
buildings with more than six dwelling units that are incapable due
to limitations of access to utilize dumpsters. A residential unit shall
be a group of connecting rooms exclusively used for residential
purposes by one family or a number of individuals as permitted
under Chapter 460, Zoning, of the Code of the Borough of Indiana,
containing private cooking, bathing, and toilet facilities. This
Subsection K does not apply to commercial or industrial users who
are permitted to contract for the collection, conveyance, and
disposal of garbage and rubbish with an authorized commercial
collector providing that the storage, collection, conveyance, and
disposal is in accordance with applicable provisions of this
Subsection K. Any person desiring to opt out of the Borough
Collection Program cannot do so unless an exemption is granted by
the Borough Manager upon cause shown.
54.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections J and K as
Subsections K and L, respectively.
§ 327-2 INDIANA CODE § 327-2
1:142
(2) Contract. Waste Management of Pennsylvania, Inc., is designated
as the Borough of Indiana's licensed hauler to provide residential
services. The proper officers of the Borough of Indiana are
authorized to enter into a contract agreement with Waste
Management of Pennsylvania, Inc.
(3) Subsequent agreements. Borough Council by resolution can
authorize the proper officers of the Borough of Indiana to enter into
subsequent contract agreements with licensed haulers after the
expiration of the previous contract agreement with Waste
Management of Pennsylvania, Inc.
(4) Fees.
(a) All payments for services for residential users shall be made to
the Borough of Indiana in accordance with the adopted
contract provided by the Borough of Indiana in the current fee
schedule. Limited service shall only be available to residential
units having no more than two people, one of whom is 62 years
of age or older. Borough Council by resolution can modify the
rights and fees for limited and unlimited service as well as the
qualifications for limited service. Application for limited
services shall be filled out by the owner on a form provided by
the Code Enforcement Office. Any residential user who desires
to discontinue services may terminate service with a prior
authorization from the Borough Manager. To reinstate
services, each residential user must pay a reinstatement fee of
$35.
(5) Collection, storage of rubbish and garbage.
(a) All garbage and rubbish shall be placed in containers that at all
times shall be kept in a sanitary and good condition.
(b) All storage containers for garbage and rubbish shall be
leakproof, weathertight, and rigid and shall be made of steel or
plastic and have a close-fitting lid or cover for storage of such
rubbish and garbage until disposal at the appropriate time. All
nonresidential users, unless otherwise exempt, are required to
have a large capacity dumpster which shall be at least two
cubic yards and shall have a functional lid.
(c) Any container that does not conform to this Subsection K(5),
which is likely to injure the garbage collector or which
hampers the prompt collection of refuse and garbage, shall be
placed on notice by the Borough and the person receiving such
notice shall promptly replace such container.
(6) Accumulation of refuse.
§ 327-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 327-2
1:143
(a) All persons residing or doing business within the limits of the
Borough shall provide for the removal of accumulated refuse at
least once a week.
(b) No person shall permit refuse to accumulate on the surface of
the ground or cause or permit refuse to be deposited on any
street, alley, walk, storm sewer, stream, body of water or other
public place. In no event shall refuse be placed on the property
of another without the consent of the owner of the same.
(c) Nonresidential establishments shall provide for the removal of
such refuse as often as may be necessary in order to maintain a
sanitary and healthful condition; however, in no instance shall
removal be less than once a week. Such establishments may
utilize, for storage, large closed containers which can be
emptied into compactor-type trucks.
(d) Refuse of a highly flammable or explosive nature, or highly
infectious or contagious refuse, shall not be stored for ordinary
collection.
(e) No refuse produced or accumulated outside the Borough shall
be brought into the Borough for disposal therein unless
payment for such disposal has been made.
(7) Location of containers.
(a) The owner of an occupied structure shall supply approved
covered storage containers for rubbish and garbage in a
designated area at the rear of the property or at another nonconspicuous
area approved by the Code Enforcement Officer.
If, in the opinion of the Borough, the physical characteristics of
a property and the area adjacent thereto are such that
compliance with this provision for location of containers is not
practical, the Borough may require alternate locations for
containers.
(b) Refuse containers shall be placed at the location for collection
not earlier than 6:00 p.m. the day prior to collection and shall
be removed by 11:00 p.m. the day of collection. Refuse
containers that are placed for collection need not be the same
type of containers referenced in Subsection K(5)(b), however,
they should be leakproof and weathertight containers and shall
be no more than 35 gallons.
(c) Containers shall be located on the property so as not to create
offensive or noxious odors on adjoining properties. Containers
placed on property in such manner as to create noxious or
offensive odors on adjoining property shall constitute a private
nuisance.
§ 327-2 INDIANA CODE § 327-2
1:144
(d) Containers shall serve only a single property or a group of
properties adjoining each other and owned by a single owner.
(e) Recycling storage containers shall be purchased from Indiana
Borough or at the Indiana County Recycling Center.
Recyclables shall be placed in the container at curbside for
disposal no earlier than 6:00 p.m. the day before the scheduled
pickup. Recycling storage containers shall be kept in a
designated area at the rear of the property or in another nonconspicuous
area approved by a Borough Code Enforcement
Officer. Recyclable storage containers shall be removed from
the curbside by 11:00 p.m. the day of the scheduled pickup.
(f) The landlord shall be responsible for the tenant's compliance
with the provisions of this Subsection K(7).
(8) Removal.
(a) All residential refuse, with the exception of those generated by
apartment houses, commercial, and industrial units or
properties otherwise exempt by the Borough, shall be removed
only by the Borough's contracted, licensed hauler. No person,
firm, or corporation other than those permitted by Borough
Council shall be permitted to remove residential refuse from
the Borough.
(b) The property owner of each residential unit shall be
responsible for providing an approved container for storage of
refuse. No refuse may be stored at any time in violation of this
Subsection K. Apartment houses, commercial/industrial
establishments, and other entities that may otherwise be
exempt shall be permitted to utilize large containers which
shall be emptied by compactor-type trucks.
(c) The landlord shall be responsible for the tenant's compliance
with the provisions of this Subsection K(8).
(9) Enforcement. The Borough Manager shall have the authority to
enforce provisions of this Subsection K as shall any Code
Enforcement Officer or Police Officer of the Borough.
(10) Collection of charges.
(a) Garbage service payments are the responsibility of the
property owner and fees shall be collected by the Borough
Manager for the Borough of Indiana.
(b) The Borough's garbage service fee shall be placed on the
sewer bill together with the recycling fee.
(c) Each dwelling unit shall be separately charged for services.
§ 327-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 327-2
1:145
(d) For nonresidential customers, the licensed hauler shall have a
nonexclusive right to negotiate rights with these customers.
Also such rights shall be fair, uniform, and equitable. Charges
for nonresidential customers shall be negotiated solely
between the licensed hauler and the customer and shall not be
subject to Borough Council reviewing mediation.
(e) The licensed hauler is authorized to make extra charges to be
negotiated with individual customers for removal of garbage,
rubbish, or other materials in excess for what is provided for
pursuant to the agreement between garbage hauler and
Indiana Borough.
(f) Any payment not received by the Borough by the due date
contained on the bill shall be delinquent and shall be subject to
a penalty of 1.25% per month. In addition, the Borough shall
have the right to terminate service.
(g) The curtailment or termination of services for nonpayment of
charges shall be in addition to the right of the Borough to
proceed for collection of the unpaid charges in any manner
provided by law, either by an action in assumpsit or by the
filing of a municipal claim or lien.
(h) The Code Enforcement Officer or his agent shall be charged
with the enforcement of this Subsection K(10).
(11) Violation and penalties.
(a) Any person, firm, corporation, or similar entity that shall
violate any of the provisions of this Subsection K shall be
subject to a fine in accordance with the following provisions. In
order to enforce the penalty provisions pursuant to this
Subsection K, the owner or occupant must first be provided
with a written notice of the violation and a time in which the
violation must be cured. If the violation is cured within the
applicable time period, there shall be no penalty for the first
violation. The Code Enforcement Officer shall only be required
to provide one notice per property for each type of violation
during a 365-day period. Failure to comply with the written
notice from the Code Enforcement Officer in a timely manner
or any subsequent violations of the same type occurring within
the 365-day period shall be actionable.
(b) In the event that the violation is unabated after notice or there
is more than one violation of the same type in any 365-day
period, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a citation with
a fine in the amount of not less than $25 nor more than $300.
The fine shall be paid within 48 hours. In the event that the fine
is not paid within 48 hours, the fine will increase by the same
amount for each day thereafter even if the violation has been
abated.
§ 327-2 INDIANA CODE § 327-2
1:146
§ 327-3. Violations and penalties; notice of violation. [Amended
7-2-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-04]
§ 327-4. Repeal. [Added 2-6-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01]
Any ordinance or parts of ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are
hereby repealed.
§ 327-5. Severability. [Added 2-6-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01]
Should any sentence, section, clause, part or provisions of this chapter
amendment be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
the same shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any part
thereof, other than the part declared to be invalid.
L. Section P.M.-303.1.1 and P.M.-303.1.2 are added as follows: [Added
2-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-02]
Section P.M.-303.1.1: No person shall place or permit to remain
any stuffed furniture or upholstered or fabric covered furniture not
intended for outdoor use on any unenclosed porch, sidewalk, or yard.
Section P.M.-303.1.2: Any person who violates this section shall be
subject to the provisions of the Property Maintenance Code of the
Borough of Indiana, as amended.55
A. Any person, firm, corporation, or similar entity who shall violate any of
the provisions this chapter shall be subject to a fine in accordance with
following provisions. In order to enforce the penalty provisions
pursuant to this chapter, the owner or occupant must first be provided
with a written notice of the violation and a time in which the violation
must be cured. If the violation is cured within the applicable time
period, there shall be no penalty for the first violation. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall only be required to provide one notice per
property for each type of violation during a three-hundred-sixty-five-day
period. Failure to comply with the written notice from the Code
Enforcement Officer in a timely manner or any subsequent violations of
the same type occurring within the three-hundred-sixty-five-day period
shall be actionable.
B. In the event that the violation is unabated after notice or there is more
than one violation of the same type in any three-hundred-sixty-five-day
period, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a citation with a fine in
the amount of not less than $25 nor more than $300. The fine shall be
paid within 48 hours. In the event that the fine is not paid within 48
hours, the fine will increase by the same amount for each day thereafter
even if the violation has been abated. [Amended 2-6-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-01]
55.Editor's Note: Original § 3, Repeat violations, added 5-2-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-03, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 10-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-08.
§ 327-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 327-6
1:147
§ 327-6. When effective. [Added 2-6-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01]
This chapter shall become effective immediately.
Chapter 348
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 170.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 327.
Zoning — See Ch. 460.
§ 327-6 INDIANA CODE § 327-6
1:148
ARTICLE I
Occupancy Licenses
[Adopted 7-2-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-03; amended in its entirety
6-2-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-03]
§ 348-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — Includes, but shall not be limited to, any building, house,
apartment, duplex, housing development, mobile home, dormitory,
fraternity house, sorority house, or similar facility used for commercial,
industrial, or residential purposes.
COMMERCIAL and INDUSTRIAL — Encompass those uses or businesses
listed under §§ 460-16A, 460-17A, and 460-18A of Chapter 460, Zoning, of
the Code of the Borough of Indiana Borough, as amended.
DWELLING UNIT — Includes a room or rooms in a building for the use of
one family or one or more persons, with or without cooking facilities, and
having the availability or use of bathroom facilities.
FUNCTIONAL FAMILY — Either an individual, or a group of people plus
their offspring, having a relationship which is functionally equivalent to a
family. The relationship must be of a permanent and distinct character with
a demonstrable and recognizable bond characteristic of a cohesive unit.
Functional family does not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority,
association, lodge, organization or students where the common living
arrangement or basis for the establishment of the housekeeping unit is
temporary.
INDIVIDUAL — Includes an individual, individuals, group of individuals,
tenants, and students.
LOCAL AGENT — A representative of the person owning the building
governed by this article. The local agent is required to have a primary
residence in Indiana County. The local agent should regularly be available
for personal contact in Indiana County. The local agent shall be the contact
person for inquiries regarding compliance with this article.
NONOWNER-OCCUPIED BUILDING — Includes:
OCCUPANCY, FOR DWELLING UNITS — That an individual lives in a
dwelling unit or building.
A. A single-family dwelling that is not the residence of the owner;
All those portions of a dormitory, personal care home, duplex, multiplefamily,
or mixed-use building, except the dwelling unit in which the
owner resides.
B.
All those portions of a building that is used for commercial or industrial
purposes not occupied for business purposes by the owner.
C.
§ 348-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 348-1
1:149
OCCUPANCY, IN THE CASE OF A COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL
BUILDING — That the building is being used regularly for a commercial or
industrial use on an on-going basis.
OCCUPANTS — More than one individual living in a dwelling unit or
building.
OWNER — Any person who owns the building.
PERSON — Includes any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other
entity.
§ 348-2. Payment of application fee for occupancy license.
§ 348-3. Occupancy license required for nonowner-occupied
buildings.
A. The following fees for an occupancy license for a nonowner-occupied
building shall be as set from time to time by resolution of the Borough
Council:56
(1) For a single-family home, providing that a family shall be
considered one occupant;
(2) For dormitories, personal care homes, multiple-dwelling units,
duplexes, or similar facilities having dwelling units;
(3) For commercial and industrial buildings;
(4) For commercial and industrial buildings also having dwelling units.
B. Borough Council may from time to time change the cost of the
occupancy license by resolution of Borough Council.
A. The owner of every nonowner-occupied building shall be required at all
times to have a valid occupancy license issued by the Borough of
Indiana. The occupancy license shall be valid for a one-year period from
the date of issuance. Applications for occupancy licenses shall be made
on a form approved by the Borough and shall include, but not be limited
to, the name, address, and telephone number of the owner.
B. The occupancy license, when issued for a building containing dwelling
units, shall state the maximum number of individuals who may reside in
each individual dwelling unit. A copy of the occupancy license shall be
displayed in an area in the building that is reasonably protected from
the effects of weather and vandals and is accessible to the Indiana
Borough Manager or his designee. It shall be the responsibility of the
building owner to maintain the license so that it is legible at all times. In
the event that there are multiple dwelling units within a building, the
Borough Manager or his designee shall determine the location and
number of occupancy licenses to be posted.
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 348-1 INDIANA CODE § 348-3
1:150
§ 348-4. Leases.
All persons owning buildings containing dwelling units shall place in each
lease for the building or dwelling unit the following information:
§ 348-5. Application information.
C. The original occupancy license shall be kept on file in a safe place. In
the event that an occupancy license is lost or destroyed, another
occupancy license shall be issued to replace it within five days. The
costs for reissuance of a valid occupancy license shall be as set from
time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.57
A. A statement of the number of occupants legally permitted in each
dwelling unit.
B. A statement advising the occupants of the trash and recycle collection
schedule, when trash and recycling containers may be placed at the
curb for pickup and when the containers must be removed from
curbside.
C. A statement of what material must be recycled.
D. A statement advising occupants where and in what manner trash is
permitted to be stored.
E. A statement advising the occupants of a building of the person
responsible for removing snow and ice from the sidewalk and
maintaining grass to a length of less than six inches.
F. A statement advising the occupants that unless the property is located
in a U-1 Zone District and has been approved by the Zoning Hearing
Board as a fraternity or sorority, it shall be illegal to host, hold, or
participate in any fraternity or sorority function in the building.
A. Each person, firm, partnership or corporation owning, operating, or
managing any nonowner-occupied building shall provide to the
Borough Manager or his designee, annually on or before September 15
of each year, an application which will be made available by the
Borough. In the event that there is a change in occupancy, ownership or
management after it is initially filed for each respective year, a
subsequent application shall be promptly filed to notify the Borough of
any changes.
B. An application form shall be made available by the Borough of Indiana
which will include, but not be limited, to the following required
information:
(1) Address of building;
(2) Designation of dwelling units;
57.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 348-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 348-5
1:151
§ 348-6. Inspections.
(3) Number of residents in each unit;
(4) Designation of persons residing in the dwelling units as unrelated
individuals or members of a functional family;
(5) Name, address, and telephone number of the person owning the
property and, if there is a manager, the name, address, and
telephone number of the manager of the property.
C. In the event that the owner of the building covered by this article does
not have a primary residence in Indiana County, the owner shall
designate a local agent. If the owner of the building is a corporate
entity, no local agent shall be required if a corporate officer has a
primary residence in Indiana County. If the owner of the building is a
partnership, no local agent shall be required if one of the partner's
primary residence is in Indiana County.
D. Within 10 days from the change of ownership, management, or local
agent of any building covered by this article, the Borough shall be
notified, in writing, of the name of the new owner or local agent.
E. All owners and local agents shall be required to promptly disclose to the
Borough Manager, his designee, and Code Enforcement Officers, upon
request, the names of tenants in a nonowner-occupied building if the
tenants are suspected of violating any Borough ordinances or codes.
This subsection of this article shall remain in full force and effect until
August 31, 2010.
A. The Borough Manager or his designee shall have the right to inspect
any nonowner-occupied building, including any dwelling units not
occupied by the owner for the purpose of making certain that the
building and dwelling units comply with all applicable Indiana Borough
ordinances and codes, including, but not limited to, Chapter 460,
Zoning; International Building Codes; International Residential Codes;
International Plumbing Codes; International Mechanical Codes;
International Fire Protection Code; National Electric Code;58 Chapter
327, Property Maintenance; § 460-24, Development on lands subject to
flooding; Chapter 360, Sewers; Chapter 388, Solid Waste; Chapter 400,
Streets and Sidewalks; snow and ice removal ordinances; Chapter 234,
Grass, Weeds and Other Vegetation; as well as any other applicable
ordinance that may affect the fitness for habitation, construction,
maintenance, operation, occupancy, or use of building or dwelling units
in the Borough of Indiana.
B. In response to an emergency, complaint, or other concern for public
safety, the Borough Manager or his designee shall have the right to
inspect any nonowner-occupied building or dwelling unit in the
58.Editor's Note: Said codes are included in the Uniform Construction Code, see Ch. 170.
§ 348-5 INDIANA CODE § 348-6
1:152
§ 348-7. Payment of inspection fees.
§ 348-8. Applicability.
None of the provisions of this article shall be construed to apply to any
building operated or occupied by the Indiana University of Pennsylvania and
that is owned by the Indiana University of Pennsylvania, the State System of
Higher Education, the Department of General Services, the General State
Authority, or any other agency of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 348-9. Unlawful acts.
Borough of Indiana between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.,
providing that the Borough Manager or his designee must identify
himself or herself and provide proper Borough identification at the
time the inspection is requested. For scheduled inspections as part of
the registration and inspection program, the Borough shall notify the
landlord of the time and date of the inspection.
A. The following inspection fees for any nonowner-occupied building or
dwelling unit that is inspected pursuant to this article shall be as set
from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council:59
(1) Single-family home;
(2) Dormitories, personal care homes, multiple-dwelling units,
duplexes, or similar facilities having dwelling units that do not
include both cooking facilities and bathroom facilities specifically
for the unit; for buildings having dwelling units that include
cooking facilities and bathroom facilities for each dwelling unit;
(3) Commercial and industrial buildings; and
(4) Commercial and industrial buildings containing dwelling units.
B. Payment of inspection fees shall be made within 15 days after the
inspection.
C. Property inspections shall not normally be conducted more often than
every three years, unless a complaint is made or the Borough has
reason to believe that conditions warrant reinspection. In the event that
the Borough Manager or his designee needs to reinspect any building
as a result of deficiencies identified during the initial inspection, the
owner shall be charged a fee, set from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council, for the building if there is no dwelling unit and a fee,
set from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council, per dwelling
unit that needs to be reinspected.60
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 348-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 348-9
1:153
§ 348-10. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person, including an occupant, who permits any dwelling unit to be
occupied by more persons than are provided for on the occupancy
license shall be in violation of this article.
B. Any person who fails to obtain an occupancy license or to maintain a
valid occupancy license shall be in violation of this article.
C. Any person who files an application for an occupancy license or
provides false information that is materially inaccurate shall be in
violation of this article.
D. Any person who fails to allow an inspection by the Borough Manager or
his designee in accordance with § 348-6 of this article shall be in
violation of this article.
A. Any person violating this article shall pay a fine of not less than $100,
nor more than $500, together with costs for each violation, upon
conviction before a Magisterial District Judge; and, in default in
payment of the fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment in the Indiana
County Jail for a period not to exceed 10 days.
B. Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense and
each day the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
C. No person shall be issued an occupancy license pursuant to this article
if that person is in violation of this article for that property or any other
property, has failed to make timely repairs pursuant to any order or
citation issued by the Borough Manager or his designee for this
property or any other property, or has failed to pay any fee, fine, taxes
or utilities to the Borough of Indiana for this property or any other
property.
D. In addition to any other fines for violations pursuant to this article, any
person who owns a building that is inspected and is found to be in
violation of the Borough of Indiana International Building Codes,
International Fire Code, National Electric Code;61 Chapter 327,
Property Maintenance; and Chapter 360, Sewers, shall be subject to an
administrative fine of not less than $10 nor more than $300 plus late
fees each day for any violations that are not remedied within the time
prescribed on the notice of violation.
61.Editor's Note: Said codes are included in the Uniform Construction Code, see Ch. 170.
§ 348-9 INDIANA CODE § 348-10
1:154
Chapter 360
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 170.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 327.
Solid waste — See Ch. 388.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 395.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 400.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 405.
Zoning — See Ch. 460.
§ 348-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 348-10
1:155

Part 1
[Adopted 6-8-S1e9w7e1rB SyerOvridce. NOou.t 1si0d3e2 B(oCrho.u XgIhX ,L Pimaritts 2, Secs. 51 To
56, Of The 1971 Code Of Ordinances)]
ARTICLE I
Permit Required; Rental Charges
§ 360-1. Definitions and word usage.
§ 360-2. Permit required to connect to sanitary sewer system;
fees.62
Every person desiring to connect his property, located outside the limits of
the Borough, with the sanitary sewers of the Borough shall, before making
such connection, obtain from the Borough Secretary a proper permit so to
do, for which he shall pay to the Borough an engineering inspection fee as
set from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council and a tappage or
connection charge as follows:
A. As used in this Part 1, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, association, firm
or corporation.
B. In this Part 1, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
A. For each and every single dwelling house: as set from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council.
B. For each and every double dwelling house: as set from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council.
C. For each and every block of dwelling houses arranged for more than
two families the tappage charge shall be fixed by multiplying the sum as
set from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council by the
number representing the number of families for which said block of
dwelling houses was built or arranged.
D. For each and every other building not mentioned above, the tappage
charge shall be fixed by multiplying the sum as set from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council by the total number of employees of
the establishment operating the building for which the connection is
sought; provided, however, that in no such case shall the tappage
charge be less than the sum as set from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council; provided, further, that if by reason of the nature of the
intended use of the building or because of peculiar circumstances, the
application of the above rates would be inequitable either to the
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 360-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-2
1:157
§ 360-3. Responsibility for tapping fees; conformance to
specifications; approval of work.
The entire cost of the tap and sewer extension shall be paid by the owner
or person having charge of such building. The sewer shall be laid in
accordance with the Borough's sanitary sewer specifications and shall not
be put into use until it shall have been approved by the Borough Engineer.
§ 360-4. Sewer rental fee; minimum rate.
Borough or the owner or parties having charge of the building, then in
that case, the tappage charge shall be fixed at such reasonable sum as
shall be mutually agreed upon between the proper Borough authorities
and the owner or parties having charge of such building, but in no such
case shall the tappage charge be less than the amount as set from time
to time by resolution of the Borough Council.
A. Every person whose property is located outside the limits of the
Borough, which property is now or shall hereafter be connected with
the sanitary sewers of the Borough, shall pay or cause to be paid to the
Borough, in addition to the charges provided for in § 360-2 of this Part
1, an annual charge or rental for the use of said sewer, payable in
advance on or before the first day of April of each and every year, the
sum or price set forth in the schedule of prices as follows:
(1) For each and every single dwelling house, the sum of $36 per year.
(2) For each and every double dwelling house, the sum of $72 per year.
(3) For each and every block of dwelling houses, arranged for more
than two families, the annual charge or rental shall be fixed by
multiplying the sum of $36 by the number representing the number
of families for which said block of dwelling houses was built or
arranged.
(4) For each and every other building or institution not mentioned
above, the annual charge or rental shall be fixed by multiplying the
sum of $1 by the total number of employees of the establishment
operating the building for which the connection is sought.
B. In no such case shall the annual charge or rental be less than the sum of
$36. And if, by reason of the nature of the intended use of the building
or institution or because of peculiar circumstances, the application of
the above rates would be inequitable either to the Borough or to the
owner or parties having charge of the building, then in that case the
annual rental shall be fixed at such reasonable sum as shall be mutually
agreed upon between the proper Borough authorities and the owner or
parties having charge of such building or institution, but in no case
shall the said annual rental be less than $36.
§ 360-2 INDIANA CODE § 360-5
1:158
§ 360-5. Failure to pay sewer rentals.
If any person shall fail to pay his annual charge or rental, or inspection
and connection charge when due, his right to use the Borough sewers shall
be immediately terminated, and the Borough, through its employees, may
forthwith and without notice enter upon the premises and disconnect or
plug the sewer. Furthermore, as a concurrent remedy in case of failure to
pay the annual charge or rental, or inspection and connection charges, the
Borough may collect the same by action in assumpsit or may file a municipal
claim.
§ 360-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part 1 shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $100 and
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs,
to imprisonment for not more than 10 days; provided that each day's
continuance of a violation, after notice thereof from the Borough Council,
shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 360-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-6
1:159

Part 2
[AdoptedSe7w-3e-r1 9S7e3rvBicye OInrdsi.d Neo A. n1d0 8O3utside Borough Limits 63 (Ch. XIX, Part 3, Secs. 71 To
177, Of The 1971 Code Of Ordinances)]
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 360-7. Definitions. [Amended 5-4-1976 by Ord. No. 1160]
The following words and terms used in this Part 2 shall have the following
meanings, unless the context clearly required otherwise:
BOD — Shall designate the "biochemical oxygen demand" and shall mean
the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of the organic
matter in sewage or industrial waste under standard laboratory procedure
in five days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l) by weight.
It shall be determined by one of the acceptable methods described in
the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Sewage," published by the American Public Health Association (hereinafter
termed an "acceptable method").
BOROUGH — The Borough of Indiana, Indiana County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of Indiana,
as now or hereafter constituted, and its duly authorized agent or
representative. 64
CUSTOMER — Includes natural persons, partnerships, associations, and
corporations.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room, group of rooms, enclosure, etc., occupied or
intended for occupancy as a separate living quarters by a family or other
group of persons living together or by persons living alone.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of
food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — A discharge of pollutants into a POTW from any
nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Clean
Water Act (CWA).65[Added 9-7-1993 by Ord. No. 1592]
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any premises used wholly or in part
for the manufacture, processing, cleaning or assembling of any product
commodity or article.
63.Editor's Note: The Preamble To Ord. No. 1083 Stated That In Order To Promote The
Health, Safety And Welfare Of The People Of The Borough And White Township And The
Purity Of Its Waters, The Borough Had Arranged For The Financing And Construction Of
Sanitary Sewerage Facilities, And Had Entered Into An Agreement With The Municipal
Authority Of The Township And The Township For Providing Services For The Treatment
And Disposal Of Sewage And Acceptable Industrial Waste In The Township; That The
Borough Had Entered Into An Agreement With The Commonwealth For Providing Sanitary
Sewage To The Indiana University Of Pennsylvania; That It Was Necessary To Enact
Provisions Regulating The Use Of The Public Sanitary Sewerage System And Impose
Charges For Providing Sewage Treatment Service.
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
65.Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1317(b), (c) or (d).
§ 360-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-7
1:161
INDUSTRIAL USER — A source of indirect discharge.[Added 9-7-1993 by
Ord. No. 1592]
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any liquid, gaseous or waterborne wastes created
by or arising from industrial or commercial processes, as distinct from
sanitary sewage.
INTERFERENCE — The discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, both inhibits or disrupts the
POTW; its treatment processes or operations; or sludge process, use, or
disposal; and therefore, cause a violation of the POTW's National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit or prevent sewage sludge
use or disposal in compliance with specified applicable federal statutes,
regulations, or permits; including an increase in the magnitude or duration
of a violation.[Added 9-7-1993 by Ord. No. 1592]
NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any regulation containing
pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA under Section 307(b) and (c)
of the CWA66 applicable to industrial users (IUs), including the general and
specific prohibitions found at 40 CFR 403.5.[Added 9-7-1993 by Ord. No.
1592]
NEW SOURCE — A facility from which there is or may be a discharge of
pollutants, construction of which began after the publication of proposed
pretreatment standards pursuant to Section 307(c) of the CWA,67 which
will apply to the facility if the standards are promulgated, provided certain
location and construction criteria are met.[Added 9-7-1993 by Ord. No.
1592]
OCCUPIED BUILDING — Any structure erected and intended for
continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy, or use by human beings or
animals, and from which structure sanitary sewage and industrial wastes,
or either thereof, is or may be discharged.
OWNER or OWNERS — Include persons, schools, churches, hospitals,
clubs, societies and all other charitable institutions and public and quasipublic
corporations.
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW in quantities or
concentrations which, alone or with discharges from other sources, cause
a violation of the POTWs NPDES permit; including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation.[Added 9-7-1993 by Ord. No. 1592]
PERSON — Natural persons, partnerships, associations, corporations and
governmental entitles.[Amended 9-7-1993 by Ord. No. 1592]
pH — The logarithm to the base 10 of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration expressed in moles per liter, and shall be determined by an
acceptable method.
66.Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1317(b) and (c).
67.Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1317(c).
§ 360-7 INDIANA CODE § 360-7
1:162
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENT — A substantive or procedural
pretreatment requirement, other than a national pretreatment standard,
applicable to IUs.[Added 9-7-1993 by Ord. No. 1592]
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will
be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
PUBLIC SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM — Any and all sanitary sewers,
sewage treatment works and other facilities owned or operated by or leased
to the Borough of Indiana, the Township of White and/or the White Township
Municipal Authority for the collection, transportation and treatment of
sanitary sewage and industrial wastes, together with their appurtenances,
and any additions, extensions or improvements thereto. It shall also include
sewers within the limits of the Borough of Indiana and White Township
which serve one or more persons and discharge into the public sanitary
sewerage system even though those sewers may not have been constructed
by Borough, Township or White Township Municipal Authority funds and
are not owned or maintained by the Borough of Indiana, White Township
or White Township Municipal Authority. It does not include separate storm
sewers or culverts which have been constructed for the sole purpose of
carrying storm and surface runoff, the discharge from which is not and does
not become tributary to the Borough's or Township's sewerage facilities.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The normal water-carried household and toilet
wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial and
commercial establishments, exclusive of stormwater runoff, surface water
or groundwater.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which
stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted.
SANITARY SEWER LATERAL — That sewer connecting any structure to
the public sanitary sewer system from a point 10 feet from the inside of
the basement wall of the structure to the point of connection to the public
sanitary sewer.
SEWAGE — A combination of water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions, and industrial and commercial
establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water or
stormwater as may be present.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — Shall mean a) any categorical
industrial user (CIU); or b) any other IU which:[Added 9-7-1993 by Ord.
No. 1592]
Discharges 25,000 gallons or more process wastewater per day
(excluding sanitary noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown
wastewater);
A.
Contributes a process wastewater which makes up 5% or more of the
dry weather average hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW; or
B.
§ 360-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-7
1:163
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE — A violation which meets one or more
of the specific criteria listed in this Part 2.[Added 9-7-1993 by Ord. No.
1592]
STORM SEWER — A sewer which is intended to carry stormwater runoff,
surface waters, groundwater drainage, etc., but which is not intended to
carry any sanitary sewage or polluted industrial waste.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — That portion of the rainfall which reaches a
channel, trench, sewer or sink.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface or are in
suspension in water, sewage, industrial waste or other liquids, and which
are removable by laboratory filtration.
UNPOLLUTED WATER OR WASTE — Any water or waste acceptable for
direct discharge without treatment to public waters, as determined by the
proper commonwealth and/or federal regulatory agencies.
Is designated as such by the control authority on the basis that it has
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTWs operation or for
violating a pretreatment standard or requirement.
C.
§ 360-7 INDIANA CODE § 360-7
1:164
ARTICLE III
Wastes Discharged to Public Sanitary Sewerage System
§ 360-8. Purpose of sewer system; sewer connections required.
The public sanitary sewerage system is primarily intended to transport and
treat sanitary sewage from dwellings, commercial, industrial and public
establishments located in the Borough of Indiana and the Township of
White. All sanitary sewage from any residence or establishment in the
Borough of Indiana and/or the Township of White is required to be
discharged into the public sanitary sewerage system, where said public
sanitary sewer system is available to the property upon which such
residence or establishment is situated.
§ 360-9. Conditions for discharge of industrial waste.
The economy and desirability of the combined treatment and transportation
of certain industrial wastes together with sanitary sewerage is recognized.
The incompatibility of many industrial wastes to the treatment processes
employed for treating sanitary sewage is also recognized. Certain industrial
wastes may be discharged to the public sanitary sewerage system which
are determined not to be harmful to said system, nor to be of such volume
nor of such a total organic or solids loading as to impair the capacity
of the public sewerage system. No industrial wastes shall be admitted to
the public sewerage system until the Borough has issued a written permit
accepting such waste and describing the conditions under which such waste
shall be accepted and limiting the amount of such waste. The written permit
or permission to discharge such waste shall be revocable by the Borough for
changes in either the character or composition of the waste, or the volume
discharged, or for departure from the conditions specified in the permit
issued accepting such waste. It is also recognized that the transportation
and treatment of industrial wastes may add to the cost of operating and
maintaining the public sanitary sewerage system. Such additional costs
shall be borne by the person or persons receiving the benefit of such
transportation and treatment as herein provided.
§ 360-10. Authority to refuse connections.
Nothing contained herein shall limit or diminish the right of the Borough
Council to refuse connection to the public sanitary sewerage system for
deleterious industrial wastes, or to compel discontinuance of the use of
the public sanitary sewerage system for such wastes, or to require
pretreatment or regulated rate of discharge thereof in order to prevent
harmful or adverse effect upon the system.
§ 360-11. Determination of harmful industrial waste.
In general, industrial waste will be considered harmful to the public
sanitary sewerage system if it may cause any of the following damaging
effects:
§ 360-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-11
1:165
§ 360-12. Discharge permit required for significant industrial users.
[Amended 4-3-1984 by Ord. No. 1357]
All significant users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the public
sanitary sewer system shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before
connection to or contributing to the public sanitary sewer system. A
"significant user" is one whose discharge flow is 25,000 gallons or greater
per average work day, or is found by the Borough of Indiana or the United
States Environmental Protection Agency to have significant impact, either
singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the
wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent
quality or emissions generated by the system. All existing significant users
connected to or contributing to the public sanitary sewer system shall
obtain a wastewater contribution permit within 180 days after the effective
date of this section. The Borough Council may, at its discretion, require
any person discharging industrial waste or industrial waste and sanitary
sewerage combined, which such person has obtained a permit from the
Borough, into the public sewer system to install a suitable manhole or
manholes on his connecting sewer or sewers to facilitate observation. Such
manhole or manholes is to be installed by such person at his or her expense
to be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible to the Borough
Council at all times and to be constructed in accordance with the plans
approved by the Borough Council.
A. Chemical reaction, either directly or indirectly, with the materials or
construction of the public sanitary sewerage system in such manner as
to impair the strength or durability of the sewer structures;
B. Mechanical action that will destroy the sewer structures;
C. Restriction of the hydraulic capacity of the sewer structures;
D. Restriction of the normal inspection or maintenance of the sewer
structures;
E. Danger to public health and safety; or
F. Obnoxious condition inimical to public interest.
A. Application.
(1) Users required to obtain a wastewater contribution permit shall
complete and file with the Borough an application in the form
prescribed by the Borough and accompanied by a fee as set from
time to time by resolution of the Borough Council. Existing users
shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit within 30 days
after the effective date of this section, and proposed new users
shall apply at least 90 days prior to connecting to or contributing to
the public sanitary sewer system. In support of the application, the
user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the
following information:68
§ 360-11 INDIANA CODE § 360-12
1:166
(a) Name, address, and location (if different from the address);
(b) SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended;
(c) Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including, but
not limited to, those mentioned in Subsection B of this section
as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and
analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures
established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act
and contained in 40 CFR Part 136, as amended;
(d) Time and duration of contribution;
(e) Average daily and thirty-minute peak wastewater flow rates,
including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any;
(f) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and
details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and
appurtenances by the size, location and elevation;
(g) Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including all materials which are or could be
discharged;
(h) Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants
in the discharge which are limited by any city, state or Federal
Pretreatment Standards, and a statement regarding whether
or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a
consistent basis and if not, whether additional operation and
maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is
required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment
standards;
(i) If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to
meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by
which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment
standard:
[1] The following condition shall apply to this schedule:
[a] The schedule shall contain increments of progress in
the form of dates for the commencement and
completion of major events leading to the construction
and operation of additional pretreatment required for
the user to meet the applicable pretreatment
standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 360-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-12
1:167
contract for major components, commencing
construction, completing construction, etc.).
[b] No increment referred to in Subsection A(1)(i)[1][a]
shall exceed nine months.
[c] Not later than 14 days following each date in the
schedule and the final date for compliance, the user
shall submit a progress report to the Superintendent,
including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied
with the increment of progress to be met on such date
and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with
this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and
the steps being taken by the user to return the
construction to the schedule established. In no event
shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the Superintendent.
(j) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes
and rates of production;
(k) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day);
(l) Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of plant
and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment
system;
(m) Any other information as may be deemed by the Borough to be
necessary to evaluate the permit application.
(2) The Borough will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may
require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of
the data furnished, the Borough may issue a wastewater
contribution permit subject to terms and conditions provided
herein.
B. Permit revised. Within nine months of the promulgation of a National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the wastewater contribution
permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require
compliance with such standard within the time frame prescribed by
such standard. Where a user, subject to a National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard, has not previously submitted an application for
a wastewater contribution permit as required by Subsection A of this
section, the user shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit
within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard. In addition, the user with an
existing wastewater contribution permit shall submit to the
Superintendent within 180 days after the promulgation of an applicable
Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard the information required by
Subsection A(1)(h) and (i).
§ 360-12 INDIANA CODE § 360-12
1:168
C. Permits subject to regulations; charges and fees. Wastewater discharge
permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this Part 2 and all
other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the
Borough. Permits may contain the following:
(1) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer;
(2) Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics;
(3) Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulations and equalization;
(4) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities;
(5) Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and
standards for tests and reporting schedule;
(6) Compliance schedules;
(7) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports (see § 360-13);
(8) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating
to wastewater discharge as specified by the Borough, and affording
Borough access thereto;
(9) Requirements for notification of the Borough or any new
introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change
in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being
introduced into the wastewater treatment system;
(10) Requirements for notification of sludge discharges;
(11) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Borough to ensure
compliance with this Part 2.
D. Issuance of permits. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period,
not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a
year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply
for permit reissuance a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of
the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may
be subject to modification by the Borough during the term of the permit
as limitations or requirements as identified in Subsection C(3) are
modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any
proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective
date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall
include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
§ 360-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-12
1:169
§ 360-13. Reports and records of discharge. [Amended 4-3-1984 by
Ord. No. 1357]
E. Unlawful to transfer permit. Wastewater discharge permits are issued
to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge
permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner,
new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without
the approval of the Borough. Any succeeding owner or user shall also
comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit.
A. Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance date
of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new source, after
commencement of the discharge into the public sanitary sewer system,
shall submit to the Superintendent for the public sanitary sewer system
during the months of June and December, unless required more
frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the Superintendent for
the public sanitary sewer system, a report indicating the nature and
concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such
pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record
of all daily flows which during the reporting period exceeded the
average daily flow reported in § 360-12C. At the discretion of the
Superintendent for the public sanitary sewer system and in
consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays,
budget cycles, etc., the Superintendent for the public sanitary sewer
system may agree to alter the months during which the above reports
are to be submitted.
B. The Superintendent for the public sanitary sewer system may impose
mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the
imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the report
required by this section shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated
by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. These reports
shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge,
including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production and
mass where requested by the Superintendent for the public sanitary
sewer system, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the
applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall
be prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standard. All analysis
shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the
Administrator pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40
CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test
procedures approved by the Administrator. Sampling shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the
Administrator. Where 40 CFR Part 136 does not include a sampling or
analytical technique for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis
shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the
EPA publication, Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of
Industrial Effluents for Priority Pollutants, April 1977, and amendments
§ 360-12 INDIANA CODE § 360-13
1:170
thereto, or with any other sampling and analytical procedures approved
by the Administrator.
(1) Inspection.
(a) The Borough shall require to be provided and operated, at the
user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection,
sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or
internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility should
normally be situated on the user's premises, but the Borough
may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue
hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the
public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be
obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
(b) There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole
or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of
samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition at the expense of the user.
(c) Whether constructed on public or private property, the
sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in
accordance with the Borough's requirements and all applicable
local construction standards and specifications. Construction
shall be completed within 90 days following written
notification by the Borough.
(2) Right to access. The Borough shall inspect the facilities of any user
to ascertain whether the purpose of this Part 2 is being met and all
requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of
premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow
the Borough or their representative ready access at all reasonable
times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, records examination or in the performance of any of their
duties. The Borough, approval authority and (where the NPDES
State is the Approval Authority) EPA shall have the right to set up
on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering
operations. Where a user has security measures in force which
would require proper identification and clearance before entry into
their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with
their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable
identification, personnel from the Borough, approval authority and
EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of
performing their specific responsibilities.
(3) Operating procedure plans. Users shall provide necessary
wastewater treatment as required to comply with this Part 2 and
shall achieve compliance with all Federal Categorical Pretreatment
Standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal
§ 360-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-13
1:171
§ 360-14. Information and data to be made public; exception.
pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat
wastewater to a level acceptable to the Borough shall be provided,
operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans
showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall
be submitted to the Borough for review, and shall be acceptable to
the Borough before construction of the facility. The review of such
plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from
the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce
an effluent acceptable to the Borough under the provisions of this
Part 2. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or
method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the
Borough prior to the user's initiation of the changes.
C. The Borough shall annually publish in the Indiana Evening Gazette a list
of the users which were not in compliance with any pretreatment
requirements or standards at least once during the 12 previous months.
The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken
against the user during the same 12 months.
D. All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be
made available to officials of the EPA or approval authority upon
request.
A. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from
inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental
agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is
able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Borough that the release
of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user.
B. When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not
be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made
available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses
relating to this Part 2, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) Permit, state disposal system permit and/or the
pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a
report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in
judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person
furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will
not be recognized as confidential information.
C. Information accepted by the Borough as confidential shall not be
transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the
Borough until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the user.
§ 360-13 INDIANA CODE § 360-14
1:172
ARTICLE IV
Prohibited Wastes
§ 360-15. Unpolluted water.
The discharge of excessive amounts of unpolluted water or waste to a
sanitary sewer is expressly prohibited. The Borough Council reserves the
right to define the amount it deems excessive in each particular instance
and to determine the adequacy of a sewer's capacity.
§ 360-16. Garbage.
The discharge of garbage to the public sanitary sewerage system is
expressly prohibited unless the garbage is first properly shredded.
§ 360-17. Industrial waste characteristics. [Amended 4-3-1984 by
Ord. No. 1357; 6-7-1988 by Ord. No. 1443]
No person shall discharge to the public sanitary sewerage system industrial
wastes having any of the following characteristics:
A. Wastes containing any gasoline, naphtha, fuel oil, or other liquids,
solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quality may cause fire
or explosion or be in any other way injurious to persons, the structures
of the public sanitary sewerage system or its operation. Waste streams
with a flash point of less than 140° F. or 60° C. (using the test method
specified in 40 CFR 261.21). [Amended 9-7-1993 by Ord. No. 1592]
B. Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the public sanitary sewer system treatment plant resulting in
interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the
introduction into the public sanitary sewer system which exceeds 40° C.
(104° F.). [Amended 9-7-1993 by Ord. No. 1592]
C. Wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0 having any
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazards to structures,
equipment or personnel of the public sanitary sewerage system. Where
the Borough Council deems it advisable, it may require any person
discharging industrial wastes to install and maintain, at his own
expense, in a manner approved by the Borough Council or its
representative, a suitable device to continuously measure and record
the pH of the wastes so discharged.
D. Wastes containing any noxious or malodorous gas or substance which
either singly or by interaction with sewage or other wastes is likely, in
the opinion of the Borough Council, to create a public nuisance or
hazard to life, or prevent entry to sewers for their maintenance and
repair.
E. Wastes containing ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, hair, chemical or paint
residues, greases, paunch manure, cotton, wool, plastic or other fibers,
§ 360-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-17
1:173
lime slurry or any other solid or viscous material of such character or in
such quantity as, in the opinion of the Borough Council, may cause an
obstruction to the flow in sewers or otherwise interfere with the proper
operation of the public sanitary sewerage system.
F. Wastes containing insoluble, nonflocculent substances having a specific
gravity in excess of 2.65.
G. Wastes containing soluble substances in such concentration as to cause
the specific gravity of the waste to be greater than 1.1.
H. No sewer user which is not under contract with the Borough by an
industrial sewer use permit shall discharge any wastewaters containing
any of the following substances in solution and concentrations
exceeding the following maximum permissible concentrations:
[Amended 9-7-1993 by Ord. No. 1592]
The sewer users who may be classified as significant industrial users
(SIUs), as defined in the revised Federal Pretreatment Regulations,
40 CFR 403.5, July 24, 1990, or latest revision, must apply to the
Borough of Indiana for an industrial sewer use permit. The maximum
concentrations listed below do not apply to SIUs.
Substance
Maximum Concentration
(mg/l)
Oil and grease (Freon Extractable) 100
Phenolics 5.0
Sodium chloride 10,000
Sodium sulfate 1,500
Chromium (total) 1.60
Chromium (hexavalent) 0.14
Copper 0.50
Zinc 0.50
Nickel 1.0
Cadmium 0.5
Arsenic 0.05
Iron 5.0
Cyanide — amenable to chlorination 0.14
Cyanide — total 0.28
Barium 1.00
Boron 0.6
Lead 0.50
Silver 0.05
§ 360-17 INDIANA CODE § 360-17
1:174
Substance
Maximum Concentration
(mg/l)
Mercury 0.10
Selenium 0.05
Butadiene 0.05
Antimony 0.1
Molybdenum 0.1
Aluminum 0.9
Fluoride 0.9
NH3-N 28.0
Phosphorous 10.0
Total toxic organics 0.0
I. Wastes containing more than 100 mg/l by weight of tar, fat, oil or
grease.
J. Wastes containing more than 10 mg/l of any of the following gases:
hydrogen, sulfide, sulfur dioxide, nitrous oxide, or any of the halogens.
K. Waste discharged into the POTW that cause interference, including
interference with sludge use and disposal practices. Wastes that
constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create any hazard in the
public sanitary sewer system operation. [Amended 9-7-1993 by Ord.
No. 1592]
L. Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutant which causes
interference or that will pass through the sewage treatment works and
exceed the state and/or federal requirements in respect thereof.
[Amended 9-7-1993 by Ord. No. 1592]
M. Any waste containing toxic radioactive isotopes.
N. The National Categorical Standards found in 40 CFR, Chapter I,
Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471 are incorporated herein by
reference as if set forth fully herein, and, if in the event that said federal
standard is more stringent than limitations imposed under this Part 2
for sources in that subcategory, the federal standard shall immediately
supersede the limitations imposed under this Part 2. Sewer users under
contract with the Borough of Indiana by an industrial sewer use permit
shall conform to the specific pollutant limitations listed in the permit.
Any requirement of these rules and regulations not addressing the
industrial sewer use permit shall be complied with by each permitted
user. [Amended 9-7-1993 by Ord. No. 1592]
§ 360-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-18
1:175
§ 360-18. Privies, septic tanks, sink holes, cesspools or receptacles.
[Amended 9-7-1993 by Ord. No. 1592]
No person shall discharge any waste containing the effluent from a privy,
septic tank, sink hole or cesspool or other receptacle for receiving and
holding sanitary sewage for an extended period of time before discharge to
the public sanitary sewerage system. No hauled or trucked waste shall be
permitted.
§ 360-19. Certain water to be excluded.
§ 360-20. Regulations may be adopted.
The Borough Council may, from time to time, adopt such further particular
rules and regulations in addition to those set forth in this Part 2, as the
Borough Council, with the advice of its consulting engineer, shall deem
necessary or appropriate for the efficient operation, maintenance and
preservation of the public sanitary sewerage system.
A. No owner of property or user of the public sanitary sewerage system,
whether with respect to existing establishments and buildings, or
establishments and buildings to be constructed hereafter, shall
discharge into the public sanitary sewerage system any stormwater,
surface water, roof runoff water, subsurface drainage, water from
springs, cooling water, or unpolluted industrial or commercial process
water.
B. The use of dilution as a substitute for adequate treatment to achieve
compliance with pretreatment standards is prohibited. [Added
9-7-1993 by Ord. No. 1592]
§ 360-18 INDIANA CODE § 360-20
1:176
ARTICLE V
Sewage Treatment Service Charges; Schedule of Rates
§ 360-21. Imposition of sewer rentals.
There is hereby imposed upon the owners of, or the users of water in or
on, all properties served by the public sanitary sewerage system, a service
charge for the treatment of waste discharged into said system, payable
as hereinafter provided in the amounts hereinafter provided. The service
charge shall begin to accrue from and after April 1, 1973, and said owners
and users shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of the service
charge and the penalty herein (§ 360-30) prescribed for delinquent payment
thereof.
§ 360-22. Residential service. [Amended 2-4-1986 by Ord. No. 1402;
6-7-1988 by Ord. No. 144469]
The sewage treatment service charge for all single-family dwellings, all twofamily
dwellings, all three-family dwellings, all four-family dwellings, all
five-family dwellings and all six-family dwellings, regardless of the water
consumed in each dwelling, shall be as established by the PUC by tariff
following the Borough's application for rate change with the PUC. Billings
shall be rendered to owners of the property at the address of the property
served, and shall be the responsibility of the owner. Billings may be sent to
a different address if requested in writing by the owner.
§ 360-23. Commercial housing service.
There has developed within the service area of the public sewerage system
a substantial number of dwelling units for semipermanent residents. These
dwelling units are principally due to the Indiana University of Pennsylvania
operating within the service area. All housing structures containing more
than six dwelling units shall be classed as commercial housing customers,
and shall be billed upon the basis of water consumption in accordance
with the rate schedule set forth in § 360-28 hereof. The billing unit for
each commercial housing account shall be identical with each commercial
housing unit or portion thereof served by a single water meter by the water
company for water consumption determination. The billing for service to
commercial housing customers shall be rendered to the holder of the water
account for the commercial housing unit, but the owner shall be finally
liable and responsible for payment of said billing.
§ 360-24. Commercial service.
The sewage treatment service charge for commercial units shall be billed
upon the basis of water consumption in accordance with the rate schedule
set forth in § 360-28 hereof. The billing unit for each commercial
establishment shall be identical with each commercial unit or portion
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 360-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-24
1:177
thereof served by a single water meter by the water company for water
consumption determination. The billing for services shall be rendered to the
holder of the water account for the commercial unit, but the owner shall be
finally liable and responsible for the payment of said billing.
§ 360-25. Public service.
The sewage treatment service charge for public units shall be billed upon
the basis of water consumption in accordance with the rate schedule set
forth in § 360-28 hereof. The billing unit for each public establishment
or institution shall be identical with each public establishment or portion
thereof served by a single water meter by the water company for water
consumption determination. Billings shall be rendered to the public agency
responsible for the operation of such public establishment or institution.
§ 360-26. Industrial customers. [Amended 2-4-1986 by Ord. No.
1402; 6-7-1988 by Ord. No. 144470]
The sewage treatment service charge to industrial customers, for treating
sanitary sewage wastes only, and not including any industrial waste arising
from or created by any processes employed by such industrial customer,
shall be based upon the equivalent employees at such industrial location.
The number of equivalent employees shall be determined by taking the total
man-hours worked at the industrial location being billed during the previous
year by all persons working at such location, or using such location as his
base of operation, and dividing these total man-hours by 2,040. The result
of this calculation shall be multiplied by the rate established by the PUC
by tariff following the Borough's application for rate change with the PUC,
to determine the quarterly service charge to the industrial customer being
billed.
§ 360-27. Multiple-use customers.
Wherever a single building is occupied by more than one class of customer
(i.e., residential, commercial housing, commercial, public or industrial) the
basis of billing shall be as follows:
A. Where the entire building is served by a single water meter, the entire
building shall be billed as a commercial building in accordance with
§ 360-24 hereof.
B. Where separate water meters are provided for each customer located
within the building, each unit shall be billed separately under the
appropriate classification set forth in §§ 360-22 through 360-27 hereof.
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 360-24 INDIANA CODE § 360-28
1:178
§ 360-28. Rate schedule on basis of water consumption. [Amended
2-4-1986 by Ord. No. 1402; 6-7-1988 by Ord. No. 144471]
The rate schedule for billing of customers on the basis of water consumption
shall be as established by the PUC by tariff following the Borough's
application for rate change with the PUC. The schedule of quarterly sewage
treatment service charges for consumers billed on the basis of water
consumption states rates for 0 gallons to 12,000 gallons or any fraction
thereof per quarter, for 12,000 gallons to 60,000 gallons or any fraction
thereof per quarter; and for all over 60,000 gallons per quarter.
§ 360-29. Conditions for billing.
Billings shall be rendered to all premises for sewage treatment services so
long as the public sanitary sewer system may be utilized at the customer's
option regardless of whether or not the premises are occupied. For
customers served by a public water system, billings shall continue so long
as water service facilities to the premises are turned on by the water
company. For all other premises, billings shall continue so long as electric
power is available on the premises.
§ 360-30. Payments of bills. [Amended 5-3-1977 by Ord. No. 1187;
2-4-1986 by Ord. No. 1402; 6-7-1988 by Ord. No. 1444]
Bills shall be due and payable when rendered, and if not paid within 30 days
after being rendered, a penalty of 1 1/4% monthly shall be added to the
amount due shown on the bill rendered.
§ 360-31. Exclusion of certain wastes may be required; meters.
The Borough Council may require the exclusion from the public sanitary
sewerage system of noncontaminated wastewaters and water used for
cooling purposes, or a customer billed upon the basis of water consumption
may exclude such waters from the public sanitary sewerage system. The
customer may or the Borough Council may require the customer to install
and maintain, at no expense to the Borough, meters approved by the
Borough Council, for measuring the water excluded from the public sanitary
sewerage system or the sewage and industrial waste entering the public
sanitary sewerage system. The service charge shall be based upon the
quantity of water determined to be actually entering the public sanitary
sewerage system, subject to the minimum service charge set forth in
§ 360-28 hereof.
§ 360-32. Reduction of sewer rentals.
Any customer billed upon the basis of water consumption requesting a
reduction of the amount of the service charge because of water used which
does not enter the public sanitary sewerage system shall make written
application to the Borough Council, giving the name of such customer, his
71.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 360-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-32
1:179
address, and setting forth supporting data fully describing all sources of
water, as well as the disposition of water alleged not to be entering the
public sanitary sewerage system. The application shall be accompanied by
a sketch to approximate scale showing the plan of the property, the water
distribution system, sewer layout, existing meters, and proposed meters
in the scheme to determine the quantity of flow not entering the public
sanitary sewerage system. The cost of furnishing, installing and maintaining
sanitary sewerage system shall be borne by the applicant. The type, size,
location, arrangement and maintenance of such meters shall be subject to
the approval of the Borough Council.
§ 360-33. Charge for repairing and replacing sanitary sewer
collection system. [Added 8-6-1991 by Ord. No. 1514; amended
9-3-1991 by Ord. No. 1517; 11-5-1996 by Ord. No. 1695; 9-5-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-06]
A. It is hereby imposed upon residential owners or users of property
served by the public sanitary sewer system within the Borough of
Indiana a user charge as set from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council.72
B. All owners or users of commercial housing service as defined in
§ 360-23 of this article, commercial service as defined by § 360-24 of
this article, public service as defined by § 360-25 of this article and
industrial customers as defined by § 360-26 of this article shall be
charged a user fee for the purpose of repairing and replacing the
existing sanitary sewer collection system within the Borough of Indiana,
said fee to be as set from time to time by resolution of the Borough
Council.73
C. All bills shall be due and payable when rendered and if not paid within
30 days after being rendered a penalty of 1 1/4% monthly shall be
added to the amount due.
D. Charge for repairing and replacing sanitary sewer collection system
shall be made either quarterly or monthly as determined by the
Borough Manager.
72.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
73.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 360-32 INDIANA CODE § 360-33
1:180
ARTICLE VI
Industrial Wastes
§ 360-34. Additional charges for industrial waste.
For industrial wastes which do not contain substances recited in § 360-17 of
this Part 2 above the limits recited in that same section, and in addition to
which the said industrial wastes do not exceed a discharge of 10,000 gallons
in any one day, the biochemical oxygen demand does not exceed 600 mg/
l, the suspended solids do not exceed 500 mg/l, and the chlorine demand
does not exceed 30 mg/l, for which the customer has received a written
permit accepting said waste for discharge to the public sanitary sewerage
system from the Borough, the following charges shall be applied and added
to the rate schedule set forth in § 360-28 of this Part 2: for each mg/l of
biochemical oxygen demand in excess of 300 mg/l a charge of 1/2% shall
be added to the rate charged in § 360-28 herein, and in addition for each
mg/l of suspended solids in excess of 250 mg/l a charge of 1/10% shall be
added to the rate charged in § 360-28 herein, and in addition for each mg/l
of chlorine demand in excess of 15 mg/l a charge of 1/2% shall be added to
the rate charged in § 360-28 herein.
§ 360-35. Agreements for charges for certain industrial waste.
For any industrial waste exceeding the volume of 10,000 gallons per day,
or a biochemical oxygen demand of 600 mg/l or a suspended solids content
in excess of 500 mg/l, or a chlorine demand in excess of 30 mg/l which has
been requested to be discharged to the public sanitary sewerage system,
the charges for treating such waste, if accepted by the Borough, will be
determined by separate agreement with the customer based upon the cost
of providing such service.
§ 360-36. Sampling of industrial waste.
The strength of any industrial waste, discharged to the public sanitary
sewerage system, shall be determined at least once annually, from samples
taken at a sampling point mutually agreed upon by the Borough Council and
the producer of such waste, either: a) by suitable sampling and analysis of
the industrial waste for a three-day period during which time the strength
of such waste being discharged or production in the industry is at its
maximum; or b) by relating production and industrial waste strength at the
time of sampling to waste strength at maximum production of the industry
if sampling is not performed at the time of maximum production; or c) from
estimates; or d) from relationships of products produced to strengths of
industrial waste for those industries where such relationships have been
established. In establishing industrial waste strengths for treatment service
charge purposes, the analysis shall be made by an acceptable method.
§ 360-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-36
1:181

ARTICLE VII
Billings and Collection
§ 360-37. Quarterly billing.
The treatment service charge provided for in this Part 2 shall be payable
in four quarterly payments each year. The billing for each quarter shall
be the treatment service charge computed on the actual water used for
that quarter for customers billed on the basis of water consumption. The
period of service billed shall coincide with the dates on which the water
meters for purchasing water have been read. For customers not billed upon
a water consumption basis, the preceding calendar quarter shall be the
billing quarter.
§ 360-38. Rendering of bills.
The Borough Council, either directly or through any person whom it may by
resolution appoint or with whom it may contract, will render such bills for
the service charges imposed by this article and will make collections thereof
in accordance with this article.
§ 360-39. Mailing or delivering of bills; changes of address.
Bills and notices relating to the treatment service charge will be mailed or
delivered to the property owner's or user's last address as shown on the
books of the Borough, and the Borough shall not be otherwise responsible
for delivery. No change of address will be honored unless and until such
change shall have been furnished in writing to the Borough.
§ 360-40. Access to meters.
The Borough Council shall have access at all reasonable times to industrial,
commercial, institutional and residential establishments connected to the
public sanitary sewerage system and to any water meters measuring water
used in such establishments to inspect the connection with the public
sanitary sewerage system and/or the discharge of sewage, water or
industrial waste into such system.
§ 360-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-40
1:183

ARTICLE VIII
Delinquencies, Violations and Remedies
§ 360-41. Delinquent sewer rentals constitute lien; remedies.
Each service charge and penalty imposed by this Part 2 shall be a debt
due the Borough and shall be a lien on the property served, and if not paid
within 30 days after the date of the bill shall be deemed delinquent. In such
event, the Borough may proceed to file the lien in the nature of a municipal
lien in the office of the Prothonotary of Indiana County, Pennsylvania, and
collect the same in the manner provided by law for the filing and collection
of municipal claims, or the Borough may proceed to collect such delinquent
service charge by an action in assumpsit, or by distress of personal property
of the premises. In the event of failure to pay the service charge or penalty
after they become delinquent as herein provided, the Borough Council shall
be authorized, in addition to any other remedies authorized by law, to
remove or close the sewer connection and shall have the right to enter
upon the property served for such purpose and to take such steps as may
be necessary to accomplish such removal or closing. The expense of such
removal or closing, as well as the expense of restoring any such service,
shall likewise be a debt due the Borough and a lien on the property served
and may be filed and collected as hereinabove provided, or such sewer
connection shall not again be turned on or the sewage service restored until
all service charges, additional charges and penalties, including the expense
of removal, closing and restoration shall have been paid. In addition to
the above remedies, the Borough may have the public water service to the
premises discontinued until payment in full for sewerage services rendered
has been made in accordance with laws governing the discontinuance of
water service for nonpayment of sewerage service billings.
§ 360-42. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-3-1984 by Ord. No.
135774]
All persons violating any of the provisions of this Part 2 shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $500 nor more than $5,000, plus costs, or not more than
90 days' imprisonment, or both, for each and every offense, to be collected
as fines or penalties are recoverable by law. Whenever such persons shall
have been notified by Borough Council or by the service of a summons in a
prosecution, or in any other way, that he is violating this Part 2, each day
that he shall continue such violation after such notification shall constitute
a separate offense punishable by a like fine or penalty.
A. Suspension of service.
(1) The Borough may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/
or a wastewater contribution permit when such suspension is
necessary, in the opinion of the Borough, in order to stop an actual
or threatened discharge which presents or may present an
imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 360-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-42
1:185
persons, to the environment, causes interference to the public
sanitary sewer system or causes the Borough to violate any
condition of its NPDES permit.
(2) Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service and/or the wastewater contribution permit shall
immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a
failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension
order, the Borough shall take such steps as deemed necessary,
including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent
or minimize damage to the public sanitary sewer system or
endangerment to any individuals. The Borough shall reinstate the
wastewater contribution permit and/or the wastewater treatment
service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying
discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the
Borough within 15 days of the date of occurrence.
B. Permit revocation. Any user who violates the following conditions of
this Part 2, or applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to
having his permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of this
Article VIII of this Part 2:
(1) Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents
and characteristics of his discharge;
(2) Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or
wastewater constituents and characteristics;
(3) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection or monitoring; or
(4) Violation of conditions of the permit.
C. Notice of violation. Whenever the Borough finds that any user has
violated or is violating this Part 2, wastewater contribution permit, or
any prohibition, limitation of requirements contained herein, the
Borough may serve upon such person a written notice stating the
nature of the violation. Within 30 days of the date of the notice, a plan
for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the
Borough by the user.
D. Hearing. The Borough may order any user who causes or allows an
unauthorized discharge to enter the public sanitary sewer system to
show cause before the Borough Council why the proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user
specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the Borough
Council regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be
taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show
cause before the Borough Council why the proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served
§ 360-42 INDIANA CODE § 360-42
1:186
personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested)
at least 10 days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent
or officer of a corporation.
E. Borough Council may conduct hearing. The Borough Council may itself
conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate any of its
members or any officer of the Borough Council to:
(1) Issue in the name of the Borough Council notices of hearings
requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the
production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such
hearings;
(2) Take the evidence;
(3) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to
the Borough Council for action thereon.
F. Testimony; transcripts. At any hearing held pursuant to this Part 2,
testimony taken must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The
transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the
public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges
thereof.
G. Service discontinued. After the Borough Council has reviewed the
evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge
directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other
related appurtenances shall have been installed on existing treatment
facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are properly
operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and
appropriate may be issued.
H. Unlawful discharge. If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes
or other wastes into the Borough's wastewater disposal system
contrary to the provisions of this Part 2, federal or state pretreatment
requirements, or any order of the Borough, the Borough Solicitor may
commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the
Court of Common Pleas of Indiana County, Pennsylvania.
I. Penalty for illegal actions or false information. Any person who
knowingly makes any false statements, representation or certification
in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or
required to be maintained pursuant to this Part 2, or wastewater
contribution permit, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly
renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this Part 2 shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than
$500 nor more than $5,000, plus costs, or by imprisonment for not more
than 90 days, or by both.
§ 360-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-43
1:187
§ 360-43. Effect of change of ownership or occupancy of property.
Change of ownership or occupancy of any property served by the public
sanitary sewerage system as to which the service charge or penalty imposed
by this Part 2 is delinquent, as provided in § 360-41 hereof, shall not be a
cause for reducing or eliminating the rights and remedies of the Borough
set forth in this Article VIII.
§ 360-43 INDIANA CODE § 360-43
1:188
ARTICLE IX
Construal of Provisions
§ 360-44. Duties of Borough.
The proper officers of the said Borough be and they are hereby authorized
and directed to make, execute and deliver the necessary drafts or vouchers
in payment for and in discharge of the obligation or obligations of this Part
2, if any, and the work herein directed, and to do and perform all and every
act and thing necessary or convenient to fully and completely carry out the
obligations and purposes of the Borough set forth in this Part 2.
§ 360-45. Severability.
It is hereby declared that the sections and provisions of this Part 2 are
severable, one from the other, and that if for any reason, one or more such
sections or provisions should be judicially held unconstitutional or contrary
to the laws applicable thereto, such holding or decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining sections or provisions of this Part 2; it being the
intention hereof and it is so declared that any such section or provision
and the said remaining sections and provisions would have been enacted
notwithstanding such judicial determination of the invalidity of any of said
particular sections or provisions in any respect.
§ 360-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-45
1:189

ARTICLE X
Sanitary Sewer Laterals and Connections
[Added 5-4-1976 by Ord. No. 1160]
§ 360-46. Connection to sanitary sewer system required.
Every owner of real estate in the Borough of Indiana, which real estate
is accessible to the public sanitary sewer system of the Borough, shall
be required to connect to the public sanitary sewer system rather than
installing a private sewage disposal system of any type. Said owners shall
connect the accessible real estate before any occupancy of the real estate
shall create any discharge of sanitary sewage or acceptable industrial
waste, or within 45 days' notice to connect to the public sanitary sewer
system issued by the Borough to the owner, whichever first occurs.
§ 360-47. Permit required prior to making connection.
No person shall uncover, make any connections to or opening into, use,
alter, or disturb any public sanitary sewer or appurtenance thereof without
having first obtained a written permit from the Manager of the Borough of
Indiana so to do, whether the connection is made by the initiation of the
owner of real estate or in response to a notice to connect to the public
sanitary sewer system issued by the Borough.
§ 360-48. Tapping fee. [Amended 4-3-1990 by Ord. No. 1487;
9-3-1991 by Ord. No. 1518; 10-3-1995 by Ord. No. 166475]
There shall be a fee, as set from time to time by resolution of the Borough
Council, per EDU for each connection to the public sanitary sewer system.
This tapping-in fee shall cover the cost of the regulation and inspection of
the connections to the public sanitary sewer system. It shall be paid prior to
the issuance of a permit to connect to the sanitary sewer system.
§ 360-49. Connections to be directed by Borough Engineer.
All connections to the public sanitary sewer system shall be made under the
direction of the Borough Engineer, whose duty it shall be, upon application
of any person for a permit to connect to the public sanitary sewer system,
or when so required by the Borough Council, to locate the point at which
such connection shall be made.
§ 360-50. Responsibility for costs of construction.
In addition to the tapping fee set forth in § 360-48 of this article, the owner
of real estate shall bear the entire cost of construction the sanitary sewer
lateral in accordance with the requirements of this Article X regulating the
construction of sanitary sewer laterals.
75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 360-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-51
1:191
§ 360-51. Separate connections required for each building;
exception.
§ 360-52. Special permission required for connection to cellar floor
drain.
No interior cellar floor drain shall be connected to the public sanitary sewer
system except with special permission of the Borough Engineer. When
connection of an interior cellar floor drain is permitted, the drain shall be
installed in accordance with Chapter 170, Uniform Construction Codes.
§ 360-53. Pipes and conduits prohibited within five feet of sewers.
No person shall lay any pipe or conduit for any purpose whatever, in any
street or alley in the Borough, within five feet of either side of the public
sewer without permission of the Borough Council.
§ 360-54. Engineer's approval required prior to making connection.
The Borough Engineer shall be given at least 24 hours' notice prior to the
time when the actual physical connection to the public sanitary sewer is
to be made in order that the Borough Engineer can be present to inspect
and approve the work of connection. The Borough Engineer shall signify his
approval of the connection by endorsing his name and the date of approval
on the permit to connect in the possession of the property owner.
§ 360-55. Inspection required prior to covering installation.
At the time of inspection of the connection, the owner or owners of
properties shall permit the Borough Engineer full and complete access to
all sanitary and drainage arrangements and facilities in each building and
in and about all parts of the property. No sanitary sewer lateral line shall
be covered over, or in any manner concealed, until after it is inspected and
approved by said inspector.
A. A separate and independent sanitary sewer lateral shall be provided for
every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another
on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be
constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard,
or driveway, the sanitary sewer lateral from the front building may be
extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one sanitary
sewer lateral.
B. A separate permit to connect shall be issued for each building and a
separate tapping fee levied for each building sewer in such cases. The
Borough Engineer shall certify that the two buildings to be serviced by
a single sanitary sewer lateral cannot be served by separate sewer
laterals before such authorization is granted.
§ 360-51 INDIANA CODE § 360-56
1:192
§ 360-56. Fees for additional inspections.
It is the intention of this article that the entire connection be inspected
at one time; however, if the property owner feels that special conditions
warrant more than one inspection, he may request the same subject to such
additional inspection fees as the Borough Council shall determine.
§ 360-57. Materials and specifications for installations. [Amended
11-8-1983 by Ord. No. 1348]
All pipe installed shall be either vitrified clay, cast iron pipe or plastic pipe
of the kind and quality hereinafter specified, and of at least six inches inside
diameter. Where the ground is firm and provides a good foundation, vitrified
clay or plastic pipe may be used. On filled ground or on ground which is not
firm, cast iron pipe shall be used. Vitrified clay pipe shall be of the bell and
spigot salt-glazed type. The pipe shall be ASTM C-200 vitrified clay sewer
pipe or ASA-A40.1 cast iron soil pipe. Each section of pipe shall be stamped
with the manufacturer's certification. Vitrified clay pipe shall be furnished
with joints conforming to ASTM C425, Type III. All joints for the cast iron
soil pipe shall be made with jute and lead. The lead in the bell shall have a
minimum depth of one inch and shall be adequately caulked. All plastic pipe
shall be ABS or PVC, Schedule 40, and shall be stamped as such, and shall
be connected with the proper solvent weld.
§ 360-58. Installation to be in accordance with manufacturer's
recommendations.
All sewer pipe shall be installed in strict accord with the manufacturer's
recommendations. Where rock trench foundation exists, a four inches
gravel cradle shall be provided under the pipe.
§ 360-59. Slope and grade of pipe; manner of doing work.
All pipe shall be installed with a minimum slope of 1/8 inch per foot and a
minimum cover of 2 1/2 feet unless otherwise approved. All pipe shall be
laid to an even grade and straight alignment to the public sanitary sewer. All
pipe shall be laid with full and even bearing and no block supports will be
allowed. Bell holes shall be dug to allow sufficient space to properly make
each joint. Backfill shall be tamped uniformly around the pipe. All work shall
be done in a workmanlike manner and shall provide a durable installation.
§ 360-60. Responsibility for maintenance and repair.
Maintenance and repair of all sanitary sewer laterals shall be the
responsibility of the property owner.
§ 360-61. Sewage receptacles to be cleaned and filled.
Septic tanks, privy vaults, and cesspools shall be cleaned out and filled with
a stable aggregate such as slag, stone, cinders, shale, or soil.
§ 360-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-62
1:193
§ 360-62. Use of old sanitary sewer laterals.
Old sanitary sewer laterals may be used in connection with new buildings
only when they are found, on examination and test by the Borough Engineer,
to meet all requirements of this article.
§ 360-62 INDIANA CODE § 360-62
1:194
ARTICLE XI
Inspection of Sewer Systems and Connections
[Added 7-5-1994 by Ord. No. 1630]
§ 360-63. Right to inspect.
The Pretreatment Coordinator or his designee shall have the right to inspect
any property in Indiana Borough that is connected to the sanitary sewer
system or the storm sewer system, and shall have the full and complete
access to all sanitary and all drainage arrangements and facilities located
on any property in Indiana Borough, and shall have the right to test these
facilities and arrangements through the use of smoke test, dye test and
similar tests to determine whether the sanitary and drainage arrangements
are properly corrected to the sanitary and storm sewer systems.
Notwithstanding any language in this Article XI, the Pretreatment
Coordinator or his designee is not authorized to enter any building on the
property by virtue of the powers given to the Pretreatment Coordinator or
his designee under this article.
§ 360-64. Access to property.
The Pretreatment Coordinator and all persons working under him or
assisting him shall have the full and free access to the property to conduct
tests and inspections.
§ 360-65. Failure of tests.
In the event that any sanitary or storm sewer system fails the applicable
tests, the Pretreatment Coordinator shall so advise the landowner and shall
notify the landowner concerning the time period in which corrections to the
systems must be made.
§ 360-66. Failure to correct; violations and penalties.
In the event that the corrections are not made in accordance with the notice
in a timely manner, the landowner shall be subject to a daily fine of not
less than $100 nor more than $300 together with costs. Each day shall
constitute a separate offense. In default of payment of such fine and costs,
the owner shall be subject to imprisonment of not less than 10 days nor
more than 30 days.
§ 360-67. Refusal of access to property; violations and penalties.
If any owner refuses to allow the Pretreatment Coordinator or his designee
access to the property, the landowner, upon conviction, before a Magisterial
District Judge, shall be fined $100 per day and each day shall constitute a
separate offense. In default of payment of such fine and costs, the owner
shall be subject to imprisonment of not less than 10 days nor more than 30
days.
§ 360-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-67
1:195

Part 3
[Current ProvisioPnres tArerea tOmne nFti lSe tIann dTahred Bs orough Offices.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-67
1:197
Chapter 365
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 460.
§ 365-1. Purpose and findings.
A. Purpose.
(1) Pursuant to the authority granted in the Borough Code to prohibit
nuisances; and to promote the health, welfare, cleanliness, comfort
and, safety of the citizens of Indiana Borough; and to regulate the
time of opening and closing, and the conduct of places of public
entertainment, amusement and recreation, the Borough of Indiana
enacts this chapter to minimize and control the adverse secondary
effects of sexually oriented businesses and thereby protect the
health, safety and welfare of its citizens; protect the citizens from
increased crime; preserve the quality of life; preserve the property
values and character of surrounding neighborhoods; and deter the
spread of blight.
(2) The Borough Council has determined that licensing is a legitimate
and reasonable means of accountability to insure the operators of
sexually oriented businesses comply with reasonable regulations
and to insure that operators do not knowingly allow their
establishments to be used as places for illegal sexual activity or
solicitation.
(3) The Borough Council does not intend this chapter to suppress
speech activities protected by the First Amendment, but to enact a
content-neutral ordinance which addresses the secondary effects of
sexually oriented businesses.
B. Legislative findings. The Borough Council finds:
(1) Sexually oriented businesses have adverse secondary effects that
should be regulated to protect the public health, safety and
welfare. These secondary effects include, but are not limited to, the
spread of communicable diseases, performance of sexual acts in
public places, presence of discarded sexually oriented materials on
public and private property, sexual harassment, obscenity,
prostitution, and other illegal sexual activities, crime, and
neighborhood deterioration.76
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 360-67 INDIANA CODE § 365-1
1:198
(2) A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to
place the burden of reasonable regulations on the owners and the
operators of the sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a
licensing procedure will place a heretofore nonexistent incentive
on the operators to see that their sexually oriented business is run
in a manner consistent with the health, safety and welfare of its
patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the Borough. It is
appropriate to require reasonable assurance that the licensee is
the actual operator of the sexually oriented businesses, fully in
possession and control of the premises and activities occurring
therein.
(3) Removal of doors on viewing booths and requiring sufficient
lighting on premises with viewing booths advances a substantial
governmental interest in discouraging the illegal and unsanitary
sexual activity occurring in adult theaters.
(4) Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep
information regarding current employees and certain past
employees will help reduce the incidence of certain types of
criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential
witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from working at
such establishments.
(5) The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately
responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the
sexually oriented business will help limit and control the adverse
secondary effects of such businesses.
(6) It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable
diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding
certain employees who may engage in the conduct which this
chapter is designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to
such activity.
(7) The fact that an applicant for a sexually oriented business license
has been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational
assumption that the applicant is likely to engage in that conduct in
contravention of this chapter.
(8) The barring of such individuals from the management of sexually
oriented businesses for a period of years serves as a deterrent to
and prevents conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually
transmitted diseases.
(9) The general welfare, health, and safety of the citizens of the
Borough will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter.
(10) Limitation of operating hours of sexually oriented businesses to
10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, and closure of
such businesses on Sundays and holidays reduces the adverse
secondary effects of such businesses, including particularly, but not
§ 365-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-1
1:199
§ 365-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings indicated unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or for any form of consideration, or
electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture
machines, projectors, video, or laser disc players, or other image-producing
devices are maintained, not located within viewing booths, to show images
to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the
images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or
describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE
— A commercial establishment which, as one of its substantial business
activities, offers for sale or rental for any from of consideration any one or
more of the following:
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or other commercial
establishment which regularly features:
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER — A commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion picture, videocassettes,
slides, or similar photographic reproductions or visual presentations of
any kind are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, dance hall, auditorium, or
similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who
appear in a state of nudity or seminudity, or live performances which are
limited to, late-night noise levels, crime, and sexually offensive
materials and activities in public areas, and promotes the public
health, safety, and welfare.
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides,
CD-ROM discs or other computer software, or other visual
representations which are characterized by the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
A.
Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in
connection with specified sexual activities.
B.
A. Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity; or
Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
B.
Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions or visual presentations of any other kind which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
C.
§ 365-1 INDIANA CODE § 365-2
1:200
characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified
sexual activities.
EMPLOYEE — A person who performs any service on the premises of
a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis,
whether or not the person is denominated as employee, independent
contractor agent or otherwise and whether or not the person is paid a
salary, wage, or other compensation by the operator of the business.
Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair
or maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the
delivery of goods to the premises.
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who furnishes, offers
to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
ESTABLISHMENT — Includes any of the following:
KNOWINGLY — Having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or belief
or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of both:
LICENSEE — A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually
oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an
applicant on the application for a license; and in the case of an employee, a
person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in
a sexually oriented business.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears
seminude, in a state of nudity, or who displays specified anatomical areas
and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new business;
A.
The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
B.
The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing
sexually oriented business or to a nonsexually oriented business; or
C.
D. The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
The character and content of any material or performance described
herein which is reasonably susceptible of examination by a licensee or
person;
A.
The age of the minor; provided, however, that an honest mistake shall
constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the licensee or person
made a reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such
minor.
B.
§ 365-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-2
1:201
photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any
form of consideration. "Nude model studio" shall not include a proprietary
school licensed by the State of Pennsylvania or a college, junior college, or
university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college
or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which
credits are transferable to a college, junior college; or in a structure:
NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY — The showing of the human male or
female genitals, public area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less
than a fully opaque covering, the showing of female breast with less than
a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the
covered male genitals in a discernible turgid state.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.
SEMINUDE or IN A SEMINUDE CONDITION — The state of dress in which
clothing partially or nonopaquely covers specified anatomical areas.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial enterprise
that, as one of is principal business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration:
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult bookstore,
adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion-picture
theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual
encounter center.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Human genitals, pubic region, anus,
buttocks, female breast(s) below a point immediately above the top of
the areola, or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely covered.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY — Any of the following offenses:
That no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other
advertising that indicates a nude or seminude person is available for
viewing; and
A.
Where in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least
three days in advance of the class; and
B.
Where no more than one nude or seminude model is on the premises at
any one time.
C.
Physical contact in the form wrestling or tumbling between persons of
the opposite sex; or
A.
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or
seminudity.
B.
Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity;
sale, distribution, or sale, distribution, or display of harmful material
to a minor; sexual performance by a child; possession or distribution
A.
§ 365-2 INDIANA CODE § 365-2
1:202
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Any of the following:
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL — Of a sexually oriented
business means and includes any of the following:
VIEWING BOOTHS — Booths, stalls, partitioned portions of a room, rooms
or other enclosures which are available for viewing:
of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency
with a child; engaging in organized criminal activity; sexual assault;
molestation of a child; gambling; or distribution of a controlled
substance; or any similar offenses to those described above under the
criminal or penal code of other states or countries;
For which:
Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction
whichever is the later date if the conviction is of a misdemeanor
offense;
(1)
Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement for the conviction whichever
is the later date if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
(2)
Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last
conviction whichever is the later date if the convictions are of
two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor
offenses occurring within any twenty-four-month period.
(3)
B.
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the
disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant.
C.
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
A.
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or
B.
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in Subsection A and B above.
C.
A. The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
B.
The establishment of a trust, will, or other similar legal device which
transfer the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control.
C.
Films, movies, videos, or visual reproductions of any kind depicting or
describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
A.
§ 365-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-2
1:203
§ 365-3. License required.
Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity or who offer
performances or presentations characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
B.
A. It is unlawful:
(1) For any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a
valid sexually oriented business license issued by the Borough
pursuant to this chapter;
(2) For any person who operates a sexually oriented business to
employ a person to work for the sexually oriented business who is
not licensed as a sexually oriented business employee by the
Borough pursuant to this chapter;
(3) For any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented
business without having secured a sexually oriented business
employee license pursuant to this chapter;
(4) Upon enactment of this chapter, for any person to continue to
operate any sexually oriented business in operation at the time of
enactment of this chapter without a valid sexually oriented
business license pursuant to this chapter;
(5) Upon enactment of this chapter, for any person to obtain
employment with a sexually oriented business in operation at the
time of enactment of this chapter without having secured a sexually
oriented business employee license pursuant to this chapter.
B. An application for license must be made on a form provided by this
Borough.
C. All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this
chapter. The application may request and the applicant shall provide
such information (including fingerprints) to enable the Borough to
determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in
this chapter.
D. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an
individual, the person must sign the application for a license as
applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented
business is other than an individual, each individual who has a 20% or
greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license
as applicant, each applicant must be qualified under the following
section and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is
granted.
E. The completed application for a sexually oriented business license shall
contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the
following documents:
§ 365-2 INDIANA CODE § 365-3
1:204
(1) If the applicant is:
(a) An individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and
any aliases and submit proof that he/she is at least 18 years of
age;
(b) A partnership, the partnership shall sate its complete name,
and the name of all partners, whether the partnership is
general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if
any;
(c) A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name,
the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in
good standing under the laws of its state of incorporation and
qualified and authorized to conduct business in Pennsylvania,
the names and capacity of all officers, directors, and principal
stockholders, and the name of the registered corporate agent
and the address of the registered office for service of process.
(2) If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business
under a name other than that of the applicant; he or she must state
the sexually oriented business' fictitious name and submit the
required registration documents.
(3) Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has
been convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in this
chapter, and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date,
place and jurisdiction of each.
(4) Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant has
had a previous license under this chapter or other similar sexually
oriented business ordinance from another municipality, state, or
county denied suspended or revoked including the name and
location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was
denied, suspended, or revoked as well as the date of the denial,
suspension, or revocation and whether the applicant or person
residing with the applicant has been partner in a partnership or an
officer, director, or principal stockholder of corporation that is
licensed under this chapter whose license has previously been
denied, suspended, or revoked, including the name and location of
the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied,
suspended, or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension, or
revocation.
(5) Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant holds
any other licenses under this chapter or other similar sexually
oriented business ordinance from another municipality, state or
county and if so, the names and locations of such other licensed
businesses.
(6) The specified classifications of sexually oriented use for which the
applicant is filing along with a detailed description of each and
§ 365-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-3
1:205
every activity encompassed by the proposed sexually oriented
business which description shall thoroughly demonstrate
compliance and/or intended compliance with all provisions of this
chapter.
(7) The location of the proposed sexually oriented business including a
legal description of the property, street address, and telephone
number(s), if any.
(8) The applicant's mailing address and residential address.
(9) A recent photograph of the applicant(s).
(10) The applicant's driver permit number, social security number and
his/her state or federally issued tax identification number.
(11) A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business.
The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but it
must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or
minus six inches.
(12) A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within 30
days prior to application by a registered land surveyor depicting
the property lines the property to be certified.
(13) If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented business
which includes viewing booth, then the applicant shall also comply
with the application requirements set forth in § 365-11 and shall
separately apply for and obtain a building and occupancy permit for
the installation of the viewing booth.
(14) The application form shall inform the applicant that:
(a) Separate applications are required by any necessary zoning
permits, subdivision and land development approvals or
building and occupancy permits and that the applicant may
apply for such permits by contacting the Code Director of Code
Enforcement; and
(b) Department of Labor and Industry approval is required.
F. Before any applicant may be issued a sexually oriented business
employee license, the applicant shall submit on a form to be provided by
the Borough of the following information:
(1) The applicant's name or any other name including "stage" names,
or aliases used by the individual;
(2) Age, date and place of birth;
(3) Height, weight, hair and eye color;
§ 365-3 INDIANA CODE § 365-3
1:206
§ 365-4. Issuance of license.
(4) Present residence address and telephone number;
(5) Present business address and telephone number;
(6) Date, issuing state and number of driver's license or other
identification card information;
(7) Social Security number; and
(8) Proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age.
G. Attached to the application form for a sexually oriented business
employee license as provided above shall be the following:
(1) A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's
face and the applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by any
police department. Any fee for the photographs and fingerprints
shall be paid by the applicant.
(2) A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the
five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the
application including whether such applicant previously operated
or is seeking to operate in this or any other county, municipality,
state, or county any business or has ever had a license permit, or
authorization to do business denied, revoked, or suspended or had
any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked, or
suspended. In the event of any denial, revocation, or suspension,
state the name, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and
describe in full the reason for the denial, revocation, or suspension.
A copy of any order of denial, revocation, or suspension shall be
attached to the application.
(3) A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of a
specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter and, if so, the
specified criminal activity involved, the date, place and jurisdiction
of each.
A. Upon the filing of said application in a fully completed form for a
sexually oriented business license or for a sexually oriented business
employee license, the applicant shall then be referred to the Borough
Code Enforcement Officer for review investigation. The Borough Code
Enforcement Officer shall utilize any available resources through the
Pennsylvania State Police, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and/or
other law enforcement agencies as may be necessary to complete the
review and investigation required by this chapter. Within 30 days from
the date the completed application is filed, the Borough Code
Enforcement Officer shall issue a license unless it is determined by the
Borough Code Enforcement Officer that one or more of the following
findings is true:
§ 365-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-4
1:207
(1) The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably
necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a
questions or requests for information on the application form;
(2) The applicant is under the age of 18 years;
(3) The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as
defined in this chapter;
(4) The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for
employment in a business prohibited by local or sate law, statute,
rule or regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of this
chapter;
(5) The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee
license revoked by the Borough within two years of the date of the
current application. If the sexually oriented business employee
license is denied, the temporary license previously issues is
immediately deemed null and void. Denial, suspension, or
revocation of license issued pursuant to this subsection shall be
subject to appeal as set forth in § 365-9;
(6) The required application, investigation and license fees have not
been paid;
(7) An applicant's license to operate a sexually oriented business,
issued by any jurisdiction, has been revoked within the preceding
12 months; or
(8) The proposed sexually oriented business is in violation of or is not
in compliance with any of the provision of this chapter.
B. A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual
renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by
the Borough that the applicant has not been convicted of any specified
criminal activity as defined in this chapter or committed any act during
the existence of the previous license, which would be grounds to deny
the initial license application. This renewal of the license shall be
subject to the payment of the fee as set forth in § 365-5.
C. The license, if granted shall state on its face the name of the person or
person to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the
sexually oriented business and the specified classification of sexually
oriented use for which the license is issued. Licenses for sexually
oriented businesses shall state that the sexually oriented business shall
not commence until all necessary zoning, subdivision, and land
development, and/or building code approvals and Department of Labor
and Industry approvals are obtained. All licenses shall be posted in a
conspicuous place or near the entrance to the sexually oriented
business so that they may be easily read at any time.
§ 365-4 INDIANA CODE § 365-4
1:208
§ 365-5. Fees.
§ 365-6. Inspection.
D. Applications for building and occupancy permits shall be processed and
either denied or approved within 30 days after a complete application is
filed with the Borough.
E. A sexually oriented business license shall issue for the specific
classification of sexually oriented use as permitted by ordinance and
applied for.
F. A license denial shall conform to the provisions of § 365-9D.
G. Any person aggrieved by the granting or denial of a license may appeal
in writing within 10 days from the date of issuance to the Borough
Council. The Borough Council shall then make a determination at the
next regularly scheduled meeting of Borough Council occurring at least
10 days thereafter. Any party who is aggrieved by the determination of
Borough Council shall have the right to appeal the decision to the Court
of Common Pleas of Indiana County, Pennsylvania, providing the appeal
is taken within 30 days after Borough Council issues its decision.
A. Every application for a sexually oriented business license (whether for a
new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied
by a nonrefundable application and investigation fee in an amount set
by resolution of the Borough Council.
B. In addition to the application and investigation fee required above,
every sexually oriented business that is granted a license (new or
renewal) shall pay to the Borough an annual nonrefundable license fee
in an amount set by resolution of the Borough within 30 days of license
issuance or renewal.
C. Every application for a sexually oriented business employee license
(whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be
accompanied by an annual nonrefundable application investigation and
license fee in an amount set by resolution of the Borough Council.
D. All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the office of the
Borough Secretary/Treasurer and thereafter the applications shall be
forwarded to the Borough Code Enforcement Officer for review and
investigation and approval or denial.
A. An applicant or licensee shall permit authorized Borough officials and
their agents or consultants to inspect the premises of a sexually
oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law
at any time it is occupied or open for business.
B. A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or
employee commits a violation of this chapter if he refuses to permit
§ 365-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-6
1:209
§ 365-7. Expiration of license.
§ 365-8. Suspension.
The Borough Code Enforcement Officer shall suspend a license for a period
not to exceed 30 days if he determines that a licensee or an employee of a
licensee has:
§ 365-9. Revocations and appeals of denials, suspensions, or
revocations.
such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open
for business.
A. Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in § 365-3. Application
for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date,
and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the date of
expiration of the license will not be extended.
B. When the Borough denies renewal of a license the applicant shall not be
issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to
denial, the Borough finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license
has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if
at least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial became final.
A. Violated or is not in compliance with any provision of this chapter;
B. Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business
premises as authorized by this chapter; or
C. Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented
business premises.
A. The Borough Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke a license if a cause
of suspension in § 365-8 occurs and the license has been suspended
within the preceding 12 months.
B. The Borough Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke a license if he
determines that:
(1) A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application process;
(2) A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of
controlled substances on the premises;
(3) A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
(4) A licensee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business;
during a period of time with the licensee's license was suspended;
§ 365-6 INDIANA CODE § 365-9
1:210
§ 365-10. Transfer of license.
Licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another nor shall a licensee
operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any
place other than the address designated in the application.
(5) A licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse,
sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sex act to occur in
or on the license premises; or
(6) A licensee is delinquent to the Borough for any licensing fees past
due.
C. When the Borough revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for
one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented
business license for one year from the date the revocation became
effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the Borough finds that the basis
for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be
granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the
revocation became effective.
D. All license application renewal, suspension or revocation decisions shall
be sent in writing to the applicant or licensee. All such decisions which
deny suspend or revoke a permit shall state specifically the ordinance
requirement not met and any other basis for the decision. After denial
of an application or denial of a renewal of an application or after
suspension for revocation of any license, the applicant or licensee may
appeal pursuant to the local agency law to the Borough Council. The
Borough Council will then hold a local agency law hearing within 20
days from the date the appeal is filed and will render a written decision
within 10 days from the date such hearing concludes. Any such appeal
must be filed in writing with the Borough Secretary/Treasurer within 10
days from the date of mailing of the decision appeal from. Failure to file
said appeal with the Borough Secretary/Treasurer within 10 days from
the date of mailing of the decision appealed from shall be deemed a
conclusive determination as to the issues or matters addressed by the
written decision. In the case of a denial or a license renewal or in the
case of a license suspension or revocation the licensee may continue to
operate to the same extent as immediately prior to the suspension or
revocation until the earlier of: the expiration of the ten-day appeal
period without filing of an appeal; or the date of a decision dismissing
any appeal.
E. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Borough Council may appeal
to the Court of Common Pleas of Indiana County, Pennsylvania. The
Borough shall, upon filing of such appeal, consent to any request by a
license applicant or licensee to the court to give expedited review to
such appeal. The Borough shall certify any record to the court within 20
days of any request by the court to do so.
§ 365-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-11
1:211
§ 365-11. Exhibition of sexually explicit films, videos, or live
entertainment in viewing rooms.
A. A person who operates viewing booths or causes them to be operated
shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Upon application for a sexually oriented license, the application
shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations
and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating
any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted.
A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area.
The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will
be conspicuously posted if granted. A professionally prepared
diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall
not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the
north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn
to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show
the various internal dimensions of all areas of interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The Borough
may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the
applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and
certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered
since it was prepared.
(2) The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
(3) It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least
one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager's
station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
(4) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is obstructed view from the manager's station of every
area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for
any purpose excluding rest rooms. Rest rooms may not contain
video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more
manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises
shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted
access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations.
The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight
from the manager's station. In addition, all viewing booths shall
have at least one side fully open so that all of the area inside the
booth is open to the view of persons in the public area of the
establishment.
(5) It shall be the duty of the licensees to ensure that the view area
specified in Subsection A(4) remains unobstructed by any doors,
curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise display racks, or other
materials and, at all times to ensure that no patron is permitted
§ 365-11 INDIANA CODE § 365-11
1:212
§ 365-12. Escort agencies.
§ 365-13. Nude model studios.
access to any area of the premises which has been designated as
an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application
filed pursuant to Subsection A(1) of this section.
(6) No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at a
time.
(7) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access at an illumination of not less than five footcandles
as measured at the floor level.
(8) It shall be the duty of the licensees to ensure that the illumination
described above as maintained at all times any patron is present in
the premises.
(9) No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between
viewing rooms or booths.
(10)No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind
between viewing booths or rooms.
(11) The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the
walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or
holes exist.
(12) The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be
nonporous easily cleanable surfaces with no rugs or carpeting.
(13) The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in
viewing booths to be constructed of or permanently covered by
nonporous easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood,
composition board or other porous material shall be used within 48
inches of the floor.
A. An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18
years.
B. A person commits a violation of this chapter if the person acts as an
escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18
years.
A. A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18
years.
B. A person commits a violation of this chapter if the person acts as an
escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18
years.
§ 365-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-13
1:213
§ 365-14. Public nudity.
C. A person commits violation of this chapter if the person appears in a
state of nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of
nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed
from the public right-of-way.
D. A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in
any room on the premises except that a sofa may be placed in a
reception room open to the public.
A. Public place violations.
(1) It shall be a violation of this chapter for a person to knowingly and
intentionally in a public place:
(a) Engage in sexual intercourse or to engage in deviate sexual
intercourse as defined by the Pennsylvania Crime Code; or
(b) Appear in a state of nudity; or
(c) Fondle the genitals of himself, herself, or another person.
(2) For purposes of this chapter, "public place" includes all outdoor
areas owned by or open to the general public and all buildings and
enclosed places owned by or open to the general public, including,
but not limited to, places of entertainment, taverns restaurants,
clubs, theaters, dance halls, banquet halls, party rooms, or halls
limited to specific members, and party rooms or halls restricted to
adults or to patrons invited to attend, whether or not an admission
charge is levied. This section shall not apply to:
(a) Any child under 10 years of age; or
(b) Any individual exposing a breast in the process of
breastfeeding an infant under two years of age; or
(c) The exercise of free speech or free expression in the form of
artistic and theatrical performances. It is the intention of the
Borough that this section be construed, enforced, and
interpreted in such a manner will cause the least possible
infringement of the constitutional rights of free speech free
expression, due process, equal protection, or other
fundamental rights.
B. It shall be a violation of this chapter for a person who, knowingly or
intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appears in a seminude
condition unless the person is an employee who while seminude shall be
at least 10 feet from any patron or customer and on a state at least two
feet from the floor.
C. It shall be a violation of this chapter for an employee, while seminude in
a sexually oriented business to solicit any pay or gratuity from any
§ 365-13 INDIANA CODE § 365-14
1:214
§ 365-15. Children in sexually oriented business prohibited.
A person commits a violation of this chapter if the person knowingly allows
a person under the age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually oriented
business.
§ 365-16. Hours of operation.
No sexually oriented business shall be open for business before 10:00 a.m.,
Monday through Saturday, or after 10:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday.
Sexually oriented businesses shall be closed at all times Sundays and legal
holidays.
§ 365-17. Exemptions.
§ 365-18. Violations and penalties.
patron or customer or for any patron or customer to pay or give any
gratuity to any employee, while said employee is seminude in a sexually
oriented business.
A. It is a defense to prosecution under § 365-14 that a person appearing in
a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
(1) By a proprietary school licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, a college, junior college, or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation; and
(2) By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a
college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation; and
(3) In a structure:
(a) Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure
advertising that indicates a nude person is available for
viewing; and
(b) In order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least
three days in advance of the class; and
(c) No more than one nude model is on the premises at any time.
A. Any person, firm, or corporation who violates or permits the violation of
the provisions of this chapter or the rules and regulations approved and
hereinafter adopted shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $300
and/or imprisonment for not more than 90 days for each violation.
Whenever such person shall have been officially notified by the Borough
that person is committing a violation of this chapter or the rules and
regulations approved and hereinafter adopted, each day that he shall
continue such violation after such notification shall constitute a
§ 365-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-18
1:215
Chapter 388
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk dealers — See Ch. 249.
separate violation punishable by a like fine. Any person who violates or
permits the violation of this chapter shall pay, in addition to the fine
set forth above, all court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred
by the Borough in connection with any civil enforcement proceedings
brought to enforce this chapter.77
B. The Borough may commence civil enforcement proceedings to assess
fines for violations of this chapter. In addition to such civil enforcement
proceedings, the Borough may commence, at any time, appropriate
actions in equity or otherwise to prevent, restrain, correct, enjoin, or
abate violations of this chapter.
77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 365-18 INDIANA CODE § 365-18
1:216
ARTICLE I
Recycling
[Adopted 8-7-1990 by Ord. No. 1491 (Ch. X, Part 3, Secs. 32 to 38,
of the 1971 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 388-1. Definitions.
The purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ALUMINUM — As used herein includes:
CARTWAY — That portion of a street which is improved by surfacing with
permanent or semi-permanent material and is intended for carts or
vehicular traffic.[Added 4-17-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-06]
COMMERCIAL, MUNICIPAL OR INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT —
Any nonresidential establishment that is intended for human occupancy,
whether temporary or permanent.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Includes cardboard of the type used to make
cardboard boxes, cartons and similar corrugated and draft paper material.
DORMITORY PROPERTY — Any residential property within the Borough of
Indiana that contains thereon one or more dormitory structures.
DORMITORY STRUCTURE — A structure or portion of a structure that is
designed so as to provide sleeping quarters in one integral unit, with toilet
facilities and/or kitchen facilities being shared by other occupants living in
the structure.
GLASS — Includes glass bottles and jars and all products made from silica
or sand, soda ash and limestone; the product being transparent or
translucent (green or brown/amber in color) and being used for packaging
or bottling of various matters excluding, however, blue or flat glass
commonly known as window and lead-based glass such as crystal or TV
tubes.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — Includes white and/or off-white stationery,
photocopy and computer paper.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree trimmings,
and similar material, but not including grass clippings.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, liquid or contained
gaseous material resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities
and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste
A. Aluminum cans used for soda, beer or other beverages;
Aluminum containers including foil, wrappers and containers for
prepared food;
B.
C. Disposable aluminum items including screen and lawn chairs.
§ 388-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 388-1
1:217
in the Solid Waste Management Act78 from a municipal, commercial or
institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant or
air pollution control facility. The term does not include source-separated
recyclable materials.
MULTIFAMILY RENTAL HOUSING PROPERTY — Residential property
within the Borough of Indiana containing thereon dormitory and/or
apartment structures occupied predominantly on a tenant basis, but not
including single-family and/or mobile home units.
NEWSPRINT — Includes recyclable paper of the type commonly known as
paper, but excluding the reference periodicals, magazines and chemically
coated paper.[Amended 4-17-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-06]
PLASTICS — Includes nonmetallic recyclable containers or items which
are synthetically produced from organic compounds by polymerization and
comprised primarily of one of the following basic materials: polyethylene
etrephthalate (PET); high-density polyethylene (HDPE); vinyl/
polyvinylchloride (V); low-density polyethylene (LDPE); polypropylene (PP);
polystyrene (PS); or other. Plastics required to be recycled will be identified
by the commonly used name for the container or item such as plastic milk
bottle, plastic soda bottle or plastic trash bags.[Amended 4-17-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-06]
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Used or abandoned waste material that can
be reclaimed and converted into new materials and objects and is capable of
being used again, thus reducing the consumption of raw materials, energy,
air and water pollution.[Added 4-17-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-06]
REFUSE — Items that are discarded or thrown away as worthless or
useless; trash, garbage or rubbish.[Added 4-17-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-06]
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any property within the Borough of Indiana
that contains thereon one or more residential unit, and/or one or more
dormitory structure.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT — A structure or portion of a structure that is designed
so as to provide sleeping quarters, toilet facilities and kitchen facilities
in one integral unit, to include single-family units, multifamily units, and
mobile home units.
SOLID WASTE — Any waste, including but not limited to municipal, residual
or hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
materials.
STEEL AND BIMETALLIC CANS — Recyclable food and beverage
containers fabricated primarily of steel and aluminum, said container which
when full shall not exceed 50 pounds.
USED BEVERAGE CANS — Includes recyclable cans fabricated primarily of
aluminum or a combination of steel and aluminum which are used for soda,
beer or other beverages.
78.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 388-1 INDIANA CODE § 388-2
1:218
§ 388-2. Mandatory recycling.
A. The commencement of mandatory curbside recycling shall begin on
September 26, 1990, and it shall be mandatory for all persons who are
owners, lessees and occupants of residential property to separate
aluminum, clear or colored glass, steel and bimetallic cans, and #1
(PET a.k.a. PETE) and #2 (HDPE) plastic bottles from all other solid
waste produced by such residence for collection and ultimate recycling
of said materials. [Amended 4-17-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-06]
B. After September 26, 1990, it shall be mandatory for all persons who are
owners, lessees and occupants of residential property to separate leaf
waste from all other solid waste produced by such residence.
C. An owner, landlord or agents of owners or landlords of multifamily
rental housing properties with four or more units must comply with the
responsibilities under this article by establishing a collection system for
recyclable materials at each property. The collection system must
utilize suitable containers for collecting and sorting materials, provide
easily accessible locations at the rear of the property for the containers,
and furnish written instructions to the occupants concerning the
permitted use and availability of the collection system. Owners,
landlords and agents of owners or landlords who comply with this
article shall be liable for the noncompliance of occupants of their
building. [Amended 4-17-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-06]
D. After September 26, 1990, it shall be mandatory for all owners, lessees
and occupants of commercial, municipal or institutional establishments
to separate leaf waste, aluminum, corrugated paper, office paper, clear
or colored glass, and #1 (PET a.k.a. PETE) and #2 (HDPE) plastic
bottles from all other solid waste produced by such nonresidential
establishments for collection and the ultimate recycling of such
material. This requirement also applies to community activities such as
festivals and other organized events. [Amended 4-17-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-06]
E. A commercial, municipal or institutional establishment may be
exempted from participating in the Borough-sponsored recycling
program if the establishment: has provided on its own for recycling of
the required materials identified in Subsection D; and has provided to
Indiana Borough on or before December 31 of each year documentation
of the weight of the various materials recycled during the prior 12
months. This does not exempt those establishments from recycling.
F. In the future, the Borough Council of the Borough of Indiana reserves
the right to add or delete any one or more of the following recyclable
materials to the list of items required to be recycled, as identified in
Subsections A and D, above: clear glass; colored glass (green or brown/
amber); aluminum; steel and bimetallic cans; newsprint; corrugated
paper; high-grade office paper; plastics; leaves; grass clippings; and
any other specified recyclable material or item.
§ 388-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 388-2
1:219
§ 388-3. Rules and regulations.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Indiana shall establish and
promulgate reasonable rules and regulations as to: the manner, separation,
and placement of the recycled materials at the curb or similar locations;
days and times for collection; sorting requirements; transportation
methods; sale and marketing of recyclable materials; and the assessment of
properties and the owners thereof for the cost of administering his recycling
program. The rules and regulations provided for hereunder shall be adopted
by resolution of the Borough Council of the Borough of Indiana prior to the
implementation of the recycling program. Copies of such resolution shall
be maintained at the Borough Building and be available for inspection or
purchase.
§ 388-4. Collection by authorized persons.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Indiana may elect to enter into
agreements with any other person, partnership, corporation, municipality
or municipal authority for the collection, transportation, processing or
marketing of recyclable materials.
§ 388-5. Collection by unauthorized persons prohibited.
G. Once identified and made known to the public (as provided below), it
shall be mandatory for all persons, partnerships or corporations, who
are owners, lessees and occupants of residential establishments, to
separate or cease separating one or more of the above-referenced
recyclable materials from all other solid waste produced by such
residential property or nonresidential establishments. In such
instances, however, the Township shall notify all persons occupying
residential property, and commercial, municipal or institutional
establishments at least 90 days prior to implementing any new
requirements imposed by this article or any amendments hereto. Such
notice shall be in the form of radio and newspaper advertisements, and
brochures distributed during regularly scheduled collection activities.
A. From time of placement of recyclables at the curb or similar location for
collection as designated in this article or rules and regulations
associated with this article, items shall be and become the property of
the Borough of Indiana or its authorized agent. It shall be a violation of
this article for any person unauthorized by the Borough to collect or
pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any such items. Any and
each such collection in violation hereof from one or more locations shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter
provided.
B. It shall be unlawful for a person to collect, remove or dispose of solid
waste which contains recyclable materials designated for separation
combined with other forms of solid waste.
§ 388-2 INDIANA CODE § 388-6
1:220
§ 388-6. Ownership of recyclables prior to placement for collection.
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to impair that ownership of
separated recyclable materials by the person who generated them unless
and until such materials are placed at curbside or similar location for
collection by the Borough or its authorized agent. Anything herein to the
contrary notwithstanding, any person, partnership or corporation who is
owner, lessee or occupant of residential property or commercial, municipal
or institutional establishments may donate or sell said recyclable material
to any person, partnership or corporation, whether or not operating for
profit.
§ 388-7. Placement of materials for collection. [Added 1-2-1996 by
Ord. No. 1673; 4-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-02; amended 4-17-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-06]
§ 388-8. Violations and penalties.
A. Recycling containers shall be placed at the curbside or next to the
cartway no sooner than 6:00 p.m. on the day prior to collection, and
empty recycling containers shall be relocated to the premises from the
curbside or cartway by 11:00 p.m. on the same day of collection.
Containers shall not be kept at the curbside or next to the cartway
between scheduled collections, and they shall be stored on the
premises at an approved location at the rear of the property so as to be
unseen from the public streets or roads or from the front yards of
immediate neighboring property.
B. It shall not be a violation of this section for a person with physical
disabilities to place recycling at the point of collection before 6:00 p.m.
the day prior to collection if the licensed hauler is picking up the
recycling from that point so long as that point is not located on a
sidewalk.
A. Any person who shall violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the
provisions of this article shall be guilty of a violation of this article and
shall be subject to an administrative fine that shall be a minimum of $25
and a maximum of $300 per day for any violations that are not remedied
within the time prescribed in the notice of violation. Each day that a
violation continues will be deemed a separate offense and shall be
subject to administrative fines and late fees. [Amended 4-6-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-02; 4-17-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-06]
B. The Borough of Indiana shall have the right to file a lien or a claim
against the property of the person violating this article to recover all
recycling fees, charges and expenses incident thereto together with an
attorney's collection fee in the amount of 5% together with the cost of
the proceeding to collect the fees, charges and expenses.
C. The Borough of Indiana can recover all penalties, damages, costs,
reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other
§ 388-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 388-8
1:221
expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person
violating this article or the rules and regulations enacted hereunder.
§ 388-8 INDIANA CODE § 388-8
1:222
ARTICLE II
Storage, Collection and Transportation of Solid Waste
[Adopted 5-5-1992 by Ord. No. 1541]
§ 388-9. Short title.
This article shall be known and referred to as the "Municipal Solid Waste
Ordinance.
§ 388-10. Definitions.
A. The following words and phrases as used in this article shall have the
meaning ascribed to them herein, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
ACT 97 — The Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act of 1980 (P.L.
380, No. 97, July 7, 1980).79
ACT 101 — The Pennsylvania Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling, and
Waste Reduction Act of 1988 (SB 528, Act 1988-101, July 28, 1988).80
AUTHORITY — The Indiana County Solid Waste Authority.
CARTWAY — That portion of a street which is improved by surfacing
with permanent or semi-permanent material and is intended for carts
or vehicular traffic.[Added 4-17-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-0681]
COLLECTOR or WASTE HAULER — Any person, firm, partnership,
corporation, or public agency engaged in the collection and/or
transportation of municipal waste.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including, but not
limited to, stores, markets, offices, restaurants, shopping centers, and
theaters.
COUNTY — The Indiana County Board of Commissioners or the County
of Indiana.
COUNTY-LICENSED COLLECTOR OR WASTE HAULER — Any
municipal waste collector or hauler possessing a valid license issued by
the county pursuant to this article.
DEPARTMENT or DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
DISPOSAL — The deposition, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or
placing of solid waste into or on the land or water in a manner that
the solid waste enters the environment, is emitted into the air or is
discharged to the waters of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
79.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
80.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
81.Editor's Note: This ordinance also changed the title of this article from "Storage,
Collection and Transportation" to "Storage, Collection and Transportation of Solid Waste."
§ 388-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 388-10
1:223
DOMESTIC WASTE or HOUSEHOLD WASTE — Solid waste, comprised
of garbage and rubbish, which normally originates in the residential
private household or apartment house.
GARBAGE — Any solid waste derived from animal grain, fruit, or
vegetable matter that is capable of being decomposed by
microorganisms with sufficient rapidity to cause such nuisances or
odors, gases, or vectors.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
manufacturing or production activities, including, but not limited to,
factories, foundries, mills, processing plants, refineries, mines, and
slaughterhouses.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment or facility
engaged in services, including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing
homes, schools, and universities.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery, and tree
trimmings, and similar material, but not including grass clippings.
LICENSED COLLECTOR or LICENSED WASTE HAULER — Any
municipal waste collector or hauler possessing a current, valid county
license issued by the Indiana County Solid Waste Authority pursuant to
County Ordinance No. 111391.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or
office waste and other material including solid, liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous material resulting from the operation of residential
municipal, commercial or institutional establishments and from
community activities; and any sludge not meeting the definition of
residual or hazardous waste under Act 97 from any municipal
commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant, or air
pollution control facility. The term does not include any sourceseparated
recyclable materials or material approved by the PADEP for
beneficial use.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Indiana, Indiana County,
Pennsylvania.
PERSON — Any individual partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, municipality,
state institution or agency, or any other legal entity recognized by law
as the subject of rights and duties. In any provision of this article
prescribing a fine, penalty, imprisonment, or any combination of the
foregoing, the term "person" shall include the officers and directors of
any corporation or other legal entity having officers and directors.
REFUSE — Items that are discarded or thrown away as worthless or
useless; trash, garbage or rubbish.[Added 4-17-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-06]
RUBBISH — All nonputrescible municipal waste except garbage and
other decomposable matter. This category includes but is not limited to
§ 388-10 INDIANA CODE § 388-10
1:224
§ 388-11. Prohibited activities.
ashes, bedding, cardboard, cans, crockery, glass, paper, wood and yard
cleanings.
SALVAGING — The controlled removal of recycling of material from a
solid waste processing or disposal facility.
SCAVENGING — The unauthorized and uncontrolled removal of any
material stored or placed at a point for subsequent collection or from a
solid waste processing or disposal facility.
SOLID WASTE — Names any waste, including, but not limited to,
municipal, residual or hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid,
semisolid or contained gaseous material.
STORAGE — The containment of any waste on a temporary basis in
such a manner as not to constitute disposal of such waste. It shall be
presumed that the containment of any waste in excess of one year shall
constitute disposal. This presumption can be overcome by clear and
convincing evidence to the contrary.
TRANSPORTATION — The off-site removal of any municipal waste at
any time after generation.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate or permit to
accumulate upon any public or private property within the municipality,
garbage, rubbish, bulky waste, or other municipal or residual waste, or
to process and/or dispose of any solid waste, including leaf waste,
except in accordance with Act 97 and Act 101, and all department rules
and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect, haul, transport or remove
any solid waste from public or private property within the municipality
without a current, valid license to do so issued by the Indiana County
Solid Waste Authority and a written agreement with Indiana Borough,
except for an individual transporting municipal waste generated on
their own private residence or property to a county-designated
processing or disposal facility.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge any materials from any
solid waste that is stored or deposited for collection within the
municipality without prior written approval from the municipality.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to salvage or reclaim any solid
wastes within the municipality except at an approved and permitted
resource recovery facility or municipal waste management facility
under any applicable department rules and regulations adopted
pursuant to Act 97 and Act 101.
§ 388-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 388-12
1:225
§ 388-12. Storage of solid waste.
§ 388-13. Collection.
§ 388-14. Licensing requirements.
No person shall collect, remove, haul, or transport any solid waste upon
or through any streets or alleys of the Municipality without first obtaining
a license from the Indiana County Solid Waste Authority pursuant to the
requirements of County Ordinance No. 111391.
§ 388-15. Placement of garbage for collection. [Added 1-2-1996 by
Ord. No. 1674; 4-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-02; amended 4-17-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-06]
A. Storage of all solid waste shall be in approved, leakproof containers
provided with close-fitting covers which prevent the attraction,
harborage or breeding of insects or rodents, which are or may become
harmful to public health, and which prevent the creation of safety
hazards, odors, unsightliness or public nuisances and shall comply with
the minimum standards for the storage of municipal waste as set forth
in the department's regulations. [Amended 4-17-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-06]
B. Any person producing solid waste shall provide a sufficient number of
containers to store all waste materials generated during periods
between regularly scheduled collections, and shall place and store all
waste materials therein.
A. All households and homeowners shall utilize the services of a licensed
hauler having a written agreement with Indiana Borough for disposal of
their domestic waste or household waste, unless they can demonstrate
that the waste is properly disposed in a manner consistent with this
article and applicable department rules and regulations.
B. All licensed waste haulers shall comply with the minimum standards for
collection and transportation of municipal waste set forth in the
department's regulations.
C. All municipal waste collected within the municipality shall only be
conveyed or transported to a transfer station, processing facility, and/or
disposal site designated by the Indiana County Solid Waste Authority
pursuant to the approved Municipal Waste Management Plan for
Indiana County.
A. Solid waste containers shall be placed at the curbside or next to the
cartway no sooner than 6:00 p.m. on the day prior to the day of
collection, and empty refuse containers shall be relocated to the
premises from the curbside or cartway by 11:00 p.m. on the same day of
collection. Containers shall not be kept at the curbside or next to the
cartway between scheduled collections, and they shall be stored on the
§ 388-12 INDIANA CODE § 388-15
1:226
§ 388-16. Injunction powers.
The municipality may petition the Court of Common Pleas for an injunction,
either mandatory or prohibitive, to enforce any of the provisions of this
article.
§ 388-17. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-6-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-02; 4-17-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-06]
Any person who shall violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the
provisions of this article shall be guilty of a violation of this article and
shall be subject to an administrative fine that shall be a minimum of $25
and a maximum of $300 per day for any violations that are not remedied
within the time prescribed in the notice of violation. Each day that a
violation continues will be deemed a separate offense and shall be subject
to administrative fines and late fees.
premises at the rear of the property so as to be unseen from the public
streets or roads or from the front yards of immediate neighboring
property.
B. It shall not be a violation of this article for a person with physical
disabilities to place solid waste at the point of collection before 6:00
p.m. the day prior to collection if the licensed hauler is picking up the
garbage from that point so long as that point is not located on a
sidewalk.
§ 388-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 388-17
1:227
Chapter 395
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 170. Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
405.
§ 388-17 INDIANA CODE § 388-17
1:228
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 395-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Indiana
Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 395-2. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the municipality finds that:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases runoff volumes,
flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation,
overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers, greatly
increases the cost of public facilities to carry and control stormwater,
undermines floodplain management and flood control efforts in
downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge, threatens
public health and safety, and increases nonpoint source pollution of
water resources.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management (SWM),
including reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated runoff, is fundamental to the public health, safety, and
welfare and the protection of people of the commonwealth, their
resources, and the environment.
C. Stormwater is an important water resource that provides groundwater
recharge for water supplies and supports the base flow of streams.
D. Green infrastructure and LID development.
(1) The use of green infrastructure and low-impact development (LID)
are intended to address the root cause of water quality impairment
by using systems and practices which use or mimic natural
processes to:
(a) Infiltrate and recharge;
(b) Evapotranspire; and/or
(c) Harvest and use precipitation near where it falls to earth.
(2) Green infrastructure practices and LID contribute to the
restoration or maintenance of predevelopment hydrology.
E. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) program.
§ 395-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-3
1:229
§ 395-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare within
the municipality and its watershed by minimizing the harms and maximizing
the benefits described in § 395-2 of this chapter, through provisions
designed to:
§ 395-4. Statutory authority.
The municipality is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
runoff by the authority of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,82 as amended, and/or the Act of
October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. § 680.1, et seq., as amended, the
Stormwater Management Act.
§ 395-5. Applicability.
All regulated activities and all activities that may affect stormwater runoff,
including land development and earth disturbance activity, are subject to
regulation by this chapter.
§ 395-6. Repealer.
Any other ordinance provision(s) or regulation of the municipality
inconsistent with any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed to
the extent of the inconsistency only.
A. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim, and
restore the existing and designated uses of the waters of this
commonwealth.
B. Preserve natural drainage systems.
C. Manage stormwater runoff close to the source, reduce runoff volumes,
and mimic predevelopment hydrology.
D. Provide procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
E. Maintain groundwater recharge to prevent degradation of surface and
groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water resources.
F. Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
G. Provide proper operation and maintenance of all stormwater best
management practices (BMPs) that are implemented within the
municipality.
H. Provide standards to meet NPDES permit requirements.
82.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 395-3 INDIANA CODE § 395-7
1:230
§ 395-7. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter, or any subsection thereof, is found to be
illegal or invalid, such illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of
the remaining provisions of this chapter, or any subsections thereunder. It
is hereby declared as the intent of the Borough that this chapter would not
have been enacted if any per se illegal or invalid provisions were included
herein. If any such provision would be found to exist, such invalid provision
would be stricken.
§ 395-8. Compatibility with other requirements.
Approvals issued and actions taken under this chapter do not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for
activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation or ordinance.
§ 395-9. Erroneous permit.
Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading
or erroneous information provided by an applicant is void without the
necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use
established pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful. No
action may be taken by a board, agency or employee of the municipality
purporting to validate such a violation.
§ 395-10. Waivers.
A. If the municipality determines that any requirement under this chapter
cannot be achieved for a particular regulated activity, the municipality
may, after an evaluation of alternatives, approve measures other than
those in this chapter, subject to § 395-10B and C.
B. Waivers or modifications of the requirements of this chapter may be
approved by the municipality if enforcement will exact undue hardship
because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question,
provided that the modifications will not be contrary to the public
interest and that the purpose of the chapter is preserved. Cost or
financial burden shall not be considered a hardship. Modification may
be considered if an alternative standard or approach will provide equal
or better achievement of the purpose of the chapter. A request for
modifications shall be in writing and accompany the stormwater
management site plan submission. The request shall provide the facts
on which the request is based, the provision(s) of the chapter involved
and the proposed modification.
C. No waiver or modification of any regulated stormwater activity
involving earth disturbance greater than or equal to one acre may be
granted by the municipality unless that action is approved in advance
by the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) or the delegated
county conservation district.
§ 395-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-10
1:231

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 395-11. Word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
§ 395-12. Definitions.
These definitions do not necessarily reflect the definitions contained in
pertinent regulations or statutes, and are intended for this chapter only.
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land through
the combined action of human activities and the natural processes, at a rate
greater than would occur because of the natural process alone.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities associated with agriculture such as
agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal heavy use areas.
This includes the work of producing crops including tillage, land clearing,
plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting crops or pasturing and
raising of livestock and installation of conservation measures. Construction
of new buildings or impervious area is not considered an agricultural
activity.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer, or other person who has filed an
application to the municipality for approval to engage in any regulated
activity at a project site in the municipality.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Activities, facilities, designs,
measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from
regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote
groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes of this chapter.
Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one of two broad categories
or measures: "structural" or "nonstructural." In this chapter, nonstructural
BMPs or measures refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices
that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff,
whereas structural BMPs or measures are those that consist of a physical
device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff.
Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices
and devices, from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands,
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
§ 395-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-12
1:233
to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter
strips, low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving,
grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins,
and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Indiana County Conservation District.
A conservation district, as defined in Section 3(c) of the Conservation
District Law [3 P. S. § 851(c)], that has the authority under a delegation
agreement executed with DEP to administer and enforce all or a portion of
the regulations promulgated under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours) used in the design and
evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see "return period."
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
released into the waters of the commonwealth at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPER — A person that seeks to undertake any regulated earth
disturbance activities at a project site in the municipality.
DEVELOPMENT — See "earth disturbance activity." The term includes
redevelopment.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) — See "project site."
DISTURBED AREA — An unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance
activity is occurring or has occurred.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human activity
which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to: clearing
and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road maintenance;
building construction; and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of
soil, rock, or earth materials.
EROSION — The natural process by which the surface of the land is worn
away by water, the wind, or chemical action.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan for a project site
which identifies BMPs to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
EXISTING CONDITION — The dominant land cover during the five-year
period immediately preceding a proposed regulated activity.
FEMA — Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any
natural source or delineated by applicable FEMA maps and studies as being
a special flood hazard area. Also includes areas that comprise Group 13
soils, as listed in Appendix A of the Pennsylvania DEP Technical Manual for
Sewage Enforcement Officers (as amended or replaced from time to time by
DEP).
§ 395-12 INDIANA CODE § 395-12
1:234
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and discharge
the 100-year flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary of the floodway
is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies provided by FEMA. In
an area where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the boundary of the
100-year floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that the
floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet from the top of the bank of the
stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and activities
necessary for the management of forestland. These include conducting
a timber inventory, preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural
treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and construction, timber
harvesting, site preparation, and reforestation.
GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE — Systems and practices that use or mimic
natural processes to infiltrate, evapotranspire, or reuse stormwater on the
site where it is generated.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Infiltration rates of soils vary widely
and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface intake rates.
Soils are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C, and D) according to their
minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare soil after prolonged
wetting. The NRCS defines the four groups and provides a list of most of the
soils in the United States and their group classification. The soils in the area
of the development site may be identified from a soil survey report that can
be obtained from local NRCS offices or conservation district offices. Soils
become less pervious as the HSG varies from A to D (NRCS83).
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — A surface that prevents
the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces (or areas)
shall include, but not be limited to: roofs; additional indoor living spaces,
patios, garages, storage sheds and similar structures; and any new streets
or sidewalks. Decks, parking areas, and driveway areas are not counted as
impervious areas if they do not prevent infiltration.
KARST — A type of topography or landscape characterized by surface
depressions, sinkholes, rock pinnacles/uneven bedrock surface,
underground drainage, and caves. Karst is formed on carbonate rocks, such
as limestone or dolomite.
LAND DEVELOPMENT (DEVELOPMENT) — Inclusive of any or all of the
following meanings:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
(1) A group of two or more buildings.
A.
83.Editor's Note: See § 395-40A and B.
§ 395-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-12
1:235
LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) — Site design approaches and smallscale
stormwater management practices that promote the use of natural
systems for infiltration, evapotranspiration, and reuse of rainwater. LID can
be applied to new development, urban retrofits, and revitalization projects.
LID utilizes design techniques that infiltrate, filter, evaporate, and store
runoff close to its source. Rather than rely on costly large-scale conveyance
and treatment systems, LID addresses stormwater through a variety of
small, cost-effective landscape features located onsite.
MUNICIPALITY — Indiana Borough, Indiana County, Pennsylvania.
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal
government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water Act,
which is delegated to DEP in Pennsylvania.
NRCS — USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously SCS).
OUTFALL — "Point source" as described in 40 CFR 122.2 at the point where
the municipality's storm sewer system discharges to surface waters of the
commonwealth.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, or a governmental unit, public utility or any other legal entity
whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
PERVIOUS AREA — Any area not defined as impervious.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state
regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92a2.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated activities in
the municipality are planned, conducted, or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed by the Pennsylvania
Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to perform the work
required by this chapter.
REDEVELOPMENT — Earth disturbance activities on land which has
previously been disturbed or developed.
The division or allocation of land or space between or among two
or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for
the purpose of, streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups, or other features.
(2)
B. Any subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.84
C.
84.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 395-12 INDIANA CODE § 395-12
1:236
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner that
may affect stormwater runoff.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving earth
disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92,85 25 Pa.
Code Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law. 86
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff that
is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of this
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a storm
event of a given magnitude can be expected to occur one time. For example,
the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected to occur on
average once every 25 years; or stated in another way, the probability of a
twenty-five-year storm occurring in any one year is 0.04 (i.e., a 4% chance).
RIPARIAN BUFFER — A permanent area of trees and shrubs located
adjacent to streams, lakes, ponds and wetlands.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the existing
road cross section, such as grading and repairing existing unpaved road
surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing drainage ditches and
other similar activities.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by surface water as a
product of erosion.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, human-made channels or storm
drains) primarily used for collection and conveying stormwater runoff.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory requirements
to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Title 25 of the
Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.87
Each stream segment in Pennsylvania has a designated use, such as
"cold water fishery" or "potable water supply," which are listed in
Chapter 93.88 These uses must be protected and maintained, under
state regulations.
A.
"Existing uses" are those attained as of November 1975, regardless of
whether they have been designated in Chapter 93.89 Regulated earth
B.
85.Editor's Note: Chapter 92 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code was reserved 10-8-2010,
effective 10-9-2010. It was replaced by Chapter 92a, National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) Permitting, Monitoring and Compliance.
86.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
87.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
88.Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93.
89.Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93.
§ 395-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-12
1:237
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting
from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or
human-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys,
stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater
management facilities include, but are not limited to: detention and
retention basins; open channels; storm sewers; pipes; and infiltration
facilities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by the
developer or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff will be
managed at the development site in accordance with this chapter.
"Stormwater management site plan" will be designated as "SWM site plan"
throughout this chapter.
SUBDIVISION — As defined in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247.90
SURFACE WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers,
streams, creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm
sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies
or channels of conveyance of surface water, or parts thereof, whether
natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
USDA — United States Department of Agriculture.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water, such as
a stream or creek, having defined bed and banks, whether natural or
artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams,
creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels
of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether
natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
disturbance activities must be designed to protect and maintain
existing uses and maintain the level of water quality necessary to
protect those uses in all streams and to protect and maintain water
quality in special protection streams.
Water quality involves the chemical, biological and physical
characteristics of surface water bodies. After regulated earth
disturbance activities are complete, these characteristics can be
impacted by the addition of pollutants such as sediment, and changes
in habitat through increased flow volumes and/or rates as a result
of changes in land surface area from those activities. Therefore,
permanent discharge to surface waters must be managed to protect
the stream bank, streambed and structural integrity of the waterway, to
prevent these impacts.
C.
90.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 395-12 INDIANA CODE § 395-12
1:238
WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse, or other
surface water of this commonwealth.
WETLAND — Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
§ 395-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-12
1:239

ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management Standards
§ 395-13. General requirements.
A. For all regulated activities, unless preparation of a SWM site plan is
specifically exempted in § 395-14:
(1) Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required.
(2) No regulated activities shall commence until the municipality
issues written approval of a SWM site plan, which demonstrates
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
B. SWM site plans approved by the municipality, in accordance with
§ 395-25, shall be on site throughout the duration of the regulated
activity.
C. The municipality may, after consultation with DEP, approve measures
for meeting the state water quality requirements other than those in
this chapter, provided that they meet the minimum requirements of,
and do not conflict with, state law including, but not limited to, the
Clean Streams Law.91
D. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g.,
during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this
chapter and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania
Code and the Clean Streams Law,92 Various BMPs and their design
standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual (E&S Manual93), No. 363-2134-008, as amended and
updated. Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth
disturbance activities shall be addressed as required.
E. Impervious areas:
(1) The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development even if
development is to take place in stages.
(2) For development taking place in stages, the entire development
plan must be used in determining conformance with this chapter.
(3) For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, the total
impervious area on the parcel is subject to the requirements of this
chapter; except that the volume controls in § 395-15, and the peak
91.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
92.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
93.Editor's Note: See § 395-40C.
§ 395-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-13
1:241
rate controls of § 395-16 do not need to be retrofitted to existing
impervious areas that are not being altered by the proposed
regulated activity.
F. Stormwater flows onto adjacent property shall not be created,
increased, decreased, relocated, or otherwise altered without written
notification to the adjacent property owner(s). Such stormwater flows
shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter.
G. All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:
(1) Protect health, safety, and property.
(2) Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing
measures to:
(a) Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, and wooded
areas.
(b) Maintain or extend riparian buffers.
(c) Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
(d) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of this commonwealth.
(e) Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious
areas, wherever possible.
(3) Incorporate methods described in the Pennsylvania Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual (BMP Manual94).
H. The design of all facilities over karst shall include an evaluation of
measures to minimize adverse effects.
I. Infiltration BMPs should be spread out, made as shallow as practicable,
and located to maximize use of natural on-site infiltration features while
still meeting the other requirements of this chapter.
J. Normally dry, open top, storage facilities should completely drain both
the volume control and rate control capacities over a period of time of
not less than 24 and not more than 72 hours from the end of the design
storm.
K. The design storm values to be used in the analysis of peak rates of
discharge should be obtained from the latest version of the
Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States, National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), National Weather Service,
Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland.
NOAA's Atlas 1495 can be accessed at: http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/
pfds/.
94.Editor's Note: See § 395-40C.
95.Editor's Note: See § 395-40E.
§ 395-13 INDIANA CODE § 395-13
1:242
§ 395-14. Exemptions.
Exemptions from any provisions of this chapter shall not relieve the
applicant from the requirements in § 395-13D through K.
§ 395-15. Volume controls.
The green infrastructure and low-impact development practices provided
in the BMP Manual98 shall be utilized for all regulated activities wherever
possible. Water volume controls shall be implemented using the Design
Storm Method in Subsection A or the Simplified Method in Subsection B
below. For regulated activity areas equal or less than one acre that do not
require hydrologic routing to design the stormwater facilities, this chapter
establishes no preference for either methodology; therefore, the applicant
may select either methodology on the basis of economic considerations, the
intrinsic limitations on applicability of the analytical procedures associated
with each methodology and other factors.
L. For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be designed,
implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes and
requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under Title
25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law, and the Storm
Water Management Act.96
M. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the BMP
Manual.97
A. Regulated activities that result in cumulative earth disturbances of less
than 6,000 square feet are exempt from the requirements.
B. Agricultural activity is exempt from the SWM site plan preparation
requirements of this chapter provided the activities are performed
according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
C. Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the SWM
site plan preparation requirements of this chapter provided the
activities are performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102.
D. The municipality may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this
section at any time for any project that the municipality believes may
pose a threat to public health and safety or the environment.
A. The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual99) is applicable to
any size of regulated activity. This method requires detailed modeling
based on site conditions.
96.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq. and 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., respectively.
97.Editor's Note: See § 395-40C.
98.Editor's Note: See § 395-40C.
99.Editor's Note: See § 395-40C.
§ 395-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-15
1:243
(1) Do not increase the postdevelopment total runoff volume for all
storms equal to or less than the two-year twenty-four-hour-duration
precipitation.
(2) For modeling purposes:
(a) Existing (predevelopment) nonforested pervious areas must be
considered meadow in good condition.
(b) Twenty percent of existing impervious area, when present,
shall be considered meadow in good condition in the model for
existing conditions. If constructing facilities to accommodate
the resulting volume requirement is believed by the developer
to be unfeasible on site, the developer may submit a
modification request along with technical support
documentation for review by the Borough. The Borough may
grant a modification to alternatively construct off-site volume
controls providing that the alternative site is located within the
same subwatershed as the project site and the peak discharge
rates downstream of the project site are not increased above
predevelopment magnitudes.
[1] Design and construction of the off-site controls shall be
subject to review and approval by the Borough. Costs shall
be the responsibility of the developer. Design
documentation shall demonstrate that the proposed
facilities are effective in removing an amount equal to the
project's increase in the two-year storm volume from the
overall runoff where the facility is to be located.
[2] In lieu of construction of off-site controls, the developer
may request, and the Borough may accept, the payment
into a stormwater fund. The cost shall be based upon the
Borough's current fee schedule (adjusted annually) based
upon an established cost per cubic foot of storage.
B. The Simplified Method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual100) provided below is
independent of site conditions and should be used if the Design Storm
Method is not followed. This method is not applicable to regulated
activities greater than one acre or for projects that require design of
stormwater storage facilities. Twenty percent of existing impervious
area, when present, shall be considered meadow in good condition.
Then, for new (additional) impervious surfaces:
(1) Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two inches of
runoff from all new impervious surfaces.
(2) At least the first one inch of runoff from new impervious surfaces
shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow, i.e., it shall not
100. Editor's Note: See § 395-40C.
§ 395-15 INDIANA CODE § 395-15
1:244
§ 395-16. Rate controls.
be released into the surface waters of this commonwealth. Removal
options include reuse, evaporation, transpiration, and infiltration.
(3) Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to
accommodate infiltration of the entire "permanently removed"
(first one inch, minimum) runoff; however, in all cases, at least the
first 0.5 inch of the permanently removed runoff should be
infiltrated.
(4) This method is exempt from the requirements of § 395-16, Rate
controls.
A. For areas not covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167
stormwater management plan: Postdevelopment discharge rates shall
not exceed the predevelopment discharge rates for the one-, two-, five-,
ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and 100-year twenty-four-hour storm events. If
it is shown that the peak rates of discharge indicated by the
postdevelopment analysis are less than or equal to the peak rates of
discharge indicated by the predevelopment analysis for one-, two-, five-,
ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and 100-year, twenty-four-hour storms, then the
requirements of this section have been met. Otherwise, the applicant
shall provide additional controls as necessary to satisfy the peak rate of
discharge requirement.
B. For areas covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167
stormwater management plan: For the one-, two-, five-, ten-, twentyfive-,
fifty-, and 100-year, twenty-four-hour storm events, the
postdevelopment peak discharge rates will follow the applicable
approved release rate maps. For any areas not shown on the release
rate maps, the postdevelopment discharge rates shall not exceed the
predevelopment discharge rates.
C. Calculation methods for development sites: For the purpose of
computing peak flow rates and runoff hydrographs from development
sites, calculations shall be performed using one of the following: USDA
NRCS publications, Technical Release (TR) 55 or 20, HEC1 or Penn
State Runoff Model (PSRM) or Modified Rational Method. Under
special circumstances other computation methods may be used subject
to the approval of the Borough. No times of concentrations less than
five minutes shall be accepted.
D. Routing of hydrographs through detention/retention facilities for the
purpose of designing those facilities shall be accomplished using the
Modified-Puls Method or other recognized reservoir routing method
subject to the approval of the Borough.
E. Design criteria for stormwater management controls.
(1) General criteria.
§ 395-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-16
1:245
(a) Applicants may select runoff control techniques, or a
combination of techniques, which are most suitable to control
stormwater runoff from the development site. All controls shall
be subject to approval of the Borough Engineer. The Borough
Engineer may request specific information on design and/or
operating features of the proposed stormwater controls in
order to determine their suitability and adequacy in terms of
the standards of this section.
(b) The applicant should consider the effect of the proposed
stormwater management techniques on any special soil
conditions or geological hazards which may exist on the
development site. In the event such conditions are identified on
the site, the Borough Engineer may require in-depth studies by
a competent geotechnical engineer.
(c) Not all stormwater control methods may be advisable or
allowable at a particular development site. In developing a
stormwater management plan for a particular site, stormwater
controls shall be selected according to the following order of
preference:
[1] Infiltration of runoff on site.
[2] Flow attenuation by use of open vegetated swales and
natural depressions.
[3] Stormwater detention/retention structures.
(d) Infiltration practices shall be used to the extent practicable to
reduce volume increases and promote groundwater recharge.
A combination of successive practices may be used to achieve
the applicable minimum control requirements. Justification
shall be provided by the applicant for rejecting each of the
preferred practices based on actual site conditions.
(e) Open detention/retention facilities shall be permitted within
residential areas. However, ponding depths, slope rates,
structure types, fencing, etc., shall be considered by the
Borough prior to approval.
(2) Criteria for infiltration systems.
(a) Infiltration systems shall be sized and designed based on local
soil and groundwater conditions. Design rates shall be justified
by the designer, including field tests if required.
(b) Infiltration systems greater than three feet deep shall be
located at least 10 feet from basement walls.
(c) Infiltration systems may not be approved for handling runoff
from commercial or industrial working areas. Drainage areas
§ 395-16 INDIANA CODE § 395-16
1:246
shall be suitably protected from the effects of the commercial/
industrial activities.
(d) Infiltration systems may not receive runoff until the entire
drainage area to the system has received final stabilization.
(e) The stormwater infiltration facility design shall provide an
overflow system with measures to provide a nonerosive
velocity of flow along its length and at the outfall.
(3) Criteria for flow attenuation facilities.
(a) If flow attenuation facilities are employed to assist in the
control of peak rates of discharge, their effects must be
quantified using the SCS Technical Release (TR) 55 Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds or other approved method.
The effects of the flow attenuation facilities on travel time
should be reflected in the calculations.
(b) Flow attenuation facilities, such as swales and natural
depressions, should be properly graded to ensure positive
drainage and avoid prolonged ponding of water.
(c) Swales shall be properly stabilized with vegetation or
otherwise lined to prevent erosion. The applicability of swales
shall be in accordance with this section.
(d) Swales shall be designed according to the recommendations
contained in the commonwealth of Pennsylvania Erosion and
Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual, latest edition.
(4) Criteria for stormwater detention facilities.
(a) All detention facilities shall be equipped with outlet structures
to provide discharge control for the seven designated storm
frequencies. Provisions shall also be made to safely pass the
postdevelopment 100-year storm runoff without damaging
(i.e., impairing the continued function of) the facilities. Should
any stormwater management facilities qualify as a dam under
PA DEP Chapter 105, a dam permit shall be obtained from the
DEP. A minimum of one foot of freeboard shall be provided
between the top of the 100-year storm elevation and the top of
the berm.
(b) Shared-storage facilities which provide detention of runoff for
more than one development site within a single subarea are
encouraged wherever feasible and provided such facilities
meet the criteria contained in this section. In addition, runoff
from the development sites involved shall be conveyed to the
facility in a manner that avoids adverse impacts (such as
flooding or erosion) to channels and properties located
§ 395-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-16
1:247
§ 395-17. Drainage design.
between the development site and the shared-storage
facilities.
(c) Where open detention facilities will be utilized, multiple use
facilities, such as wetlands, lakes, ball fields or similar
recreational/open space uses are encouraged wherever
feasible, subject to the approval of the Borough and PA DEP's
Chapter 105 regulations.
(d) Other considerations which should be incorporated into the
design of open detention facilities include:
[1] Inflow and outflow structures shall be designed and
installed to prevent erosion, and bottoms of impoundment
type structures should be protected from soil erosion.
[2] Control and removal of debris both in the storage
structure and in all inlet or outlet devices shall be a design
consideration. Provisions shall be made for trapping
sediment and grit upstream of storage facilities.
[3] Inflow and outflow structures, pumping stations, and other
structures shall be designed and protected to minimize
safety hazards.
[4] The facility shall be located to facilitate maintenance,
considering the frequency and type of equipment that will
be required.
[5] Where an open detention facility is installed, the design
configuration should be based on public health and safety;
the water depth at the perimeter of a storage pond shall be
limited to that which is safe for children. All open
detention facilities shall be surrounded by a secure fence
not less than five feet high. All fences must have at least
one lockable gate, minimum twelve-foot-wide opening, to
facilitate maintenance operations.
[6] Side slopes of storage ponds shall not exceed a ratio of
2.5:1 horizontal to the vertical dimension.
[7] Landscaping which is compatible with the surrounding
area shall be provided for the facility.
[8] Bottoms of detention basins should be graded with a
minimum slope of 1.5% to provide positive surface
drainage. A subdrainage system may be required
depending on the location of the pond bottom relative to
groundwater levels.
§ 395-16 INDIANA CODE § 395-17
1:248
A. Calculation methods for stormwater collection/conveyance facilities:
For the purposes of designing storm sewers, open swales and other
stormwater runoff collection and conveyance facilities, the Rational
Method or other method as approved by the Borough shall applied.
Rainfall intensities for design should be obtained from the appropriate
PennDOT region rainfall chart.
B. Criteria for collection/conveyance facilities:
(1) All stormwater runoff collection or conveyance facilities, whether
storm sewers or other open or closed channels, shall be designed in
accordance with the following basic standards:
(a) All sites shall be graded to provide drainage away from and
around the structure in order to prevent any potential flooding
damage.
(b) Collection/conveyance facilities should not be installed parallel
and close to the top or bottom of a major embankment to avoid
the possibility of failing or causing the embankment to fail.
(c) All collection/conveyance facilities shall be designed to convey
the twenty-five-year storm peak flow rate from the contributing
drainage area and to carry it to the nearest suitable outlet such
as a stormwater control facility, curbed street, storm sewer or
natural watercourse without damage to the drainage structure
or roadway, with runoff from the twenty-five-year design storm
at a minimum one foot of freeboard measured below the lowest
point along the top of the roadway. Roadway crossings located
within designated floodplain areas must be able to convey
runoff from a 100-year design storm while providing a
minimum finished roadway grade 1.0 foot above the 100-year
flood elevation. When it can be shown that, due to topographic
conditions, natural drainageways on the site cannot adequately
provide for drainage, open channels may be constructed
conforming substantially to the line and grade of such natural
drainageways. Work within natural drainageways shall be
subject to approval by PA DEP through the Joint Permit
Application process, or, where appropriate by PA DEP, through
the General Permit process.
(d) Where drainage swales or open channels are used, they shall
be suitably lined to prevent erosion and designed to avoid
excessive velocities. For drainage facilities to be conveyed to
the Borough, grass-lined facilities shall be provided. If grass
lining is not stable at the design velocity(ies), storm sewers
shall be provided.
(e) Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided in order to
permit unimpeded flow along natural watercourses, except as
modified by stormwater management facilities or open
channels consistent with this section.
§ 395-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-17
1:249
(f) Existing points of concentrated drainage that discharge onto
adjacent property shall not be adversely impacted and shall be
subject to any applicable discharge criteria specified in this
section.
(g) Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge shall be subject
to any applicable discharge criteria in the general direction of
existing discharge, whether proposed to be concentrated or
maintained as diffused drainage areas, except as otherwise
provided by this section. If diffused flow is proposed to be
concentrated and discharged onto adjacent property, the
developer must document that easements, satisfactory to the
Borough, have been obtained and that adequate downstream
conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the concentrated
discharge, or otherwise prove that no erosion, sedimentation,
flooding, or other harm will result from the concentrated
discharge.
(h) Where a development site is traversed by watercourses,
drainage easements shall be provided conforming to the line of
such watercourses. The terms of the easements shall prohibit
excavation, the placing of fill or structures, and any alterations
that may adversely affect the flow of stormwater within any
portion of the easement. Also, maintenance, including mowing
of vegetation within the easement shall be required, except as
approved by the appropriate governing authority.
(i) In order to promote overland flow and infiltration/percolation
of runoff where it is advantageous to do so, roof drains must
not be connected to streets, storm sewers, or roadside ditches.
When it is more advantageous to connect directly to streets or
storm sewers, then it shall be permitted on a case-by-case
basis by the Borough.
(2) Wherever storm sewers are proposed to be utilized, they shall
comply with the following criteria:
(a) If constructed within 10 feet of road paving, walks or other
surfaced areas, drains shall have a narrow trench and
maximum compaction of backfill to prevent settlement of the
superimposed surface or development.
(b) Installed after excavating and filling in the area to be traversed
is completed, unless the drain is installed in the original
ground with a minimum of three feet cover and/or adequate
protection during the fill construction.
(c) Designed with cradle when traversing fill areas of
indeterminate stability, anchors when gradient exceeds 20%,
and encasement or special backfill provisions when traversing
under a paved area.
§ 395-17 INDIANA CODE § 395-17
1:250
§ 395-18. Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth
disturbance activities.
(d) Designed to adequately handle the anticipated peak discharge
and be economical to maintain. The minimum pipe size shall be
15 inches in diameter. The capacity shall, at a minimum,
convey a ten-year, five-minute-duration peak discharge
(without surcharging the system) unless the storm sewer is
part of a stormwater facility with a more severe design
frequency in which case, the capacity shall adequately convey
the peak discharge associated with the more severe design
frequency.
(e) Specifications for materials and construction methods for drain
pipe, trenching, bedding and backfilling requirements shall
conform to the requirements of the Borough and/or applicable
PennDOT Specifications, Publication 408, the Standards for
Roadway Construction, Publication 72, and the Borough
details available at the Planning/Zoning Office.
(f) Design criteria, including acceptable pipe types, shall conform
to PennDOT Design Manual Part 2.
(g) Storm inlets and structures shall be designed to be adequate,
safe, unobtrusive and consistent with Borough standards.
Inlets and structures within a Borough right-of-way shall
comply with the PennDOT Standards for Roadway
Construction, Publication 72. Inlets and manholes shall be
sumped at least six inches and shall be easily entered for
cleaning and inspection.
(h) Appropriate grates shall be designed for all catch basins,
stormwater inlets, and other entrance appurtenances. Bicyclesafe
grates shall be provided.
(i) Manholes shall be designed so that the top shall be at finished
grade and sloped to conform to the slope of the finished grade.
Top castings of structures located in roads or parking areas
shall be machined or installed to preclude "rattling."
(j) Where proposed storm sewer connects with an existing storm
sewer system, the applicant shall demonstrate that discharge
rates and volumes are not being increased.
(k) Storm sewer outfalls shall be equipped with energy dissipation
devices to prevent erosion and conform with applicable
requirements of the PA DEP for stream encroachments
(Chapter 105 of PA DEP Rules and Regulations).
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until approved by the municipality or its designee of an
erosion and sediment control plan for construction activities.
§ 395-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-18
1:251
§ 395-19. Permit requirements by other government entities.
The following permit requirements may apply to certain regulated earth
disturbance activities, and must be met prior to the commencement of
regulated earth disturbance activities, as applicable:
B. DEP has regulations that require preparation of a written erosion and
sediment control plan for any earth disturbance activity of 5,000 square
feet or more, under 25 Pa. Code § 102.4(b).
C. In addition, under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92a, a DEP NPDES construction
activities permit is required for regulated earth disturbance activities.
D. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate DEP regional office or County
Conservation District must be provided to the municipality.
E. A copy of erosion and sediment control plan and any required permit, as
required by DEP regulations, shall be available at the project site at all
times.
A. All regulated earth disturbance activities subject to permit
requirements by DEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
B. Work within natural drainageways subject to permit by DEP under 25
Pa. Code Chapter 105.
C. Any stormwater management facility that would be located in or
adjacent to regulated surface waters of the commonwealth, including
wetlands, subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
D. Any stormwater management facility that would be located on a state
highway right-of-way, or require access from a state highway, shall be
subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT).
E. Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must pass
or convey flows from the tributary area and any facility which may
constitute a dam subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter
105.
§ 395-18 INDIANA CODE § 395-19
1:252
ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management (SWM) Site Plan Requirements
§ 395-20. Plan requirements.
The following items shall be included in the SWM site plan:
A. Appropriate sections of the Borough's Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance,101 and other applicable local ordinances, shall
be followed in preparing the SWM site plans.
B. The municipality shall not approve any SWM site plan that is deficient
in meeting the requirements of this chapter. At its sole discretion and in
accordance with this article, when a SWM site plan is found to be
deficient, the municipality may either disapprove the submission and
require a resubmission or, in the case of minor deficiencies, the
municipality may accept submission of modifications.
C. Provisions for permanent access or maintenance easements for all
physical SWM BMPs, such as ponds and infiltration structures, as
necessary to implement the operation and maintenance (O&M) plan
discussed in Subsection E(9) below.
D. The following signature block for the municipality.
(Municipal official or designee), on this date (Signature date), has
reviewed and hereby certifies that the SWM site plan meets all design
standards and criteria of the Municipal Ordinance No. 2017-04."
E. The SWM site plan shall provide the following information:
(1) The overall stormwater management concept for the project.
(2) A determination of site conditions in accordance with the BMP
Manual.102 A detailed site evaluation shall be completed for
projects proposed in areas of carbonate geology or karst
topography, and other environmentally sensitive areas, such as
brownfields.
(3) Stormwater runoff design computations and documentation as
specified in this chapter, or as otherwise necessary to demonstrate
that the maximum practicable measures have been taken to meet
the requirements of this chapter, including the recommendations
and general requirements in § 395-13.
(4) Expected project time schedule.
(5) A soil erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable, as
prepared for and submitted to the approval authority.
101. Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Subdivision and Land Development.
102. Editor's Note: See § 395-40C.
§ 395-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-20
1:253
§ 395-21. Plan submission.
Three copies of the SWM site plan shall be submitted as follows:
§ 395-22. Plan review.
§ 395-23. Modification of plans.
A modification to a submitted SWM site plan that involves a change in SWM
BMPs or techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of SWM
BMPs, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated
on the SWM site plan as determined by the municipality shall require a
resubmission of the modified SWM site plan in accordance with this article.
(6) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water quality,
and peak flows) on surrounding properties and aquatic features
and on any existing stormwater conveyance system that may be
affected by the project.
(7) Plan, profile, and detail drawings of all SWM BMPs, including
drainage structures, pipes, open channels, and swales. Drainage
design shall conform to the criteria herein and the Borough details.
(8) SWM site plan shall show the locations of existing and proposed onlot
wastewater facilities and water supply wells.
(9) The SWM site plan shall include an O&M plan for all existing and
proposed physical stormwater management facilities. This plan
shall address long-term ownership and responsibilities for O&M as
well as schedules and costs for O&M activities.
A. Two copies to the Municipal Engineer (when applicable).
B. One copy to the County Conservation District.
A. SWM site plans shall be reviewed by the municipality for consistency
with the provisions of this chapter.
B. The municipality shall notify the applicant in writing within 45 days
whether the SWM site plan is approved or disapproved. If the SWM site
plan involves a Subdivision and land development plan, the notification
shall occur within the time period allowed by the Municipalities
Planning Code103 (90 days). If a longer notification period is provided by
other statute, regulation, or ordinance, the applicant will be so notified
by the municipality.
C. If the municipality disapproves the SWM site plan, the municipality will
state the reasons for the disapproval in writing. The municipality also
may approve the SWM site plan with conditions and, if so, shall provide
the acceptable conditions for approval in writing.
103. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 395-20 INDIANA CODE § 395-24
1:254
§ 395-24. Resubmission of disapproved SWM site plans.
A disapproved SWM site plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions
addressing the municipality's concerns, to the municipality in accordance
with this article. The applicable review fee must accompany a resubmission
of a disapproved SWM site plan.
§ 395-25. Authorization to construct and term of validity.
The municipality's approval of a SWM site plan authorizes the regulated
activities contained in the SWM site plan for a maximum term of validity
of five years following the date of approval. The municipality may specify a
term of validity shorter than five years in the approval for any specific SWM
site plan. Terms of validity shall commence on the date the municipality
signs the approval for a SWM site plan. If an approved SWM site plan is
not completed according to § 395-26 within the term of validity, then the
municipality may consider the SWM site plan disapproved and may revoke
any and all permits. SWM site plans that are considered disapproved by
the municipality shall be resubmitted in accordance with § 395-24 of this
chapter.
§ 395-26. As-built plans, completion certificate, and final
inspection.
A. The developer shall be responsible for providing three copies of as-built
plans, illustrating all SWM BMPs included in the approved SWM site
plan. The as-built plans and an explanation of any discrepancies with
the construction plans shall be submitted to the municipality.
B. The as-built submission shall include a certification of completion
signed by a qualified professional verifying that all permanent SWM
BMPs have been constructed according to the approved plans and
specifications. The latitude and longitude coordinates for all permanent
SWM BMPs must also be submitted, at the central location of the BMPs.
If any licensed qualified professionals contributed to the construction
plans, then a licensed qualified professional must sign the completion
certificate.
C. After receipt of the completion certification by the municipality, the
municipality may conduct a final inspection.
§ 395-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-26
1:255

ARTICLE V
Operation and Maintenance
§ 395-27. Responsibilities of developers and landowners.
§ 395-28. Operation and maintenance agreements.
A. The municipality shall make the final determination on the continuing
maintenance responsibilities prior to final approval of the SWM site
plan. The municipality may require a dedication of such facilities as part
of the requirements for approval of the SWM site plan. Such a
requirement is not an indication that the municipality will accept the
facilities. The municipality reserves the right to accept or reject the
ownership and operating responsibility for any portion of the
stormwater management controls.
B. Facilities, areas, or structures used as SWM BMPs shall be enumerated
as permanent real estate appurtenances and recorded as deed
restrictions or conservation easements that run with the land.
C. The O&M plan shall be recorded as a restrictive deed covenant that
runs with the land.
D. The municipality may take enforcement actions against an owner for
any failure to satisfy the provisions of this article.
A. Prior to final approval of the SWM site plan, the property owner shall
sign and record an operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement (see
Appendix A104) covering all stormwater control facilities which are to be
privately owned.
(1) The owner, successor and assigns shall maintain all facilities in
accordance with the approved maintenance schedule in the O&M
agreement.
(2) The owner shall convey to the municipality conservation easements
to assure access for periodic inspections by the municipality and
maintenance, as necessary.
(3) The owner shall keep on file with the municipality the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or company
responsible for maintenance activities; in the event of a change,
new information shall be submitted by the owner to the
municipality within 10 working days of the change.
B. The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance (O&M) of the
SWM BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the O&M agreement, the
municipality may perform the services required and charge the owner
appropriate fees. Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the
property.
104. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 395-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-29
1:257
§ 395-29. Performance guarantee.
For SWM site plans that involve subdivision and land development, the
applicant shall provide a financial guarantee to the municipality for the
timely installation and proper construction of all stormwater management
controls as required by the approved SWM site plan and this chapter
in accordance with the provisions of Sections 509, 510, and 511 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.105
105. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10509, 10510 and 10511.
§ 395-29 INDIANA CODE § 395-29
1:258
ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses
§ 395-30. General.
The municipality may include all costs incurred in the review fee charged to
an applicant. The review fee may include, but not be limited to, costs for the
following:
A. Administrative/clerical processing.
B. Review of the SWM site plan.
C. Attendance at meetings.
D. Inspections.
E. Development of O&M agreement.
§ 395-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-30
1:259

ARTICLE VII
Prohibitions
§ 395-31. Prohibited discharges and connections.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water to enter a regulated small MS4 or to enter
the surface waters of this commonwealth is prohibited.
B. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into a regulated
small MS4, or discharges into waters of this commonwealth, which are
not composed entirely of stormwater, except;
(1) As provided in Subsection C below; and
(2) Discharges authorized under a state or federal permit.
C. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution of a regulated small MS4 or to
the waters of this commonwealth:
(1) Discharges or flows from firefighting activities.
(2) Discharges from potable water sources including waterline
flushing and fire hydrant flushing, if such discharges do not contain
detectable concentrations of total residual chlorine (TRC).
(3) Noncontaminated irrigation water, water from lawn maintenance,
landscape drainage and flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(4) Diverted stream flows and springs.
(5) Noncontaminated pumped groundwater and water from foundation
and footing drains and crawl space pumps.
(6) Noncontaminated HVAC condensation and water from geothermal
systems.
(7) Residential (i.e., not commercial) vehicle wash water where
cleaning agents are not utilized.
(8) Noncontaminated hydrostatic test water discharges, if such
discharges do not contain detectable concentrations of TRC.
D. In the event that the municipality or DEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection C significantly contribute pollutants
to a regulated small MS4 or to the waters of this commonwealth, the
municipality or DEP will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the
discharge.
§ 395-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-32
1:261
§ 395-32. Roof drains and sump pumps.
Roof drains, and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration or vegetative
BMPs wherever feasible.
§ 395-33. Alteration of SWM BMPs.
No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any SWM BMPs,
facilities, areas, or structures that were installed as a requirement of this
chapter without the written approval of the municipality.
§ 395-32 INDIANA CODE § 395-33
1:262
ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 395-34. Right of entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, the municipality or its designated
agent may enter at reasonable times upon any property within the
municipality to inspect the condition of the stormwater structures and
facilities in regard to any aspect regulated by this chapter.
§ 395-35. Inspection.
§ 395-36. Enforcement.
§ 395-37. Suspension and revocation.
A. The landowner or the owner's designee shall inspect SWM BMPs,
facilities and/or structures installed under this chapter according to the
following frequencies, at a minimum, to ensure the BMPs, facilities and/
or structures continue to function as intended:
(1) Annually for the first five years.
(2) Once every three years thereafter.
(3) During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year-or-greater
storm.
B. Inspections should be conducted during or immediately following
precipitation events. A written inspection report shall be created to
document each inspection. The inspection report shall contain the date
and time of the inspection, the individual(s) who completed the
inspection, the location of the BMP, facility or structure inspected,
observations on performance, and recommendations for improving
performance, if applicable. Inspection reports shall be submitted to the
municipality within 30 days following completion of the inspection.
A. It shall be unlawful for a person to undertake any regulated activity
except as provided in an approved SWM site plan unless specifically
exempted in § 395-14.
B. It shall be unlawful to violate § 395-33 of this chapter.
C. Inspections regarding compliance with the SWM site plan are a
responsibility of the municipality.
A. Any approval or permit issued by the municipality pursuant to this
chapter may be suspended or revoked for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approved SWM site plan or O&M agreement.
§ 395-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-37
1:263
§ 395-38. Violations and penalties.
§ 395-39. Appeals.
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule, or regulation relating to the regulated activity.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
the regulated activity which constitutes or creates a hazard,
nuisance, pollution, or endangers the life or property of others.
B. A suspended approval may be reinstated by the municipality when:
(1) The municipality has inspected and approved the corrections to the
violations that caused the suspension.
(2) The municipality is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
C. An approval that has been revoked by the municipality cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the
provisions of this chapter.
D. If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health, or
property, at its sole discretion, the municipality may provide a limited
time period for the owner to correct the violation. In these cases, the
municipality will provide the owner, or the owner's designee, with a
written notice of the violation and the time period allowed for the owner
to correct the violation. If the owner does not correct the violation
within the allowed time period, the municipality may revoke or suspend
any, or all, applicable approvals and permits pertaining to any provision
of this chapter.
A. Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
summary offense, and upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $600 for each violation, recoverable with costs. Each day
that the violation continues shall be a separate offense and penalties
shall be cumulative.
B. In addition, the municipality may institute injunctive, mandamus, or any
other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the
enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall
have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the municipality or its designee,
relevant to the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the
municipality within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the municipality, relevant to
the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the County Court of
Common Pleas in the county where the activity has taken place within
30 days of the municipality's decision.
§ 395-37 INDIANA CODE § 395-39
1:264
ARTICLE IX
References
§ 395-40. References.
A. U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Resources Conservation
Service (NRCS). National Engineering Handbook. Part 630: Hydrology,
1969-2001. Originally published as the National Engineering
Handbook, Section 4: Hydrology. Available from the NRCS online at:
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/.
B. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation
Service. 1986. Technical Release 55: Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, 2nd Edition. Washington, D.C.
C. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No.
363-0300-002 (December 2006), as amended and updated.
Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual.
Harrisburg, PA.
D. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No.
363-2134-008 (March 31, 2012), as amended and updated. Erosion and
Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual. Harrisburg, PA.
E. U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, National Weather Service, Hydrometeorological Design
Studies Center. 2004-2006. Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United
States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0, Silver Spring, Maryland.
Internet address: http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
§ 395-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-40
1:265

ARTICLE X
Effective Date
§ 395-41. When effective.
This chapter is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public
peace, health, safety, morals and general welfare of the residents of the
Borough, and shall take effect and be in full force immediately after its
passage, execution and publication.
§ 395-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-41
1:267
Chapter 400
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking meters — See Ch. 288.
Parking on private property — See Ch. 293.
Permit parking — See Ch. 305.
Towing — See Ch. 421.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 440.
§ 395-41 INDIANA CODE § 395-41
1:268
ARTICLE I
Street Plan; Street Names
[Adopted 5-9-1898 by Ord. No. 42 (Ch. XXI, Part 1, Secs. 1 to 12, of
the of the 1971 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 400-1. Plan of streets.
The draft or plan (lately made by John R. Caldwell of the Borough of Indiana
and now on file at the Council Chamber of said Borough of Indiana) of
the lines, roads, streets, lanes and alleys of said Borough, and including
the streets and alleys which have been or may be laid out but not opened,
shall be the general plan of the streets and alleys of said Borough, and
all subdivisions of property hereafter made in said Borough shall conform
thereto.
§ 400-2. Streets and alleys on plan ordained.
The streets and alleys marked upon said draft or plan,106 and for the first
time located as streets and alleys, are hereby ordained streets and alleys
of said Borough, and no person shall hereafter be entitled to recover any
damages for any building or improvements of any kind which shall or may
be placed or constructed upon or within the lines of any located street or
alley.
§ 400-3. Standard of elevation. [Added 2-3-1902 by Ord. No. 72]
The monument erected by the engineers in the service of the government of
the United States upon the grounds of the State Normal School at Indiana,
Pennsylvania, and having an elevation of 1299.219 feet above the sea level,
shall be established as the base and standard of the elevations established
by Council.
§ 400-4. East-west streets to be designated by name. [Added
5-9-1899 by Ord. No. 43]
All streets running east and west shall be designated by name.
§ 400-5. North-south streets to be designated by number. [Added
5-9-1898 by Ord. No. 43]
All streets running north and south shall be numbered consecutively,
beginning with the street nearest to and parallel with the eastern line of the
Borough, which shall be known as First Street.107
106. Editor's Note: See § 400-1 of this chapter.
107. Editor's Note: Original Secs. 3 to 8 of this ordinance were repealed by Ord. No. 999.
§ 400-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-6
1:269
§ 400-6. Railroad Avenue renamed Normal Avenue.108
From and after the passage of this section, the avenue located on west
side of the Indiana Branch of the Pennsylvania Railroad extending from
Church Street to the south line of the Borough and now called and known
as Railroad Avenue shall be called and known as Normal Avenue.109
§ 400-7. Saltsburg Road renamed Oakland Avenue. [Added 5-9-1898
by Ord. No. 45]
From and after the passage of this section, the name of the street known as
Saltsburg Road, beginning at Church Street, opposite the southern end of
South Ninth Street, and extending in a southwesterly direction to the line
of the Borough, shall be changed to Oakland Avenue and shall hereafter be
known by this name.
§ 400-8. North Papermill Alley renamed Station Avenue. [Added
3-3-1922 by Ord. No. 368]
From and after the passage of this section, the name of Papermill Alley
between Philadelphia Street and north Borough line shall be changed to
Station Avenue.
§ 400-9. Railroad Avenue renamed College Avenue; certain alleys
renamed avenues. [Added 12-7-1948]
Railroad Avenue be hereafter known as College Avenue and that the
hereinafter named alleys in said Borough be designated as avenues, and
that the official Borough Map be changed in accordance therewith:
A. Gompers Alley to Gompers Avenue.
B. Carpenter Alley to Carpenter Avenue.
C. Taylor Alley to Taylor Avenue.
D. Willow Alley to Willow Avenue.
E. Virginia Alley to Virginia Avenue.
F. Lowry Alley to Lowry Street.
G. Burns Alley to Burns Avenue.
H. Poplar Alley to Poplar Avenue.
I. Fleming Alley to Fleming Avenue.
J. Fisher Alley to Fisher Avenue.
108. Editor's Note: This section was added 9-28-1981 by the Borough of West Indiana.
109. Editor's Note: Railroad Avenue was later renamed College Avenue; see § 400-9 of this
chapter.
§ 400-6 INDIANA CODE § 400-9
1:270
§ 400-10. Part of West Alley renamed West Avenue. [Added 4-8-1969
by Ord. No. 937]
All that portion of West Alley as shown on the Official Map of the Borough
of Indiana which lies between School Street and Philadelphia Street shall
hereafter be known and designated as West Avenue.
§ 400-11. West Avenue renamed South Eighth Street. [Added
3-3-1970 by Ord. No. 976]
The street on the Borough Map which runs from Philadelphia Street south
to School Street and heretofore known as West Avenue shall hereafter be
known and designated as South Eighth Street.
§ 400-12. Section of Burns Avenue renamed Jimmy Stewart Avenue.
[Added 8-6-1985 by Ord. No. 1383]
The section of Burns Avenue Bordered on the East by Seventh Street and
on the West by Eighth Street is hereby renamed Jimmy Steward Avenue,
effective immediately.
K. Hammers Alley to Rex Avenue.
L. Rice Alley to Rice Avenue.
M. Paper Mill Alley to Paper Mill Avenue.
N. Shryock Alley to Shryock Avenue.
O. Foundry Alley to Foundry Avenue.
P. Klondyke Alley to Klondyke Avenue.
Q. Stannard Alley to Stannard Avenue.
R. South Alley to South Avenue.
§ 400-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-12
1:271

ARTICLE II
Street Excavation
[Adopted 6-6-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-03110]
§ 400-13. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Street Excavation
Permit Ordinance."
§ 400-14. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates otherwise:
APPLICANT — Any person or entity that makes application for a permit.
EMERGENCY — Any unforeseen circumstance or occurrence, the existence
of which constitutes a clear and immediate danger to persons or properties.
MANAGER — The Manager of Indiana Borough or their authorized
designee.
PERMITTEE — Any person, corporation, or entity that has been issued a
permit and has agreed to fulfill all the terms of this article.
PUBLIC UTILITY COMMISSION — Any entity subject to the jurisdiction of
and control by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission.
STREET — A public street, public easement, right-of-way, public highway,
public alley, public sidewalk, public way or public road accepted or
maintained by the municipality or open for travel and use by the public,
whether or not so accepted or maintained, including the entire area within
the right-of-way thereof.
§ 400-15. Activities requiring issuance of permit.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to make any tunnel, opening
or excavation of any kind in or under the surface of any street without
first securing a permit from the Manager for each separate
undertaking; provided, however, that any person or entity maintaining
pipes, lines or other underground facilities in or under the surface of
any street may proceed with an opening without a permit when
emergency circumstances demand the work to be done immediately,
provided that the permit could not reasonably and practically have been
obtained beforehand. In such cases where emergency openings are
necessary, however, the municipality shall be notified prior to such
openings by:
(1) Fax notification.
110. Editor's Note: This ordinance, originally adopted as Ch. 234, superseded former Art. II,
Openings and Excavations, adopted 6-6-1950 by Ord. No. 595 (Chapter XXI, Part 3,
Subpart B, Sections 111 to 118, of the 1971 Code of Ordinances, as amended.
§ 400-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-15
1:273
§ 400-16. Work to be done pursuant to permit.
No person or entity to whom a permit has been granted shall perform
any of the work authorized by such permit in any amount greater than
that specified in the permit, except that where the permittee desires to
perform additional work not in excess of an amount greater than 10%
of the amount specified in the permit, the permittee may apply to the
Manager for an amended permit to authorize the additional work. If the
additional work desired to be performed by the permittee exceeds 10% of
the amount specified in the original permit, an application for a new permit
shall be made. Any deposit or bond posted in connection with the original
permit shall be deemed to cover any such additional work as may be added
pursuant to the issuance of an amended permit within the limit specified
herein.
§ 400-17. Time for commencement of work.
Work for which a permit has been issued shall commence within 30 days
after the issuance of the permit therefor. If not so commenced, the permit
shall be terminated automatically unless the permittee applies for an
extension of time within which to commence work. If such an extension is
granted, the original permit shall remain in force for the period of time
specified in the extension. Permits which terminate because of failure to
commence work within 30 days after issuance or within any extension of
time granted hereunder may be renewed only upon the payment of an
additional permit fee as originally required.
§ 400-18. Time limit on permit.
Every permit shall expire at the end of the period of time which shall be
set out in the permit. If the permittee shall be unable to complete the
work within the specified time, he or she shall, prior to expiration of the
permit, present, in writing, to the Manager a request for an extension of
time setting forth therein the reasons for the requested extension. If the
Manager finds that the failure to complete the work under the permit within
the time specified therein was due to circumstances reasonably beyond the
control of the permittee and that an extension of time to complete the work
under the permit is necessary and not contrary to the public interest, the
permittee may be granted additional time for the completion of the work.
(2) Telephone notification.
(3) PA One Call.
B. The person or entity shall thereafter apply for a permit on the first
regular business day on which the office of the Manager is open for
business, and said permit shall be retroactive to the date when the work
was begun.
§ 400-15 INDIANA CODE § 400-19
1:274
§ 400-19. State and county roads.
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable in those instances
where the street or highway is maintained by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or by Indiana County; provided, however, that any person or
entity applying for a permit to do work within the right-of-way of a street
or highway maintained by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or by Indiana
County which would otherwise require a permit under the terms of this
article shall notify the Manager at the time that said application is made
and at the time that the work under any permit issued pursuant to said
application is begun, so that proper safety precautions may be taken by the
municipality during the continuation of said work.
§ 400-20. Revocation of permit.
§ 400-20.1. Requirements and specifications.
A. Any permit may be revoked by the Manager, after notice to the
permittee, for:
(1) Violation of any condition of the permit or any provision of this
article.
(2) Violation of any other applicable provision of the Municipal Code or
any law relating to the work.
(3) The creation of any condition or the doing of any act constituting or
creating a nuisance or endangering the life or property of others.
B. The permittee shall be granted a period of three days from the date of
the notice to correct the violation and to proceed with the diligent
prosecution of the work authorized by the permit before said permit is
revoked.
C. Written notice of any such violation or condition shall be served upon
the permittee or his/her agent engaged in the work. The notice shall
contain a brief statement of the reasons for revoking the permit. Notice
may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person or entity
to be notified or by certified or registered United States Mail addressed
to the person or entity to be notified.
D. When any permit has been revoked and the work authorized by the
permit has not been completed, the Manager shall do or cause to be
done such work as may be necessary to restore the street or part
thereof to its original condition prior to the excavation. All expenses
thereby incurred by the municipality shall be recovered from the
deposit or bond the permittee has made or filed with the municipality.
A. No opening or excavation in any street shall extend beyond the center
line of the street before being backfilled and the surface of the street
temporarily restored.
§ 400-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-20.1
1:275
B. No more than 250 feet measured longitudinally shall be opened in any
street at any one time, except by special permission of the Manager.
C. All utility facilities shall be exposed sufficiently, or their definite location
shall be determined ahead of trench excavation work to avoid damage
to those facilities and to permit their relocation, if necessary.
D. Pipe drains, pipe culverts or other facilities encountered shall be
protected by the permittee.
E. Any person whose facilities are damaged or caused to be relocated by
the permittee shall notify the permittee and the municipality of such
damage and thereafter may make the necessary repairs or relocation
and file a claim against the permittee for the cost of such repairs or
relocation. Public utility companies concerned shall be notified by the
municipality in sufficient time to determine the validity of the damage
or relocation claims. The cost of such repair work or relocation work
may be withheld by the Manager from the deposit pending
determination of liability for the damage.
F. Monuments of concrete, iron or other lasting material set for the
purpose of locating or preserving the lines of any street or property
subdivision or a precise survey reference point or a permanent survey
benchmark within the municipality shall not be removed or disturbed or
caused to be removed or disturbed unless permission to do so is first
obtained, in writing, from the Manager. Permission shall be granted
only upon the condition that the permittee shall pay all expenses
incident to the proper replacement of the monument.
G. When work performed by the permittee interferes with the established
drainage system of any street, provision shall be made by the permittee
to provide proper drainage.
H. Any earth, gravel or other excavated material must be maintained with
the use of erosion and sediment controls. Additionally, when any earth,
gravel or other excavated material is caused to flow, roll or wash upon
any street, the permittee shall cause removal of the same from the
street within eight hours after deposit to permit safe flow of traffic. In
the event that the earth, gravel or other excavated material so
deposited is not removed as specified, the Manager shall cause such
removal, and the cost incurred shall be paid by the permittee or
deducted from his/her deposit.
I. Every permittee shall place around the project such barriers,
barricades, lights, warning flags and danger signs as shall be
determined by the Manager to be necessary for the protection of the
public. Additional safety requirements may be prescribed by the
Manager and, where applicable, shall be in conformance with the
requirements set forth in 67 Pa. Code Chapter 212, relating to work
zone traffic control. Copies of the publication shall be made available in
the office of the Manager for inspection by the public.
§ 400-20.1 INDIANA CODE § 400-20.1
1:276
(1) Whenever any permittee fails to provide or maintain the required
safety devices, such devices shall be installed and maintained by
the municipality. The amount of the cost incurred shall be paid by
the permittee or deducted from his/her deposit.
(2) No person shall willfully move, remove, injure, destroy or
extinguish any barrier, warning light, sign or notice erected, placed
or posted in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(3) Permittees are required to maintain erosion and sedimentation (E
& S) controls.
J. Access to private driveways shall be provided except during working
hours when construction operations prohibit provision of such access.
Free access must be provided at all times to fire hydrants. Owner and/
or renters must be notified at least two days prior to the closing of any
access aisle before any work can commence.
K. Excavated materials shall be laid compactly along the side of the trench
and kept trimmed up so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible
to public travel. In order to expedite the flow of traffic or to abate dirt or
dust nuisance, the Manager may require the permittee to provide toe
boards or bins; and if the excavated area is muddy and causes
inconvenience to pedestrians, temporary wooden plank walks shall be
installed by the permittee as directed by the Manager. If the street is
not wide enough to hold the excavated material without using part of
the adjacent sidewalk, the permittee shall keep a passageway at least 1/
2 the sidewalk width open along such sidewalk line. The permittee is
responsible for proper pedestrian traffic controls at all times. When
required by the manager, "sidewalk closed" and directional signs must
be utilized to direct pedestrians to use the opposite side of the street.
L. Work authorized by a permit shall be performed between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, unless the
permittee obtains written consent from the Manager to do the work at
an earlier or later hour. Such permission shall be granted only in the
case of an emergency or in the event that the work authorized by the
permit is to be performed in traffic-congested areas.
M. In granting any permit, the Manager may attach such other conditions
thereto as may be reasonably necessary to prevent damage to public or
private property or to prevent the operation from being conducted in a
manner hazardous to life or property or in a manner likely to create a
nuisance. Such conditions may include, but shall not be limited to:
(1) Limitations on the period of the year in which the work may be
performed.
(2) Restrictions as to the size, weight and type of equipment.
(3) Designation of routes upon which materials may be transported.
§ 400-20.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-20.1
1:277
§ 400-20.2. Restoration.
(4) Designation of the place and manner of disposal of excavated
materials.
(5) Requirements as to the laying of dust, the cleaning of streets, the
prevention of noise and other results offensive or injurious to the
neighborhood, the general public or any portion thereof.
(6) Regulations as to the use of streets in the course of the work.
N. Hydra-hammer, headache ball. The use of mechanical devices for the
breaking of pavement, such as a hydra-hammer, headache ball, etc., will
be permitted only under special written permission of the Manager.
A. All pavement cuts, openings and excavations shall be made properly
and backfilled properly by the permittee according to Indiana Borough
specifications using PennDOT PUB 408 regulations. Unless the
permittee has been granted permission to restore the street surface, as
provided in Subsection D, the permittee also shall place a temporary
cold patch a maximum of three inches on the pavement cut, opening or
excavation in accordance with municipal specifications. If the permittee
has been granted permission to restore the street surface, but weather
conditions are such as to prevent the completion of permanent
restoration of the street surface at the time backfilling is completed, the
permittee shall install a temporary surface in accordance with
municipal specifications until such time as weather conditions will
permit permanent restoration of the street surface.
B. The Manager shall be notified by the permittee during the forty-eighthour
periods preceding the beginnings of backfilling and restoration
and the approximate time each will be begun.
C. No backfilling or restoration shall be accomplished unless or until the
Manager or his/her designee is present or permission has been granted
for backfilling or restoration after inspection by the Manager or his/her
designee.
D. The work of final restoration, including both paving surface and paving
base, shall be performed directly by the permittee or agent under the
supervision of the Manager. All restoration work shall be performed by
the permittee according to Indiana Borough specifications and shall be
subject to inspection by the municipality.
E. If the Manager finds that paving surfaces adjacent to the street
openings may be damaged where trenches are made parallel to the
street or where a number of cross trenches are laid in proximity to one
another or where the equipment used may cause such damage, he or
she may require negotiated contributions from the permittee for the
resurfacing in place of patching of such street if the total area of the
proposed patch or damaged area exceeds 25% of the total pavement
surfacing between curb faces or between concrete gutter edges. Such
§ 400-20.1 INDIANA CODE § 400-20.2
1:278
§ 400-20.3. Deposit.
negotiations shall be carried on and contributions agreed upon prior to
issuance of a permit.
F. After excavation is commenced, the work of making and backfilling the
same shall be prosecuted with due diligence. Unless the provisions of
Subsection A of this section apply, the permittee is required to complete
permanent restoration of the street surface in accordance with
municipal specifications within 30 days after repairs and/or installation
are completed. Furthermore, the permittee shall be required to install
and maintain a temporary surface in accordance with municipal
specifications during:
(1) The period between the completion of repairs and/or installation
and the commencement of final restoration; and
(2) The periods during the actual work when workers do not require
access to the excavation.
G. Inspections of all work authorized by a permit shall be made by the
Manager at such times and in such manner as required to assure
compliance with provisions of this article. If the nature of the work to be
performed under any permit is such as to require the services of a fulltime
inspector, the Manager shall provide for the services of such an
inspector.
H. All inspection costs shall be borne by the permittee. Such costs shall be
based upon a schedule of charges on file in the office of the Manager.
I. Upon completion of all work accomplished under the provisions of a
permit, the permittee shall notify the Manager, in writing. A certificate
of final inspection shall be issued by the Manager to each permittee no
sooner than one year and not later than 18 months after the permanent
restoration of the excavation has been made, provided that the work
authorized by the permit has been performed according to municipal
specifications. Prior to the issuance of a certificate, the Manager shall
make a final inspection of the restoration to determine whether
municipal specifications have been adhered to.
J. If any settlement in a restored area occurs within a period of 18 months
from the date of completion of the permanent restoration and the
permittee fails to make such correction after notification, any expense
incurred by the municipality in correcting such settlement shall be paid
by the permittee or recovered from his/her bond, unless the permittee
submits proof, satisfactory to the Manager, that the settlement was not
due to defective backfilling.
A. Computation of deposit. The Manager, upon receipt of a properly
completed application, shall determine the amount of the deposit to be
made by the permittee in accordance with the fee schedule; provided,
however, that the minimum deposit required shall be $2,400 plus the
§ 400-20.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-20.3
1:279
§ 400-20.4. Performance bond.
cost of the street excavation permit. The deposit shall be paid at the
time the permit is issued, and the deposit shall be used to reimburse
the municipality for the cost of any work and/or materials furnished by
it in connection with work authorized by the permit, to cover the cost of
all necessary inspections of said work or any other expenses incurred
by the municipality in carrying out the provisions of this article.
B. Form of deposit. The deposit may be either in the form of a certified,
treasurer's or cashier's check or in lawful money of the United States.
C. Insufficient deposit. If any deposit is less than sufficient to pay all costs,
the permittee shall, upon demand, pay to the municipality an amount
equal to the deficiency. If the permittee fails or refuses to pay such
deficiency, the municipality may institute an action to recover the same
in any court of competent jurisdiction. Until such deficiency is paid in
full, no additional permits shall be issued to such permittee.
D. Yearly deposit. Whenever any public utility company shall anticipate
applying for permits for more than one street opening or excavation per
calendar year and does not elect to file a corporate bond as
hereinbefore provided, such public utility company may post one
deposit in an amount and form as hereinbefore provided for the
calendar year or part thereof to cover the cost of deposits which would
otherwise be required for the anticipated permits.
E. Deposit and cost schedules. The Manager shall establish a schedule of
charges for inspections, labor, materials and other such expenses as
may be incurred by the municipality in carrying out the provisions of
this article. This schedule shall be established by the Manager in
accordance with the reasonably anticipated costs to be incurred by the
municipality in making such inspections, including reasonable
administrative and overhead expenses, and in accordance with the
currently prevailing costs in the area for any labor and materials which
may be provided by the municipality. The Manager shall revise said
schedule from time to time to reflect any increase or decrease in the
costs used to establish said charges. The schedule shall be open to
public inspection in the office of the Manager upon request.
F. Decision on costs. The decision of the Manager as to the cost of any
work done or repairs made by a permittee under his/her direction,
pursuant to the provisions of this article, shall be final and conclusive as
to such cost.
G. Refund of deposit. Upon notification by the permittee that all work
authorized by the permit has been completed and after restoration of
the opening, the Manager shall refund to the permittee his/her deposit,
less all costs incurred by the municipality in connection with said
permit. In no event shall the permit fee be refunded.
§ 400-20.3 INDIANA CODE § 400-20.4
1:280
§ 400-20.5. Liability insurance.
Each applicant, upon the receipt of a permit, shall provide the municipality
with an acceptable certificate of insurance indicating that he or she is
insured against claims for damages for personal injury as well as against
claims for property damage which may arise from or out of the performance
of the work, whether such performance is by himself or herself, his/her
subcontractor or anyone directly or indirectly employed by him or her. Such
insurance shall cover collapse, explosive hazards and underground work
by equipment on the street and shall include protection against liability
arising from completed operations. The amount of the insurance shall be
prescribed by the Manager in accordance with the nature of the risk
involved; provided, however, that the liability insurance for bodily injury
shall be in an amount no less than $500,000 for each person and $500,000
for each accident, and for property damages, in an amount no less than
$1,000,000, with an aggregate of $500,000 for all accidents. Public utility
companies and authorities may be relieved of the obligation of submitting
such a certificate if they submit satisfactory evidence that they are insured
in accordance with the requirements of this article or have adequate
A. A performance bond is required by Indiana Borough to perform the
restoration work. Each applicant or permittee, upon receipt of a permit,
shall provide the municipality with an acceptable corporate surety bond
to guarantee faithful performance of the work authorized by a permit
granted pursuant to this article. The amount of the bond shall be 110%
of the estimated cost of restoring the street opening. The term of the
bond shall begin upon the date of posting thereof and shall terminate 18
months upon the receipt by the permittee of a certificate of final
inspection from the Manager. If the permittee anticipates requesting
more than one permit per year, as required by this article, he or she
may furnish one continuing corporate surety bond to guarantee faithful
performance in such amount as the Manager deems necessary. The
amount of such bond shall be in relation to the cost of restoring
pavement cuts to be made by the permittee throughout the year. In the
case of a public utility company, its corporate bond, in a form
satisfactory to the Solicitor, may be accepted in lieu of the corporate
surety bond required by this section.
B. Default in performance. Whenever the Manager shall find that a default
has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of the permit,
written notice thereof shall be given to the principal and to the surety
on the bond. Such notice shall state the work to be done, the estimated
cost thereof and the period of time deemed by the Manager to be
reasonably necessary for the completion of such work.
C. Completion of work. After receipt of such notice, the surety must,
within the time therein specified, either cause the required work to be
performed or, failing therein, indemnify the municipality for the cost of
doing the work as set forth in the notice.
§ 400-20.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-20.5
1:281
provision for self-insurance. Public utility companies may file an annual
certificate of insurance in lieu of individual certificates for each permit.
§ 400-20.6. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity who shall violate any provision of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600;
and in default of payment, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
Every day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 400-20.7. Severability.
If any provision of this article, or any subsection thereof, is found to be
illegal or invalid, such illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any
of the remaining provisions of this article, or any subsections thereunder. It
is hereby declared as the intent of the Borough that this article would not
have been enacted if any per se illegal or invalid provisions were included
herein. If any such provision would be found to exist, such invalid provision
would be stricken.
§ 400-20.8. Repealer.
Any other ordinance provision(s) or regulation of the municipality
inconsistent with any of the provisions of this article is hereby repealed to
the extent of the inconsistency only.
§ 400-20.9. When effective.
This chapter is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public
peace, health, safety, morals and general welfare of the residents of the
Borough, and shall take effect and be in full force immediately after its
passage, execution and publication.
§ 400-20.5 INDIANA CODE § 400-20.9
1:282
ARTICLE III
Driveways Crossing Sidewalks
[Adopted 6-4-1963 by Ord. No. 765 (Ch. XXI, Part 2, Subpart B,
Secs. 71 to 75, of the 1971 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 400-21. Property owners responsible for improving and paving
portion of driveway between curbline and sidewalk line.
It shall be the duty of the owner of any lots or parts of lots of real estate
fronting on any improved street within the limits of the Borough of Indiana,
upon which property is maintained a private driveway or driveways leading
from the improved street into the said property, to improve and pave that
portion of the driveway or driveways which lies between the street curbline
and the sidewalk line, with cement or other suitable material, at such
grades and lines as Council shall from time to time direct.
§ 400-22. Time limit for making improvements; conformity to
requirements and specifications.
Every such owner of real estate subject to this article shall, on 30 days'
notice from the Borough Council, make such improvements, which shall
conform to all applicable requirements and specifications as Council may
direct and which said requirements and specifications may be obtained from
the office of the Borough Manager.111
§ 400-23. Authority for property owner to make improvements on
own initiative.
Any property owner who is subject to this article may, upon his own
initiative, and without notice from any Borough authority, make the
improvements described in § 400-21 of this article, provided that such
owner shall first make application to the Borough Manager and shall
conform to the specifications as to materials, grades and lines as received
from the Borough Manager.
§ 400-24. Authority for Borough to do work and collect cost from
defaulting property owner.
If, after receiving notice as provided in § 400-22 of this article, the owner
fails to comply with the requirements of this article, the Borough may cause
the improvements to be made at the cost of such owner, and may collect
the cost thereof and 10% additional, together with all charges and expenses
from such owner, and may file a municipal claim therefor or collect the same
by action in assumpsit.
111. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 73, Requirements for notice, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted 4-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-02.
§ 400-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-24
1:283

ARTICLE IV
Ballplaying and Other Games
[Adopted 6-8-1971 by Ord. No. 1023 (Ch. VI, Part 1, Sec. 5, of the
1971 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 400-25. Ballplaying, snowballing and throwing stones and other
missiles prohibited.
Ballplaying, including the throwing, kicking or knocking of any ball,
snowballing, and the throwing of any stone or other missile of any kind
upon or onto any of the public streets, alleys or sidewalks in the Borough of
Indiana, is hereby prohibited.
§ 400-26. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-6-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-02; 9-2-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-03]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $300 for the
first offense and not less than $500 for the second and subsequent offenses,
together with costs of prosecution. In default of payment of such fine and
costs, such person shall be sentenced to imprisonment for not more than 30
days.
§ 400-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-26
1:285

ARTICLE V
Sidewalk Construction and Repair
[Adopted 1-18-1994 by Ord. No. 1612]
§ 400-27. Notice to reconstruct or repair.
§ 400-28. Sidewalk material and specifications.
A. Every owner of property in the Borough of Indiana shall, on 60 days'
notice from the Public Works Committee of Borough Council, construct,
reconstruct or repair the sidewalk in front of and/or alongside such
property, in the manner and to the extent stipulated in such notice. The
Public Works Committee's decision to require a new sidewalk to be
constructed shall be in accordance with an overall Borough-wide plan
for sidewalk extension prepared by the Committee, adopted by Borough
Council after a public hearing and modified from time to time by
Council action after Council receives recommendations from the Public
Works Committee.
B. The Public Works Committee's decision to require a segment of
sidewalk to be reconstructed or repaired shall be based on either a
determination by the Borough Manager that a hazard to public safety
exists that must be immediately corrected, or upon recommendations of
the Public Works Committee after inspection of sidewalks. The Public
Works Committee, the Borough Manager or the Borough Manager's
designated representative shall inspect all sidewalks in each Ward of
the Borough not less frequently than once every four years.
C. "Reconstruction" shall mean complete removal and replacement of an
entire sidewalk between property lines. "Repair" shall mean
improvement or replacement of deteriorated or hazardous panels
within a sidewalk, leaving some or most of the sidewalk intact. A
"hazard to public safety" shall mean that a vertical separation greater
than 1/2 inch exists between adjacent concrete panels or masonry
units, or cracks within panels, or that at least 50% of the surface of any
panel has spalled so as to create a rough condition, or that a panel has
shifted or tilted so as to create a sloped surface greater than one
vertical to 10 horizontal.
A. All sidewalks shall be constructed, reconstructed and repaired of
concrete only, in conformity with specifications adopted by the Borough
Council from time to time. Provided: where the existing sidewalk is of
brick, and at least 2/3 of such sidewalk between property lines is in
good repair, as determined by the Public Works Committee, such
sidewalk may be repaired with brick, but where such sidewalk is in such
a condition, in the opinion of the Public Works Committee, that more
than 1/3 should be replaced, the entire walk between property lines
shall be reconstructed of concrete in accordance with Borough
specifications.
§ 400-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-28
1:287
§ 400-29. Sidewalk widths and line and grade.
All sidewalks on Philadelphia Street, between Fifth Street and Ninth Street,
shall be paved to the full width, from building line to curb. All sidewalks
along any other portion of any street of alley shall be paved to a width of
four feet, except where the Public Works Committee shall determine that
special conditions of terrain, pedestrian or vehicular traffic, continuity of
sidewalk width between cross streets or other necessity shall require a
sidewalk paved to a width greater or lesser than four feet, in which case the
Committee shall order such walk to be paved to the width so determined.
When ordering the construction or reconstruction of any sidewalk, the
Committee shall establish the grades and lines thereof and such sidewalk
shall conform in every respect to such orders as to width, grade and line.
Owners of lots located at intersections of streets and/or alleys shall pave
sufficiently beyond the corner of the lot to join with the paved sidewalk on
the intersecting street or alley.
§ 400-30. Determination by Committee; inspection.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Public Works Committee
to determine, in the case of any individual property, whether or not the
abutting sidewalk shall be reconstructed or repaired, and if so, the specific
part or parts to be reconstructed or repaired. Any property owner receiving
an order to reconstruct or repair may appeal to the Committee to rescind,
modify or postpone the order, and, if dissatisfied with the Committee's
response, may appeal to Council as a whole. A Borough official may at
any time during the course of constructing, reconstructing or repairing any
sidewalk, visit the site at any reasonable time, or when so requested by
the property owner, to ascertain whether the work is being done according
to the Borough's sidewalk construction specifications. If the average daily
temperature is less than 40°, measures shall be taken to keep the
temperature of the concrete not less than 50° for a period of at least seven
days after pouring or three days if high-early-strength concrete is used.
In hot weather, concrete shall be fog-sprayed or covered with a wet light-
B. The sidewalks in the C-1 and C-2 zoned districts may be constructed of
chamfered brick pavers. The brick shall be Glen-Gery K&W red, and
shall be four inches by eight inches, 2 1/4 inches thick. The brick shall
be placed upon a 3/4 inch thick dry pack which shall be on a four-inch
concrete base. The base shall be reinforced with number 10 six-by-six
wire. The Public Works Committee may approve other pavers that shall
be equal in quality and similar in color to the specified Glen-Gery
pavers, and may also approve, prior to the start of construction,
alternate installation methods. All work is to be performed by skilled
craftsmen using a straight edge and other tools to insure a smooth and
uniform surface grade consistent with lines and grades established by
the Borough. Omni-brick and similar poured-in-place surfaces shall be
considered as concrete for purposes of this article. Color additives to
the concrete mix shall be prohibited unless specifically approved by the
Public Works Committee.
§ 400-28 INDIANA CODE § 400-30
1:288
colored fabric as soon as hardening of the surface will permit. Within two
working days after the completion of the work, it shall be the duty of the
owner of the property abutting the sidewalk to notify the Borough Manager
of that fact, so that he or his representative may inspect such sidewalk to
determine whether the work was done in conformity with the requirements
of this article and the Borough's sidewalk specifications.
§ 400-31. Maintenance of surfaces between street curb and
sidewalk; alternate surfacing.
The owner of property abutting any sidewalk shall be responsible for
maintaining not only the sidewalk itself but also any surfaces lying between
the street curb or edge of the vehicular pavement and the sidewalk. Such
surfaces shall be planted and maintained in grass, or the owner may appeal
to the Public Works Committee to approve an alternate surfacing, such
as a planted ground cover, or a brick, block, concrete or similar surface,
provided such surface is maintained at the same level as the adjacent top of
curb and sidewalk surfaces.
§ 400-32. Construction, reconstruction or repair by property owner
without notice from Borough.
Any property owner, upon his own initiative and without notice from any
Borough authority, may construct, reconstruct or repair a sidewalk in front
of or alongside his property, provided that such property owner shall first
make application to the Borough Manager or his representative for a
permit, and shall conform to all requirements of this article and the
Borough's sidewalk construction specifications as to line and grade and as
to materials used. The property owner shall notify the Borough Manager as
required by § 400-30 above within two working days after completion of the
work to request an inspection.
§ 400-33. Construction of handicap ramp.
The Public Works Committee may order, as part of the construction of a
new sidewalk or reconstruction of an existing sidewalk, where the project
includes a street intersection, that the property owner build a handicap
ramp connecting the sidewalk surface and the street curb, depressed to the
level of the adjacent street surface.
§ 400-34. Violations and penalties.
Each owner who shall violate the provisions of this article shall be subject
to a monthly fine of not less than $35 nor more than $100 for the initial
month. For each month thereafter, the fine shall double; providing, however,
that the total fine shall not be more than $500 in any year. Any violator shall
be responsible for the cost of prosecution. Each thirty-day period that the
owner continues to violate the article shall be a separate offense.
§ 400-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-34
1:289

ARTICLE VI
Objects in Public Right-of-Way
[Adopted 10-7-1997 by Ord. No. 1712]
§ 400-35. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, definitions will be as follows:
OBSTRUCTIONS — Obstructions shall include, but not be limited to, the
following: signs, equipment, racks, displays, fixtures, products, furniture,
trees, shrubbery, plants, and similar objects.
PERSON — A person, partnership, corporation, or other entity.
§ 400-36. Obstructions prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place any obstruction in, on, or upon a
public right-of-way in the Borough of Indiana unless otherwise permitted by
this article.
§ 400-37. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to municipal, state, or federal governments.
§ 400-38. Application to place obstruction in right-of-way.
Any person desiring to place an obstruction in, on, or upon a public right-ofway
within Indiana Borough must apply for a permit by filing an application
with the Borough Manager or his designee on a form provided by the
Borough of Indiana. No obstruction shall be erected or maintained prior to a
permit being issued by the Borough of Indiana. The Borough Manager or his
designee shall determine the time period for which the permit will be valid.
The Borough Manager or his designee may issue a permit providing that
the obstruction will not create a safety hazard. Each application shall have
attached to it a plot plan showing the location of the obstruction. Permits
for the erection of obstructions shall not be issued unless it is determined
by the Borough Manager or his designee that there is no other area on the
property where the obstruction could be feasibly located.
§ 400-39. Abandoned signs prohibited.
No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained, in, on, or upon any
property located in the public right-of-way within Indiana Borough, an
abandoned sign. An abandoned sign for the purpose of this article shall be:
A. A sign located on a property which is vacant or unoccupied for a period
of 30 days;
B. A sign which was erected for an occupant or business unrelated to the
present occupant or business; or
§ 400-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-39
1:291
§ 400-40. Placement of signs restricted.
No signs shall be printed, pasted, attached, or placed on any tree, utility
pole, or upon any natural feature.
§ 400-41. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
by a Magisterial District Judge, be subject to a fine of $25 for the first
offense, $100 for the second offense, and $300 for the third or subsequent
offense, together with costs. Each day shall constitute a separate offense.
The Indiana Borough Council may, by resolution, change the provisions for
fines.
C. Any sign which relates to a time, event, or purpose which is more than
three days in the past.
§ 400-39 INDIANA CODE § 400-41
1:292
ARTICLE VII
Curb Cuts
[Adopted 1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-01]
§ 400-42. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Shall include, but not be limited to, all individuals, corporations,
partnerships, and other legal entities.
§ 400-43. Curb cuts prohibited.
No person shall be permitted to cut a curb unless a permit is issued by the
Borough of Indiana.
§ 400-44. Application for curb cut.
An application for a curb cut shall be filed with a Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 400-45. Application requirements.
The application for the permit shall include:
§ 400-46. Review of application.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall have 20 days to review the application
to determine whether it's in proper form. If the application is not in proper
form, it shall be rejected and returned to the person submitting the
application. In the event that a proper application is filed, the Borough
Manager and the Code Enforcement Officer shall be obligated to review the
plans as well as the location where the curb cut is to take place within 20
days after the submission of the application.
§ 400-47. Requirements.
In reviewing the application and the location of the curb cut, the Borough
Manager and the Code Enforcement Officer shall review the location and
size of the curb cut in reference to the property as well as sight distance
along the street and the location of any impediments for traffic ingressing
A. The name and address of the property owner or developer or contractor
responsible for the construction;
B. A drawing, sketch, or plan to show the dimensional location of the work
with regard to the existing improvements, property lines, rights-of-way,
and streets; and
C. A profile showing the proposed elevation of the sidewalk and cut in
reference to the existing street elevation. Elevation shall be shown in
twenty-five-foot stations.
§ 400-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-47
1:293
and egressing across the curb cut as well as other traffic in the area. The
following requirements shall also be met:
§ 400-48. Approval of curb cut.
If the Borough Manager and the Code Enforcement Officer determine that
the curb cut as well as other ancillary improvements are not detrimental
to the safety of the persons who will be using the subject property or for
the general public and do not violate any other provisions of any Borough
ordinances or state law, the Code Enforcement Officer shall approve the
curb cut.
§ 400-49. Term of permit; extensions.
A curb cut permit shall be valid for a period of six months after it is granted.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall be permitted to extend the permit for
an additional three-month period because of weather or the contractor's
schedule. Providing that, if the extension is because of the contractor's
schedule, the requesting party shall provide the Code Enforcement Officer
with a signed contract between the property owner and the contractor.
§ 400-50. Revocation of permit.
In the event that the curb cut and any improvements are not completed in a
timely manner, the curb cut permit shall be revoked and no other curb cut
request shall be made for one year for the property that is the subject of the
curb cut request.
§ 400-51. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall cut a curb or place or construct paved areas,
driveways, or parking surfaces that are served by the curb cut shall be
in violation of this article unless a valid curb cut permit was issued and
the work was completed in a timely manner. Any person making any
improvements that are not in accordance with this article shall be subject
A. The surface of any parking area or driveway in areas serviced by the
curb cut between the sidewalk and the curb shall be paved with paving
stone or concrete material;
B. The surface of any parking area or driveway not between the sidewalk
and the curb shall consist of paving stone, bricks, concrete, bituminous
concrete, asphalt, or similar nonporous material;
C. The maximum width of the curb cut shall be 18 feet;
D. No portion of the parking area that is accessed by the curb cut shall
encroach the Borough right-of-way; and
E. Any curb cut accessing a parking area directly off a Borough right-ofway
of 25 feet or less, positioned at a 90° angle, must be a minimum of
20 feet deep.
§ 400-47 INDIANA CODE § 400-51
1:294
to a penalty, upon conviction before a Magisterial District Judge, of a fine of
$300 per day together with costs for each day the violation is in existence.
Each day shall be a separate offense.
§ 400-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-51
1:295

ARTICLE VIII
Bicycles, Roller Blades, Skateboards, Sleds and Similar Devices
[Adopted 8-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-05]
§ 400-52. Restricted use.
No person shall ride, operate, coast, or propel himself or anyone else
upon any bicycle, tricycle, roller blades, skates, skateboard, scooter, sled or
similar device, hereinafter indicated as "device", on any sidewalk or street
in the Borough of Indiana, except in accordance with this article.
§ 400-53. Prohibited use.
No person shall ride operate, coast, or propel himself or anyone else upon
any of the aforementioned devices on any sidewalk located on Philadelphia
Street between 5th and 9th Streets.
§ 400-54. Permitted use; restrictions.
Persons shall be permitted to ride, operate, coast, or propel himself or
anyone else upon the aforementioned devices on the streets and sidewalks,
except where prohibited in § 400-53. Such activities shall be strictly limited
to personal conveyance, except that tricycles, skates, roller blades,
skateboards, and scooters shall not be operated on the streets. The practice
of tricks and/or engagement of competition, without prior approval, shall
be prohibited. Persons using any of the aforementioned devices shall be
required, at all times, to yield the right-of-way to pedestrians.
§ 400-55. Usage restriction for persons 10 years of age or under.
No person 10 years of age or under is permitted to use the aforementioned
devices on any street when a sidewalk is available, and no person 10
years of age or under is permitted to use such devices on Philadelphia
Street between Fifth Street and Ninth Street. Helmets shall be required in
accordance with § 400-56.
§ 400-56. Applicable statutory provisions.
Vehicle Code provisions for "pedalcycles" (bicycles): All persons operating a
bicycle upon the street shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject
to all of the duties applicable to drivers of vehicles under the provisions
of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code. Such devices shall not be used to carry
more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and
equipped. An adult operator may transport a child in a child carrier, which is
securely attached to the device or in a trailer, which is towed. All equipment
standards shall be met, including the use of lighting equipment between
sunrise and sunset as specified in the Vehicle Code. A person under 12 years
of age shall not operate a bicycle or ride as a passenger unless the person
is wearing a helmet meeting the standards set forth within the vehicle code.
Persons operating any aforementioned device other than a bicycle shall be
§ 400-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-56
1:297
subject to the provisions set forth within the Vehicle Code pertaining to
pedestrians, except as otherwise specified in this article.
§ 400-57. Use of sleds.
No person shall operate a sled upon any street or sidewalk, except that
children may be pulled upon a sled by a person over the age of 18. Persons
may pull a sled upon a sidewalk in order to get to and from appropriate
locations for sled riding.
§ 400-58. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to privately owned property,
except that persons operating such devices on private property shall be
subject to applicable statutes including, but not limited to trespassing,
vandalism, and disorderly conduct.
§ 400-59. Violations and penalties.
Persons violating any section of this article shall, upon conviction thereof,
be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and any costs of prosecution.
§ 400-56 INDIANA CODE § 400-59
1:298
Chapter 405
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 170.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 220.
Sewers — See Ch. 360.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 395.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 400.
Zoning — See Ch. 460.
§ 400-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-59
1:299

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 405-1. Statutory authority.
Indiana Borough has the power to review and approve or disapprove plans
for the subdivision of land, for the arrangement and administration of land
developments, and for the layout of multifamily residential developments
within its corporate limits under the authority vested in Borough Council
by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1969, as
amended.112
§ 405-2. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted for the following reasons:
§ 405-3. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Indiana Borough
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance."
§ 405-4. Definitions for subdivisions and developments governed by
chapter.113
For subdivisions and developments governed by this chapter, the following
terms shall have the meaning indicated:
LAND DEVELOPMENT — As defined by the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.114 Examples may include, but are not limited to, a new
nonresidential building, the expansion of a nonresidential building, the
separation of space within an existing building for two or more tenants, and
two buildings functioning as dwellings on a single lot.
A. To promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the
residents and property owners;
B. To guarantee that a vehicular circulation system, safe means of sewage
disposal, a potable water supply of sufficient capacity, and control of
storm drainage are provided for in each subdivision and development
plan;
C. To safeguard lands subject to flooding or subsidence and to prevent
erosion, unnecessary destruction of plant materials, and excessive
grading; and
D. To assure property owners and residents of the Borough that all plans
will be considered based on an established public policy and objectively
and uniformly enforced.
112. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
113. Editor's Note: See also Article II, Definitions.
114. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 405-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-4
1:301
LOT LINE REVISION — A form of minor subdivision where no new lot
is created but lot lines between two or more adjacent lots are expanded,
diminished, combined, or altered in some fashion.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — A subdivision in which three or more lots, tracts,
or parcels are created or new streets or extensions of existing streets,
public or private, required to serve at least one of the lots, tracts, or parcels
in order to provide the minimum street frontage for the lot or lots and/or
sewer or water lines or both must be extended to serve one or more of the
lots.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — A subdivision in which fewer than three lots,
tracts, or parcels are created (including original or residual land), all of
which abut a public street in existence prior to presentation of the
subdivision, each lot with sufficient frontage thereon, and further, no
extension of public or private sewer or water lines is required to serve any
or all of the lots, tracts, or parcels.
SUBDIVISION — The division by the owner, grantor, or devisor of a singlelot
tract or parcel of land, or a part thereof, into two or more lots, tracts
or parcels of land, including lots, tracts, or parcels to be retained by the
owner, grantor, or devisor, and those lots, tracts, and parcels to be conveyed
or leased, whether now or in the future, to others for immediate or later
development. The rearrangement of property lines, although not creating
any new properties, and the combining of several lots, tracts, or parcels or
parts thereof to create a new property or properties, whether resulting in
fewer properties in number or not, shall be considered subdivisions for the
purpose of this chapter.
§ 405-5. Applicability.
A. On and after the effective date of this chapter, no lot in a subdivision
may be sold, no permit to erect, alter, repair or remove any building
upon land in a subdivision or a land development may be issued, and no
building may be erected in a subdivision or land development unless
and until a subdivision plan or land development plan has been
approved by the Borough Council or its designated representative, the
Planning Commission, and recorded in the office of the Indiana County
Recorder of Deeds, and until the improvements required by this chapter
have either been constructed or guaranteed.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the
protection of the public health, safety, and welfare.
C. This chapter shall not apply to any lot or lots, plan of lots or
development created and lawfully recorded prior to the third day of
August 2010, except as regards to the development of such lots or plan,
and as permitted by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
D. Any redivision or combination of lots within a plan previously recorded
or any rearrangement of structures, parking areas, graded land
§ 405-4 INDIANA CODE § 405-5
1:302
§ 405-6. Grant of power to planning commission.
Borough Council hereby delegates the Indiana Borough Planning
Commission to act and to have full authority in the administration of this
chapter and any subsequent amendments thereto. The Planning
Commission shall have the power to grant reasonable modifications in
accordance with § 405-32 and to propose and to hold public hearings upon
amendments to this chapter. The Borough Council shall approve or reject
proposed amendments to this chapter.
surfaces, or other elements within a development plan shall be subject
to this chapter.
E. Any lot, plan of lots, or development plan illegally recorded or not
lawfully recorded prior to adoption of this chapter shall not be given
legal status by adoption.
F. It is not the intent of this chapter to annul or interfere with existing
laws and ordinances, private restrictions placed upon property by deed,
covenants, private agreements, or such covenants running with the
land to which the Borough is a party except where this chapter imposes
greater restrictions upon the land and development than are imposed
or required by such existing provisions of law, ordinance, contract or
deed. It shall be interpreted that these are in addition to the restrictions
of such other existing regulation and ordinance.
§ 405-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-6
1:303

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 405-7. General terms; word usage.
For purposes of these regulations, certain terms or words used herein are
defined as follows:
§ 405-8. Specific terms.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESS LANE — The passage within a parking area allowing traffic to
enter and leave the individual parking spaces.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A building used for an activity in support of,
but secondary to, the principal use of the property, such as a garage on a
residential lot.
ACCESS POINT — A location along the frontage of a property providing
connection between the property and the adjacent highway.
ALIGNMENT — The vertical or horizontal line to which a street, road, or
utility adheres in its passage across, over, or under the land.
AMENDMENT — A change in these regulations, including the addition of
new requirements, revision of existing requirements, or deletion of obsolete
requirements, necessitating public hearings and formal adoption by the
Borough Council before becoming effective.
APPLICATION — A formal request in writing by a developer for
consideration of a proposal to develop land in accordance with the
requirements of these regulations.
BERM — The graded strip, usually filled with crushed stone, along each
side of a street pavement when curbs are not present, designed to direct
A. The word "person" or "developer" includes a firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation as well as an
individual.
B. The present tense shall include the future tense.
C. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular.
D. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive.
E. Words generally found in legal terminology not otherwise defined in
this chapter or the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code115 shall
have the same meanings as they are generally interpreted in courts of
law in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
115. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 405-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-8
1:305
stormwater from the pavement to a gutter and to provide a stable location
for disabled or parked vehicles off the pavement.
BLOCK — An area of land, generally in a plan of lots, surrounded by streets.
BOROUGH ENGINEER — A professional civil engineer registered in
Pennsylvania and retained by the Borough Council to represent the Borough
in the review of proposed public improvements and in the inspection of
them during construction and upon completion.
BOUNDARY — A line that demarcates the edge of a municipality, a
development plan, zoning district property, or other land area.
BUILDING — A permanent man-made structure attached to or in the
ground enclosing a volume of space intended to shelter or contain people,
animals, businesses, and activities associated with any of them.
BUILDING PERMIT — A document issued by the Borough attesting that
a proposal for construction meets all requirements of these regulations
and other applicable development ordinances in force and allowing such
proposed construction to commence.
CENTER LINE — A line running parallel to and equidistant from the edges
or curbs on each side of the street.
CONTOUR — An imaginary line connecting all points with the same
elevation above or below a fixed base point whose elevation is known.
COVENANT — An agreement legally binding successor owners of a
property to certain conditions regarding use of the property stipulated by
the original owner and running with the land.
CROSS SECTION — A cut through a road or utility at right angles to its
length revealing materials and dimensions of components of construction.
CUL-DE-SAC — A street with connection to other streets at only one end
and having a permanent vehicular turnaround at the closed end.
CURB — The raised edge of a street pavement designed to create a gutter
for stormwater removal, to eliminate the need for berms, and to provide a
guide for paving and snow removal.
CURVE — A rounded change of direction of an alignment that can be
described by radii and arc distances.
CUT — An excavation into earth material that has lain dormant for at least
two years.
DEDICATION — The designation of property, formerly privately owned, for
public or semipublic purpose, such designation stipulated in writing and
recorded by the private owner and accepted by the Borough of Indiana.
DEVELOPER — An individual, group or corporation that undertakes to
improve a property or properties in accordance with these regulations and
with concurrence of the Borough.
DWELLING — A building designed exclusively for residential purposes for
one or more families on a permanent basis.
§ 405-8 INDIANA CODE § 405-8
1:306
EASEMENT — A right-of-way grant across private property generally for
public utility lines or access to another property.
EROSION — The process of the breaking down and carrying away of
exposed ground surfaces by action of wind, water, or temperature change.
FILL — Earth material excavated elsewhere and deposited upon the ground
surface in the process of grading.
FINAL PLAN — The documentation presented by a developer to the
Planning Commission for consideration under the terms of this chapter after
approval has been granted for a preliminary plan proposal that included the
land area covered by the final plan.
FINISHED GRADE — The condition of the land surface after mechanical
rough and finished grading is completed and topsoil applied.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Land subject to inundation
during an intermediate regional flood.
FRONTAGE — The edge of a property abutting a public street. When a
property abuts two or more streets, frontage shall be considered the edge
abutting the principal street to which the property has access.
GRADE — The percentage that the center line of a street or sewer line
deviates from the level. A change of grade is a change in the percentage.
"To grade" means to mechanically alter the land surface in the course of
property development.
GUTTER — The low points in the cross section of a street designed to collect
and direct stormwater to a planned discharge off the street surface.
HIGHWAY — A street carrying large traffic volumes between areas of major
traffic generation, usually a state-maintained street, and often called a
"traffic arterial."
IMPOUNDMENT AREA — A natural or man-made concavity in the land
surface designed to accept storm drainage and to hold it for gradual release
into a receiving stream in order to minimize downstream flooding.
IMPROVEMENT BOND — A guarantee, backed by the developer's
collateral, that improvements agreed upon as a condition of final plan
approval will be carried out as specified.
INTERMEDIATE REGIONAL FLOOD — The water level generated by a
storm whose frequency can be anticipated once in every 100 years, using
current U.S. Army Corps of Engineers criteria and determined by detailed
stream flow analysis.
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one or more contiguous lots, tracts, or parcels
of land for any purpose involving:
(1)
A.
§ 405-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-8
1:307
LOT — A property within a group of similarly sized properties in a plan
available for development.
LOT AREA — The square foot or acre measurement of all the land surface
within a lot or property, except for street rights-of-way which shall be
considered as not less than 50 feet in width for purposes of calculation, 25
feet on each side of the street center line.
LOT WIDTH — The distance between the side lot lines measured along the
front building line of a lot.
MARKER — A permanent indication, established by a registered surveyor,
of a specified point in a subdivision or planned development, as required in
these regulations.
MINOR STREET — A vehicular street serving the properties abutting it not
intended to carry traffic collected from other streets.
MODIFICATION — A grant by the Planning Commission allowing a
developer to proceed with a deviation of the regulations normally in force
on developer's property because unusual conditions are present not of
the developer's making but creating hardship for the developer, and the
deviation will not be contrary to the public interest and the purpose and
intent of this chapter.
MONUMENT — A permanent indication, established by a registered
surveyor, of points at changes of direction in the boundary of a subdivision
or development plan or at points of crossing street rights-of-way within a
plan.
OWNER OF RECORD — The person whose name appears on the records of
the Indiana County Recorder of Deeds as the current owner of the property.
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively; or
(a)
A single nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of
the number of occupants or tenure; or
(b)
The division or allocation of land space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups, or other features; or
(c)
(2) A subdivision of land.
In accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code,116 as amended, the following activity shall be excluded
from the definition of land development: the addition of accessory
buildings subordinate to the principal buildings on single-family
residential lots.
B.
116. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 405-8 INDIANA CODE § 405-8
1:308
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability
company, or similar entity.
PETITION — An appeal to an elected or appointed public body asking for
review of a condition from which relief is requested and attesting that the
appeal is supported by a consistency of sufficient size.
PLAN — An arrangement for development of property, either for sale or
rental of lots or construction of buildings, including the provision of
improvements as required by this chapter.
PLANNING COMMISSION — Unless indicated specifically as the County
Planning Commission, the term refers to the Indiana Borough Planning
Commission.
PRELIMINARY PLAN — The documentation presented by a developer to
the Borough in support of a subdivision or land development plan for
consideration under the terms of this chapter.
PRIVATE ROAD — A vehicular access to a second property as an easement
over the land from which the second property was subdivided, approved in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
PROFESSIONAL CONSULTANTS — Persons who provide expert or
professional advice, including, but not limited to, architects, attorneys,
certified public accountants, engineers, geologists, land surveyors,
landscape architects, and planners.
PROFILE — A vertical cut along the center line of a street or utility line
indicating the vertical alignment of the street or utility line, the vertical
dimension often exaggerated to clarify the relation between horizontal and
vertical measurements.
PROPERTY LINE — The boundary line surrounding a property or any
portion of such line.
PROPERTY OR PARCEL — An area or tract of land all portions of which are
in the same ownership and the boundary of which closes on itself.
PUBLIC HEARING — An advertised meeting called by the Borough and
open to the public at which testimony is given on a proposal for
development or a revision to these or other development regulations in
order to assist the Borough in reaching a decision on the proposal or
revision.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS — Those improvements contained in a plan for
development of a property required by the municipality to be built by
the developer as a condition of approval of the developer's plan since the
improvements will ultimately be publicly maintained.
PUBLIC SEWER AND WATER SYSTEM — A system for sewage collection
and disposal or water storage and distribution developed, financed, and
operated by a public authority, public utility, or Indiana Borough.
PUBLIC STREET — A right-of-way dedicated for public vehicular use which
may or may not have been accepted for maintenance by the Borough.
§ 405-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-8
1:309
RECORDING — The act of timely filing with the Indiana County Recorder
of Deeds a subdivision or land development plan which has received final
approval by the Borough.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land which has been dedicated for public
use and provides access to private property abutting it, connects with
other rights-of-way, or provides an easement across private property for the
passage of public utilities, disposal of stormwater, or restricted vehicular
use.
ROAD — Same as a street.
SEDIMENTATION — Material scoured from the earth's surface by water
action and carried into nearby streams, raising their level and reducing
their water-carrying capacity.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The distance that an automobile driver can see ahead
unobstructed by changes in alignment, roadside structures, or topography,
usually measured between points on a road center line between three feet
six inches and eight feet above the surface.
STOP BARS — Devices attached to a parking area pavement to prevent
vehicles from driving off the edge of the area and to guide motorists in the
proper placement of their cars.
STORMWATER — Precipitation falling upon the ground surface, requiring
structures to direct and contain it to prevent damage to downstream areas
in developed areas.
STREET — An open public vehicular and/or pedestrian passage within a
recorded right-of-way at least 30 feet in width, connecting with other streets
to form the municipal circulation system.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made construction erected on the ground or
attached to the ground directly or indirectly, including buildings, fences,
poles, masts and signs, but excluding vehicles ready for immediate
movement or any paved surfaces at grade level.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a tract of parcel of land by
any means into two or more lots, tracts, or other divisions of land, including
changes in existing lot lines, for the purpose, whether immediate or future,
of lease, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development.
SWALE — An elongated indentation in the ground surface which collects
stormwater from higher elevations and directs it to an established allweather
stream or man-made subsurface drainage system.
TOPOGRAPHIC MAP — A map delineating by contours the surface
elevations of a land area.
TRACT — A property, parcel, or lot to be subdivided or developed.
§ 405-8 INDIANA CODE § 405-8
1:310
ARTICLE III
Plan Applications
§ 405-9. Preliminary considerations.
§ 405-10. Minor subdivision procedure.
Developers seeking approval of a minor subdivision or lot line revision as
defined in § 405-4 may disregard the preliminary plan stages and proceed
to final plan application. Ten copies of the final plan shall be submitted.
All steps in the final review procedure, with the exception of those
guaranteeing provision of streets and public utilities, shall apply to a minor
A. Activities denied prior to final approval. No person, firm, or corporation
contemplating subdivision or development of a tract of land shall
proceed with any grading of the site until preliminary approval has
been granted or shall record or sell any lots until he/she has received
final approval of his/her plan from the Planning Commission.
B. Unsuitable conditions jeopardizing approval. The Borough may refuse
to grant approval of all or a part of certain plans that provide
inadequate access or that are unsuitable for development by reason of
flooding hazard, steep slopes, poor drainage, slide-prone soils, or
nonconformity with the Borough Comprehensive Plan.
C. Preliminary sketch plan. Any developer may present at developer's
option a preliminary sketch plan for the Planning Commission's review
at a regular meeting. The developer is urged to attend to answer
questions and receive advice. The sketch plan shall show the entire
property, slopes and grading, parking if a multifamily, commercial or
industrial project, streams and storm drainage, easements, natural
features of the property and relationship of the site to major roads and
landmarks in the vicinity. In addition, the plan shall contain the name of
the property owner, developer, preparer of plan, proposed number of
dwelling and/or commercial units, and average area and frontage of
lots. The purpose of this section is to provide guidance. No
recommendations of the Commission are binding on the developer.
D. Exchanges of property. When a property is being divided or property
lines rearranged with particular buyers and sellers, each parcel to be
transferred in title shall be identified with the seller's and buyer's name
so that the line of conveyance is clear.
E. County review. All applications for subdivision and/or land development
approval within the Borough shall be forwarded upon receipt to the
Indiana County Planning Commission for a nonbinding review and
report consistent with Section 502(b) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.117 Any fees for this review shall be the
responsibility of the developer.
117. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10502(b).
§ 405-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-10
1:311
subdivision. The approved final plan shall be officially stamped as approved,
dated, and signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the Commission and
shall be recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Indiana County
within 90 days thereafter or such approval will be void.
§ 405-11. Preliminary plan application.
§ 405-12. Final plan application.
A. Submission. Any person proposing to subdivide or develop land, except
for minor subdivisions, shall submit 10 copies of the information, plans,
and profiles required by this section to the Planning Commission at
least 10 days prior to a regular monthly meeting. The Commission may,
at its option, postpone consideration of the plan and official receipt of it
until the developer can be present at a regular meeting.
B. Review. The Planning Commission shall review the submitted
documents for conformance with this chapter and inclusion of
recommendations made at the preapplication meeting. The Planning
Commission may hold a public hearing when it deems necessary. It shall
submit one copy of the submission to the Borough Council, one copy to
the Planning Commission, and other copies to the Indiana County
Planning Commission, as well as state or federal agencies and
professional consultants, as appropriate.
C. Approval. The Planning Commission shall render its decision granting
approval, denying it, or granting preliminary approval with conditions
not later than 90 days after officially reviewing the plan at a regular
meeting. The decision shall be in writing and shall be communicated to
the applicant personally or mailed to applicant's last known address not
later than 15 days following the decision. The decision shall set forth
the reasons for the disapproval, if that is the decision, specifying the
defects found, describing the requirements which were not met and
citing the provisions of the statute or ordinance relied upon. Failure of
the Commission to reach a decision or to communicate it within the
time limits shall be deemed an approval of the plan as presented.
Failure of the developer to accept any and all conditions upon approval
shall render the approval void. No amendment to this chapter after
official receipt of a subdivision plan shall detrimentally affect the plan
or its processing unless the plan is withdrawn and resubmitted, nor
shall such intervening amendment adversely affect the right of a
developer to commence and complete any approved plan or portion of a
plan within five years of the date of preliminary approval. Preliminary
plan approval shall only be an expression of tentative approval and
authorization to proceed to the final plan application. The plan shall be
stamped, dated and signed by the Commission Chairman and Secretary
upon granting of the preliminary approval.
A. Submission. Having received preliminary approval, the developer or
developer's authorized representative shall within three years or such
§ 405-10 INDIANA CODE § 405-12
1:312
time as permitted by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code
submit a final plan application for all or part of the plan given
preliminary approval. Ten copies of the application shall be provided,
plus a permanent copy for recording of the plan. If the developer does
not appear at the meeting at which developer's plan is received, the
Planning Commission may postpone review until the developer can be
present at a regularly scheduled meeting.
B. Review. The Planning Commission shall review the submitted
documents for conformance with this chapter and inclusion of any
conditions attached to preliminary approval. Distribution and
submission of materials shall follow the pattern for distribution of
copies for preliminary plan applications.
C. Approval. The Planning Commission shall render its decision within 90
days after officially receiving the plan at a regular meeting. The
decision shall be in writing and shall be communicated to the applicant
personally or mailed to applicant's last known address not later than 15
days following the decision. The decision shall set forth the reasons for
the disapproval, if that is the decision, specifying the defects found,
describing the requirements that were not met and citing the provisions
of the statute or ordinance relied upon. Failure of the Commission to
reach a decision or to communicate it within the time limits shall be
deemed an approval of the plan as presented. The final plan shall be
dated and signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the Commission if
approved, using the official stamp. The developer shall within 90 days
of final approval record the approved plan in the Indiana County office
of the Recorder of Deeds. Failure to record within the time limit shall
void the plan. At the time of submittal of the final plan, the developer
shall pay a fee in accordance with § 405-37 of this chapter.
D. Guarantee that improvements will be completed. Before approving any
final plan application, the Planning Commission shall require that the
developer deposit with the Borough Council a guarantee of completion
of all improvements agreed upon at the time of final approval in the
form of a bond or the deposit of funds or securities to be held in escrow,
to the benefit of the Borough, such guarantee equal to 110% of the
value of the improvement as estimated by a qualified engineer. The
form and type of guarantee shall be approved by the Borough. The
Borough may permit partial release of the guarantee funds as
construction proceeds, provided that sufficient funds remain to
complete all the improvements in the estimation of the Borough
Engineer. Annually, the municipality may adjust the amount of financial
security by comparing the actual cost of the improvements which have
been completed and the estimated cost for the completion of the
remaining improvements as of the expiration of the 90th day after
either the original date scheduled for completion or a rescheduled date
of completion. Subsequent to this adjustment, the municipality may
require the developer to post additional security in order to assure that
the financial security equals 110%.
§ 405-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-12
1:313
§ 405-13. Preliminary plan submission requirements.
§ 405-14. Final plan submission requirements.
E. Maintenance bond as condition of immediate acceptance. If the
developer requests the Borough Council to accept the improvements
covered under the guarantee immediately after their completion, each
developer shall post a maintenance bond or shall deposit funds or
securities to be held in escrow for the benefit of the Borough, such bond
or deposit to equal 15% of the value of the improvements as completed
to run for a period of 12 months. As a condition of accepting the
developer's offer of a maintenance bond or escrow deposit, the Borough
Council shall take responsibility for the improvements upon their
completion. The form and type of maintenance guarantee shall be
approved by the Borough Council.
A. General information. Names and addresses of the property owner,
developer, and preparer of the plan; date that plan was prepared; total
acreage of the property; total number of lots or commercial units to be
accommodated; and density of development expressed as average lot
size or number of dwelling units per acre in a multifamily development.
B. Map of existing conditions and proposed plan. Scale not smaller than
one inch equals 50 feet or such scale as recommended by the
Subdivision Administrator; North arrow; title block; graphic scale;
boundary of the property showing bearings and distances of all lines
and arcs; names of owners of abutting property which may be
interpolated from USGS data; existing and proposed sanitary sewer,
water supply and storm sewer lines in approximate locations; existing
and proposed easements noting purpose; existing structures, railroads,
streams and other natural features; proposed plan of lots showing
approximate dimensions for each lot line; proposed location and height
of existing and proposed buildings and parking areas; proposed areas of
site grading indicating percentage of finished slopes; name and
dimensional requirements of the zoning district, required lot and
setback lines; and locational map relating the site to prominent features
in the vicinity at a scale of the USGS map.
C. Profiles. Where the developer proposes new streets, sanitary sewers,
and storm sewers the developer shall provide profiles along the center
line of the improvements showing grades with approximate
percentages, relationship to existing ground surface manholes, inlets,
and approximate lengths of tangents and curves.
D. Engineer's report, at the discretion of the Planning Commission, a
report of stormwater collection and retention in terms of impact on
downstream properties may be required as well as feasibility of water
supply if provided by wells as to quality, quantity, and likely depth, and
presence of flood-prone or slide-prone land on the property or adjacent
property.
§ 405-12 INDIANA CODE § 405-14
1:314
A. General information. The plan shall be prepared in accordance with the
Professional Engineers Registration Law (P.L. 913, No. 367)118 and shall
be presented on permanent material at a scale not smaller than one
inch equals 50 feet or such scale as recommended by the Subdivision
Administrator; North arrow; graphic scale; the preparing engineer's
seal shall be shown; a key map shall be provided if the plan is in
sections to show the relationship between the portion proposed for final
approval and that given preliminary approval; a title block shall be
placed in the lower right corner of the plan showing the plan name,
name and address of property owner, and prospective developer, if
different; name and address of engineer; and date of submission.
B. Plan for final approval and recording. All property boundary lines, lot
lines, street lines, and easement lines shall be shown by bearings and
distances to the nearest minute and tenth of a foot; zoning district and
building setback lines on all properties; street and easement widths,
pavement widths and street names; number of each lot running
consecutively over the entire plan given preliminary approval or
number corresponding to the assigned street number address, if
requested by the Borough; location of all monuments; designation of
areas to be dedicated for public or community use; names of abutting
property owners and subdivisions; location of structures, including
height of each and distances between adjacent buildings and between
buildings and adjacent property lines in a multifamily, commercial or
industrial plan; location of access points from adjacent roads, private
drives and parking areas indicating number of spaces if a multifamily,
commercial or industrial plan; proposed grading with contours at twofoot
intervals if a multifamily, commercial or industrial plan; sewage
collection lines showing line size, direction of flow and manholes; water
distribution lines showing line size, valves and hydrants; stormwater
lines showing line size, direction of flow, inlets and retention devices.
C. Profiles. Along the center line of all new street sections and sanitary
sewer and storm sewer lines, profiles shall be drawn at the same scale
as the plan showing the lengths and grades of tangents and curves and
curve data of all roads; the lengths of sanitary and storm sewer line
sections and slope of each; manholes and inlets with top and bottom
elevations; stormwater impoundments showing dam, spillway and
drainpipe.
D. Cross section. A section across a typical street right-of-way showing
materials to be used, depth of materials, dimensions, and grading to
create gutter lines.
E. Supporting documents. Evidence that the property is owned by the
person submitting the plan or that person has entered into a sales
agreement for the purchase; a statement describing in detail the
improvements to be built by the developer, together with estimates of
118. Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 148 et seq., the Engineer, Land Surveyor and Geologist
Registration Law.
§ 405-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-14
1:315
the cost of each; a completion bond properly executed and approved by
the Borough Solicitor, or a certified check, drawn to Indiana Borough,
to cover the full cost of the public improvements; and any restrictive
covenants to be applied by the developer upon the sale of lots in the
form of recording.
§ 405-14 INDIANA CODE § 405-14
1:316
ARTICLE IV
Subdivision Development Standards
§ 405-15. Streets.
§ 405-16. Lots.
A. Public streets. Street design and construction standards shall be in
accordance with specifications approved by the Indiana Borough
Council by resolution.
B. Private streets in a development plan. The Planning Commission may
approve a plan containing a private street or streets if the following
conditions are met:
(1) The developer shall state on the recorded plan that the street or
streets are private and that the Borough has no interest or
obligation in their maintenance.
(2) The plan shall state that the street abutting each lot to be sold in
the plan is private and the deed for each lot shall so provide. Any
utility easements within a private street shall be clearly marked on
the plan and identified as to width and use.
(3) A private street shall be permanently marked as private at its
intersection with a public road.
(4) The street shall be constructed to all public specifications for
grade, paving, and design as would be required by the Borough for
a public street.
(5) The right of passage over the private street or streets for the
maintenance of public utilities or for access of emergency vehicles
shall be guaranteed in writing to each utility and emergency
service involved. The developer shall file with the Borough a letter
granting such right of passage.
(6) An association shall be established by the developer for the
perpetual maintenance of the street or streets in the plan at no cost
to the Borough; such association shall be made up of all the owners
in the plan, each to share equally in the expenses of the association.
(7) The bylaws of the association shall be approved by the Borough
Solicitor, prior to recording of the plan, to guarantee protection of
the plan residents and the Borough.
(8) If, at a future time, the lot owners petition the Borough to adopt the
street or streets as a public street or streets, they, at their expense,
shall widen, reconstruct, or otherwise improve the street or streets
to meet the Borough's road specifications current at the time and
shall have completed the work to the Borough's satisfaction prior to
the acceptance of the street or streets by Borough Council.
§ 405-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-16
1:317
§ 405-17. Other considerations.
A. All lots shall be developed in conformity with the standards of the
Indiana Borough Zoning Ordinance,119 including, but not limited to, lot
size, setbacks, dimensional and bulk requirements, and proposed use.
B. Arrangement. As far as it is practical, the side lot lines shall be at right
angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines.
C. On a lot with irregular lot lines (several tangents and/or arcs), the
setback lines shall always be parallel with such irregular lot lines and
separated from the adjacent property lines by the minimum distances
required by the Zoning Ordinance.
A. Easements. Where alleys are not provided, easements not less than
eight feet in width shall be provided on each side of all rear lot lines as
necessary for public utilities. Easements of greater width may be
required along lot lines or across lots where necessary for sewer mains,
storm sewers, drainage ditches, watercourses, and similar conditions.
B. Natural features. The developer shall plan a major subdivision or
development plan to preserve the natural features of the site.
C. Dedication of public sites and open space or fees in lieu. (Reserved)
119. Editor's Note: See Ch. 460, Zoning.
§ 405-16 INDIANA CODE § 405-17
1:318
ARTICLE V
Public Improvements
The subdivider shall, at the subdivider's own expense, provide the following
public improvements which shall meet the minimum design standards of
this chapter and shall be shown on subdivider's final subdivision plan.
§ 405-18. Monuments and markers.
§ 405-19. Street improvements.
A. Type. Monuments shall be of concrete or stone with a minimum size of
four inches by 36 inches long and shall be marked on top with a onehalf-
inch round brass pin or a drilled hole. Markers shall consist of iron
pipes or iron or steel bars at least 24 inches long and not less than 1/2
inch in diameter.
B. Placement. Monuments and markers shall be placed so that the scored
or marked point shall coincide exactly with the intersection of lines to
be marked and shall be set so that the top of the monument or marker is
level with the surface of the surrounding ground.
C. Location of monument. Monuments shall be set at the intersection of all
lines forming angles in the boundary of the subdivision, at points where
street right-of-way lines cross a boundary and at points of intersection
of streets within the subdivision.
D. Location of markers. Markers shall be set:
(1) At the beginning and ending of all curves along street property
lines;
(2) At all points where lot lines intersect curves;
(3) At all angles in property lines of lots; and
(4) At all other lot corners.
E. Replacement. Any monuments or markers that are removed shall be
replaced by a registered engineer or surveyor at the developer's
expense until such time as the developer's involvement in the
subdivision ceases.
A. Minimum paving requirements. Streets shall be graded, surfaced, and
improved to the grades and dimensions shown on plans, profiles, and
cross sections submitted by the subdivider consistent with Borough
specifications, approved by the Borough Council through resolution.
B. Other improvements. The Borough may require a heavier pavement and
subbase than stipulated by the Borough street specifications if a
proposed street will function as the main access to a large residential
development or if the street will serve a commercial or industrial plan.
§ 405-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-19
1:319
C. Subsurface drainage. Prior to laying down the street surface, adequate
subsurface drainage and all subsurface utilities shall be provided or
installed by the developer. The size of the storm drainage structures
shall be computed by using Talbot's formula for runoff.
D. Slopes.
(1) Slopes of banks measured perpendicular to the center line of the
street shall not exceed three to one for fills and two to one for cuts.
(2) In all aspects in which standards for required improvements are
not set forth in this chapter or Borough specifications, the
applicable standard requirements of the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation shall govern, and all work shall be performed in
the manner prescribed in the standard specifications of that
Department for the type of construction under consideration.
E. Approval, maintenance, and security. The work of constructing streets
or roads, including the methods and materials incident thereto, shall be
subject to the approval of the Borough, with advice of its engineer and
professional consultants. Final acceptance of the completed streets or
roads shall rest with the Borough Council. The developer shall enter
into a contract with the Borough which provides that in consideration of
the acceptance of the roads or streets for inclusion in the Borough
street system, the developer agrees to construct the roads or streets in
the subdivision or development to the standards prescribed herein at
developer's own expense.
(1) In the event that the developer or subdivider desires to complete
the construction of the streets after the plan is placed on record,
the developer shall be required to submit a cost estimate prepared
by a registered professional engineer setting forth all items of work
to be performed and the estimated cost. The estimate shall be
subject to the approval of the Borough Engineer. A certified check
or contract performance bond issued by a surety company, subject
to the approval of the Borough Council, in an amount equal to the
approved estimate to insure the completion of the work, shall be
filed with the Borough. All construction items shall be completed
within one year after the plan is placed on record, except where
bituminous paving construction is required. When bituminous
construction is required, it shall be completed within two years
after the plan is placed on record.
(2) The certified check shall be made payable to the Borough. In the
event the work is satisfactorily completed within the time specified,
the funds from the certified check, or surety bond as the case may
be, shall be returned.
(3) The developer or subdivider shall be required to maintain all
culverts, ditches, backslopes, and shoulders until the Borough
accepts the street.
§ 405-19 INDIANA CODE § 405-20
1:320
§ 405-20. Sanitary sewage disposal.
§ 405-21. Water supply.
§ 405-22. Storm drainage and site grading.
§ 405-23. Curbs, gutters, and sidewalks.
A. Every structure in any subdivision or development plan shall be
connected to the public sewage disposal system.
B. Connection to the public system shall be in accordance with the
ordinances, rules, and regulations of the Borough of Indiana.
C. No storm sewers, footer drains, or downspouts shall be connected to
any sanitary sewage disposal system.
A. Every dwelling and each commercial or industrial business shall be
connected to the public water supply.
B. Water lines shall be installed in accordance with the regulations of the
company providing the water supply.
A. All areas of a subdivision or development plan to be developed shall be
graded to assure positive drainage. Any areas that hold water, contain
habitual swamp conditions, have no drainage outlet, or harbor insects
or other disease-carrying or -producing agents shall be drained even
though not otherwise to be developed, unless designed to create a
permanent pond.
B. Storm sewers, culverts and related installations shall be provided to
insure the unimpeded but controlled flow of natural watercourses and
to guarantee the drainage of all low points along curblines or gutter
lines, as well as at intervals related to slope, for all streets in or
adjacent to the plan.
C. The intersection of driveways and streets shall be designed to permit
uninterrupted flow along the gutter line or via a pipe of sufficient size to
carry the runoff below the driveway. In no case shall stormwater
flowing down a driveway be permitted to cross a public street on the
surface.
D. Developers shall design their storm drainage system in accordance with
the Indiana Borough Stormwater Management Ordinance120 and/or
applicable specifications.
E. No grading shall occur within five feet of any subdivision or
development plan except as is needed for the entrance of streets or to
grade off land immediately adjacent to a street to the street's elevation.
120. Editor's Note: See Ch. 395, Stormwater Management.
§ 405-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-23
1:321
§ 405-24. Erosion and sedimentation control.
§ 405-25. Floodprone area special regulations.
In any areas of the Borough where maps or data prepared by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development, Flood Insurance
Administration (Flood Hazard Area Maps), indicate a floodplain exists,
development of any kind proposed to take place within such floodplain shall
not be approved, and no building permits for construction shall be issued,
unless requirements of the Borough Flood-Prone Area Regulations have
been met.
§ 405-26. Additional requirements.
A. Every public street or road shall be crowned to create gutter lines on
each side of the travel lanes with curbing installed pursuant to Borough
specifications.
B. Curb cuts and storm inlets shall be placed in the initial curb installation.
C. Sidewalks are required for all subdivision and land developments and
shall be installed pursuant to Borough specifications as adopted by
resolution.
D. Sidewalks shall be placed in the existing or proposed street right-ofway.
E. If sidewalks are installed on grades exceeding 10%, steps, step ramps,
landings, and suitable railings shall be installed.
A. Before final approval by the Borough of any land development, an
erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be provided by the
developer's engineer.
B. The plan shall be prepared in accordance with requirements contained
in the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Manual published by the
Pennsylvania DEP January 1974, as amended, and shall be acceptable,
after review, to the Indiana County Office, Soil Conservation Service.
A. The Borough may require streetlights at intersections within a
subdivision or development plan to be furnished and installed by the
developer and maintained by the Borough.
B. Streetlights shall be on their own standards and shall be serviced by an
underground conduit or as required by state law.
C. Street name signs and posts approved by the Borough Council shall be
placed by the developer at all street intersections within a subdivision
plan and at the intersection of existing streets and streets entering the
plan.
D. The Borough Engineer shall inspect all required improvements within
an approved subdivision or development plan as they are installed. He
§ 405-23 INDIANA CODE § 405-26
1:322
shall inspect and approve road construction after rough grading is
completed, before subbase is applied and before and after the wearing
course or seal coat is put down. He shall also inspect trenches to
receive storm drain lines just before the lines are installed and just
before backfilling.
E. Upon completion of all required public improvements in a subdivision
plan or other development, plans and profiles of the improvements as
completed shall be filed with the Borough.
§ 405-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-26
1:323

ARTICLE VI
Additional Standards for Land Developments That Are Not
Subdivisions
§ 405-27. Conditions for considerations as minor development.
Upon the request of a developer, a land development plan which is not
a subdivision may be considered by the Planning Commission as a minor
development and proceed directly to final plan submittal if the following
conditions are met:
§ 405-28. Required information.
All land development plan submittals shall include the following information
in conformity with the Borough Zoning Ordinance:
A. If the proposal is for dwellings and no more than two dwelling units are
involved as defined by the Borough Zoning Ordinance.121
B. If the proposal is for nonresidential development that involves a square
footage increase of no greater than 2,500 square feet of building area.
C. The ordinance requires no new public street and does not necessitate a
traffic impact study.
A. A depiction of required parking and loading areas.
B. The proposed use of all buildings and structures, using language and
terminology from the Borough Zoning Ordinance.
C. The number of proposed dwelling units, including any proposed for
student occupancy.
D. All existing and proposed buildings, with a depiction of required lot and
setback lines, coverage calculations, and other dimensional standards.
E. Proposed lighting and landscaping plans.
121. Editor's Note: See Ch. 460, Zoning.
§ 405-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-28
1:325

ARTICLE VII
Traffic Impact Studies
§ 405-29. Purpose.
The purpose of a traffic impact study is:
§ 405-30. Administration.
A. To allow the Borough to determine the safety and congestion impacts
and related costs of proposed major traffic-generating uses.
B. To require that applicants respond with reasonable proposals to resolve
the negative traffic impacts that their proposed uses will cause to the
public.
C. To recognize that sufficient federal, state, and Borough funds are not
available to resolve traffic problems caused by private development.
D. To assist in carrying out Section 503(2)(ii) and (3) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.122
E. To ensure that streets bordering a subdivision or land development are
coordinated and of such widths and grades and in such locations as
deemed necessary to accommodate prospective traffic and to facilitate
fire protection.
F. To ensure that the access into and out of subdivisions and land
developments is reasonably safe.
A. The Borough may require a full or abbreviated traffic study as a part of
its review process for subdivisions and land developments to be
prepared in a manner consistent with the standards of this article.
B. The full cost of the traffic study shall be borne by the applicant. Any
costs associated with professional review of the traffic study by the
Borough's professional consultants shall also be borne by the applicant.
The applicant shall provide the appropriate escrow to ensure the
payment of the costs of such traffic study review.
C. Traffic impact studies shall be prepared by a qualified traffic engineer
and/or transportation planner with previous traffic study experience. To
be considered as qualified, the engineer or planner shall have
completed at least three comparable studies and shall make copies of
same available to the Borough. The Borough reserves the right to
review and approve the qualifications of any proposed consultant.
D. The Borough shall require such on-site traffic improvements to be
provided by the applicant as the Borough deems appropriate, in light of
the traffic impact study, as a specific condition of preliminary plan
approval for all land developments and/or subdivisions for which a
122. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(2)(ii) and (3).
§ 405-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-30
1:327
§ 405-31. Determination of level of traffic study required.
study has been required. The study shall identify improvements/
facilities to be installed or actions to be undertaken by the applicant.
E. Joint traffic studies by different applicants are acceptable and are
strongly encouraged.
A. The Borough, with advice of its own professional consultants, shall
make a determination on the level of traffic study required based upon
two factors: the location of the proposed development and the projected
traffic generation of the proposed development.
(1) Location factors. The Borough has identified as stressed road in its
Comprehensive Plan and subsequent studies Philadelphia Street, S.
Sixth Street, Oakland Avenue, and Wayne Avenue.
(2) As deemed necessary by changes in information gathering and new
land developments, the Borough may remove or add new stressed
roads and intersections as necessary upon the recommendation of
the Planning Commission and resolution by the Borough Council.
B. Traffic study level requirements.
(1) Based upon the location and trip generation characteristics, the
Borough shall use the following table as a guide for the level of
traffic study required:
Trip Generation at
Peak Hours
Location Directly
Accessing a
Stressed Road or
Within 200 Feet of
a Stressed Road
Other
Locations
At least 50 trips but less
than 100 trips
Full study Abbreviated
study
More than 100 trips Full study Full study
(2) The Borough may, in its discretion, require any other subdivision or
land development application to be accompanied by an abbreviated
traffic impact study. In such circumstances, the Borough will notify
the applicant within 10 days following the Planning Commission's
first meeting with the applicant. Such notification shall specify the
reason for the requirement, citing the proposal's particular
location, existing problems, or type of use (i.e., generation of heavy
truck traffic).
C. Determination of peak-hour trips. As a general guide, the Borough shall
utilize the second edition of Transportation and Land Development, as
published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), included
in the table below for reference. The Borough may utilize alternative
information provided by the developer for more specific land uses, if
§ 405-30 INDIANA CODE § 405-31
1:328
consistent with the ITE trip generation manual and if consistent with
the advice of its professional consultants.
Land Use
50 or More Peak-
Hour Trips
100 or More Peak-
Hour Trips
Single-family
dwellings
45 dwelling units 90 dwelling units
Apartments 75 dwelling units 150 dwelling units
Townhouses or
condominiums
90 dwelling units 180 dwelling units
Retail/shopping
centers
3,000 square feet
gross floor area
6,000 square feet
gross floor area
Convenience store/gas
stations
3 pumps 7 pumps
Banks with drive-in 1,000 square feet
gross floor area
2,000 square feet
gross floor area
Professional offices 33,500 square feet
gross floor area
67,000 square feet
gross floor area
Medical/dental offices 15,000 square feet
gross floor area
30,000 square feet
gross floor area
Research and
development/
corporate offices
35,500 square feet
gross floor area
71,000 square feet
gross floor area
Light industrial/
warehousing
distribution centers
49,000 square feet
gross floor area
98,000 square feet
gross floor area
Heavy industry 72,750 square feet
gross floor area
145,500 square feet
gross floor area
Colleges and
universities (General
guideline: specific
residential or other
special-purpose
facilities may have
higher trip
generation.)
1/2 acre of developed
land area
1 acre of developed
land area
D. Abbreviated study requirements.
(1) The following abbreviated traffic impact study shall be required as
part of the preliminary plan submission. Development of a project
in stages or on a phased basis will not avoid this requirement. The
trips expected to be produced by the ultimate buildout of the
development will be the basis for such a study. Even if a
development generates less than the required peak-hour trips, it is
not totally excluded from the adequacy requirements of these
§ 405-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-31
1:329
guidelines unless site traffic generation is anticipated to be de
minimus (less than five peak-hour trips).
(2) A written abbreviated traffic study, where appropriate, and a
traffic-calming and access management analysis shall be submitted
at the time of the preliminary plan application and shall include:
(a) Projected peak a.m., p.m., and Saturday traffic volumes of the
development;
(b) Projected ADT (average daily trips) of the development;
(c) Current ADT and peak-hour volumes of streets adjacent to any
access drives;
(d) LOS (level of service) of existing and proposed access drives;
(e) Modal split of services (categories of vehicles) entering the
site;
(f) Proposed sight distances at access drives;
(g) Existing and proposed pedestrian paths from streets and
within the site to entrances of all buildings;
(h) The study shall identify improvements and facilities to be
installed or actions to be undertaken by the applicant to ensure
the following:
[1] LOS C or higher overall for all new access drives;
[2] No reduction in the levels of service for existing access
drives, except that LOS D shall be permitted during the
a.m. and p.m. peak hour. If an applicant cannot meet this
requirement, an analysis shall be completed to show that
all reasonable options have been considered to create the
most efficient access possible; and
[3] Sight distances for all access drives intersecting with all
streets shall meet Borough and/or PennDOT requirements,
as applicable.
E. Full traffic impact study.
(1) A written full traffic study and, where appropriate, traffic-calming
and access management measures shall be submitted at the time of
preliminary plan application. The study area shall include all public
streets and intersections within a radius of 1,600 feet of an access
drive to the site, unless the Borough's consulting traffic engineer
determines that another study area shall be more appropriate. The
full traffic study shall include, at a minimum, the following:
(a) Current ADT and peak-hour volumes of all streets.
§ 405-31 INDIANA CODE § 405-31
1:330
(b) Current LOS of all intersections.
(c) Projected ADT and peak-hour volumes of all streets without the
development.
(d) Projected LOS of all intersections without the development.
(e) Site traffic generation, including projected ADT and peak-hour
volumes of the development. Development of a project in
stages, or on a piecemeal basis, must create a realistic
assumption expected to be produced by the ultimate buildout
of the development.
(f) Site traffic distribution.
(g) Site traffic assignment.
(h) Projected ADT and peak-hour volumes of all streets and
intersections within the development.
(i) Projected LOS of all intersections within the development,
including all existing and proposed access drives.
(j) An assessment of the change in roadway operating conditions
resulting from the development traffic.
(k) Modal split of vehicles entering the site.
(l) Proposed sight distances at access drives.
(m) Existing and proposed pedestrian paths from streets and
within the site to entrances of all buildings.
(2) The study shall identify improvements and facilities to be installed
or actions to be undertaken by the applicant to ensure the
following:
(a) LOS C or higher overall for all new access driveways.
(b) No reduction in the levels of service for existing access
driveways, except that LOS D shall be permitted during the
a.m. and p.m. peak hour. If an applicant cannot meet this
requirement, an analysis shall be completed to show that all
reasonable options have been considered to create the most
efficient access possible.
(c) No reduction in the levels of service of intersections within the
study area as a result of the development; however, if the
intersection already has an LOS, no reduction in the
intersection delay shall occur.
(d) Sight distances for all access drives intersecting with all rightsof-
way shall meet Borough and/or PennDOT requirements, as
applicable.
§ 405-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-31
1:331
F. Implementation. The Borough shall review the traffic impact study to
analyze its adequacy in solving any traffic problems that will occur due
to the land development or subdivision. The Borough's professional
consultants shall review the study and submit their review comments to
the Borough. These review comments shall be part of the Borough's
official review and approval process. The Borough may decide that
certain improvements on an adjacent site within the study area are
necessary for land development or subdivision plan approval and may
attach these conditions to the approval. If the municipality concludes
that additional improvements are necessary, the developer shall have
the opportunity to resubmit alternative improvement designs to obtain
plan approval.
§ 405-31 INDIANA CODE § 405-31
1:332
ARTICLE VIII
Administration
§ 405-32. Modifications.
§ 405-33. Amendments to chapter.
A. The Planning Commission may grant a modification of the requirements
of one or more provisions of this chapter if the literal enforcement will
exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the
land in question, provided that such modification will not be contrary to
the public interest and that the purpose and intent of the chapter is
observed.
B. All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall be included
in the application for development. The request shall state in full the
grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which the
request is based, the provision or provisions of the ordinance involved,
and the minimum modification necessary.
C. The modification, if authorized, will represent the minimum deviation
that will afford relief and will represent the least modification possible
of the regulation in issue.
D. The condition leading to the request for modification shall not have
been created by the applicant.
E. The Planning Commission shall keep a written record of all action on
requests for modification.
F. The specific wording of the modification shall be written in ink upon the
recording tracing and signed and dated by the Chairman of the
Planning Commission, if the modification is granted. If the modification
is denied, the owner and/or developer may not again submit the same
application for modification for a least one year after such rejection.
A. The provisions of this chapter may from time to time be amended,
supplemented, changed, or repealed in accordance with the following
procedure and with the current regulations of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.123
B. A proposal for an amendment may be initiated in any of the following
ways:
(1) A request to the Planning Commission by the Borough Council;
(2) A proposal by the Planning Commission; or
(3) A petition presented to the Planning Commission by a property
owner in the municipality or by a prospective owner who has
entered in an agreement to purchase property in the municipality.
123. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 405-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-33
1:333
§ 405-34. Unlawful recording and sale of lots.
§ 405-35. Violation and penalites.
Any person who being the owner or agent of the owner of any lot, tract,
or parcel of land who lays out or subdivides any lot, tract, or parcel of
land, constructs opens or dedicates any street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer,
water main, or other improvement for public use, travel or other purposes
or for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon, or who
sells, transfers, agrees to enter into an agreement to sell any land in a
subdivision or land development, whether by reference to or by other use
of a plat of such subdivision or land development, or erects any building
thereon, without a final plat having been prepared in full compliance with
the provisions of these regulations and without having recorded the plan as
provided herein, shall be guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter,
and upon conviction thereof in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by Borough of Indiana, such person or member of such partnership or the
officers of such corporation, or the agent or any of them responsible for
such violation shall pay a judgment of not more that $500 plus all court
costs including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the municipality as a
result thereof. Each lot or parcel within a subdivision on which a violation
C. Procedures for consideration. Upon receiving a request or petition for
an amendment or upon making a proposal, the Planning Commission
shall prepare a report on the proposal with a copy sent to the Borough
Council. Borough Council shall schedule a public hearing to consider
the proposed amendment.
D. If Borough Council proposes an amendment, it shall allow the
Commission at least 30 days prior to public hearing to review and make
recommendations on the proposed amendment.
E. At least 30 days prior to the public hearing, the proposed amendment
shall be submitted to the County Planning Commission for
recommendations.
F. Procedures for the public hearing, public notice, and enactment
procedures shall be in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.
A. No plan of a subdivision or land development proposed for Indiana
Borough shall be recorded in the Indiana County Recorder of Deeds
office unless that plan shall bear the certified approval of the Planning
Commission.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, trade, lease, or otherwise
convey or offer to sell, trade, lease, or otherwise convey any lot or
parcel of land as part of or in conformity with any plan, plat, or replat of
any subdivision or land development unless and until said plan, plat, or
replat shall have been first recorded in the office of the County
Recorder of Deeds.
§ 405-33 INDIANA CODE § 405-35
1:334
is found may be considered a separate offense. Each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation unless the District Judge
determining that there has been a violation further determines there was
a good faith basis for the person, partnership, or corporation violating the
ordinance to believe there was no such violation, in which event there
shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination of violation by the District Judge,
and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation. All fines collected for such violations shall be paid over
to the municipality. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument
of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring
shall not exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties.
§ 405-36. Enforcement.
§ 405-37. Fees.
A. The provisions of these regulations shall be enforced by an
administrator appointed by and responsible to the Borough Council.
B. The administrator shall review proposals for subdivision and land
development plans and submit them with recommendations to the
Planning Commission for action in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter; shall enter upon, at the administrator's discretion,
subdivision and land development plans in the process of construction
to evaluate compliance with the terms of approved plans; shall point out
to the developer discrepancies in the development and demand
remedial action to guarantee compliance within 30 days of noting the
discrepancy; and shall otherwise act as the Borough's agent in the
enforcement of these regulations.
A. Fees for subdivision plans and land development plans shall be
established by the Indiana Borough Council. Such administrative, filing,
review, and inspection fees may be separate for various alternative
forms of subdivision and land development. Review fees shall include
the review of subdivision plans, land development site plans, and
stormwater management plans. Fees may also include the field
inspection of such plats, plans, or site plans and their final inspection.
The fees charged shall be in accordance with Sections 503(1), 509 and
510 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.124 Fees for the
review and administrative processing of subdivision and land
development plans will be charged at the time of application. The fees
shall be set by resolution by Indiana Borough Council and may be
amended from time to time by resolution.
B. The applicant shall reimburse the Borough of Indiana for the
reasonable and necessary charges by the Borough's professional
consultants or engineers for review and report thereon to the
municipality, for the inspection of improvements, and for administrative
124. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10503(1), 10509 and 10510.
§ 405-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-37
1:335
§ 405-38. Injunctive and other proceedings.
Notwithstanding the imposition of any penalties hereunder, the Borough
may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to require compliance
with or to enjoin violation of the provisions of these regulations or any
administrative orders or determinations made pursuant to these
regulations.
§ 405-39. Conflict with other provisions.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances or regulations in conflict with this
chapter or inconsistent with the provisions hereof are hereby repealed
to the extent necessary to give this chapter full force and effect. Where
another ordinance, regulation or restrictive covenant imposes a higher
standard in a particular control or restriction, that standard shall supersede
this chapter in that particular instance.
§ 405-40. When effective.
This chapter is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public
health, safety, morals and general welfare and shall be in full force and
effect immediately upon passage and publication.
expenses. Such reimbursement shall be based upon a schedule of fees
established by resolution of the Indiana Borough Council. Such
schedule of fees may be amended or changed from time to time by
resolution of the Indiana Borough Council. If, within 45 days of the
date of billing, the applicant disputes the amount of the expense, the
disputed matter shall be subject to the procedures established in
Section 503(1) and Section 510(g) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code,125 Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as reenacted and
amended.
125. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10503(1) and 10510(g).
§ 405-37 INDIANA CODE § 405-40
1:336
Chapter 414
TAXATION
§ 405-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-40
1:337

ARTICLE I
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 10-3-1972 by Ord. No. 1064 (Ch. XXIV, Part 3, Secs. 51 to
63); amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 414-1. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, 53
P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 414-2. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Indiana
Earned Income and Net Profits Tax Ordinance."
§ 414-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other
unincorporated group of two or more persons.
BUSINESS — An enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking of
an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for
profit whether by a person, partnership, association or any other entity.
CORPORATION — A corporation or joint-stock association organized under
the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any
other state, territory, foreign country or dependency.
CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his permanent home and
to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent. Actual
residence is not necessarily "domicile," for "domicile" is the fixed place of
abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than
transitory. "Domicile" is the voluntary fixed place of habitation of a person,
not for a mere special or limited purpose, but with the present intention of
making a permanent home, until some event occurs to induce him to adopt
some other permanent home. In the case of businesses or associations, the
domicile is that place considered as the center of business affairs and the
place where its functions are discharged.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation as determined under Section 303 of
the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform Code of
1971," and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Part I, Subpart B, Article V (relating
to personal income tax), not including, however, wages or compensation
paid to individuals on active military service. Employee business expenses
are allowable deductions as determined under Article III of the Tax Reform
Code of 1971. The amount of any housing allowance provided to a member
of the clergy shall not be taxable as earned income.
§ 414-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 414-3
1:339
EARNED INCOME AND NET PROFITS TAX OFFICER or OFFICER — That
person, public employee, private agency or other entity designated by the
Borough Council to collect and administer the tax on earned income and net
profits. The elected (or appointed) Real Property Tax Collector shall be and
shall serve as the Earned Income and Net Profits Tax Officer of the Borough
of Indiana.
EMPLOYER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, institution,
governmental body or unit or agency or any other entity employing one or
more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, except corporations, determined under Section
303 of the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform
Code of 1971," and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Part I, Subpart B, Article V
(relating to personal income tax). The term does not include income which
is not paid for services provided and which is in the nature of earnings from
an investment. For taxpayers engaged in the business, profession or activity
of farming, the term shall not include:
NONRESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled outside the Borough of Indiana.
PERSON OR INDIVIDUAL — A natural person.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
RESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled
in the Borough of Indiana.
SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
TAXPAYER — Person, partnership, association or any other entity required
hereunder to file a return of earned income or net profits or to pay a tax
thereon.
§ 414-4. Imposition of tax.
The following taxes are hereby imposed, for general municipal purposes,
under the authority of Act No. 511 of 1965, the Local Tax Enabling Act:
Any interest earnings generated from any monetary accounts or
investment instruments of the farming business;
A.
B. Any gain on the sale of farm machinery;
Any gain on the sale of livestock held 12 months or more for draft,
breeding or dairy purposes; and
C.
D. Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of the farm.
A. One percent of all earned income earned during the current year by
residents.
§ 414-3 INDIANA CODE § 414-4
1:340
§ 414-5. Declaration and payment of tax.
B. One percent of all earned income earned during the current year by
nonresidents for work done or services rendered in the Borough of
Indiana.
C. One percent of all net profits earned during the current year by
businesses, professions and other activities conducted by residents.
D. One percent of the net profits earned during the current year by
businesses, professions and other activities conducted in the Borough
of Indiana by nonresidents.
A. Net profits.
(1) Every taxpayer making net profits shall, on or before April 15 of the
current year, make and file with the Officer on a form prescribed or
approved by the Officer, a declaration of his estimated net profits
during the period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of
the current year and pay to the Officer in four equal quarterly
installments the tax due thereon as follows: the first installment at
the time of filing the declaration and the other installments on or
before June 15 of the current year, September 15 of the current
year and January 15 of the succeeding year, respectively.
(2) Any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profit after April 15 of
the current year shall make and file the declaration hereinabove
required on or before June 15 of the current year, September 15 of
the current year or December 31 of the current year, whichever of
these dates next follows the date on which the taxpayer first
anticipates such net profit and pay to the Officer in equal
installments the tax due thereon on or before the quarterly
payment dates which remain after the filing of the declaration.
(3) Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding year,
make and file with the Officer on a form prescribed or approved by
the Officer a final return showing the amount of net profits earned
during the period beginning January 1 of the current year and
ending December 31 of the current year, the total amount of tax
due thereon and the total amount of tax paid thereon. At the time of
filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay to the Officer the
balance of tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in the
case of overpayment.
(4) Any taxpayer may, in lieu of paying the fourth quarterly installment
of his estimated tax, elect to make and file with the Officer on or
before January 31 of the succeeding year, the final return as
hereinabove required.
(5) The Officer is hereby authorized to provide by regulation for the
making and filing of adjusted declarations of estimated net profits
and for the payments of the estimated tax in cases where a
§ 414-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 414-5
1:341
§ 414-6. Collection at source.
taxpayer who has filed the declaration hereinabove required
anticipates additional net profits not previously declared or finds
that he has overestimated his anticipated net profits.
(6) Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of
the current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of
business, file his final return as hereinabove required and pay the
tax due.
B. Earned income.
(1) Annual earned income tax return. Every taxpayer shall, on or
before April 15 of the succeeding year, make and file with the
Officer on a form prescribed or approved by the Officer, a final
return showing the amount of earned income received during the
period beginning January 1 of the current year and ending
December 31 of the current year, the total amount of tax due
thereon, the amount of tax paid thereon, the amount of tax thereon
that has been withheld pursuant to the provisions relating to the
collection at source and the balance of tax due. At the time of filing
the final return, the taxpayer shall pay the balance of the tax due or
shall make demand for refund or credit in the case of overpayment.
(2) Earned income not subject to withholding. Every taxpayer who is
employed for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation
and who received any earned income not subject to the provisions
relating to collection at source, shall make and file with the Officer
on a form prescribed or approved by the Officer, a quarterly return
on or before April 30 of the current year, July 31 of the current year,
October 31 of the current year and January 31 of the succeeding
year, setting forth the aggregate amount of earned income not
subject to withholding earned by him during the three-month
periods ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the current
year, September 30 of the current year and December 31 of the
current year, respectively, and subject to the tax, together with
such other information as the Officer may require. Every taxpayer
making such return shall at the time of filing thereof pay to the
Officer the amount of tax shown as due thereon.
A. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the Borough of Indiana who employs
one or more persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation, who has not previously registered,
shall, within 15 days after becoming an employer, register with the
Officer his name and address and such other information as the Officer
may require.
B. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch warehouse
or other place of business within the Borough of Indiana who employs
§ 414-5 INDIANA CODE § 414-6
1:342
one or more persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation, shall deduct at the time of payment
thereof, the tax imposed by this article on the earned income due to his
employee or employees and shall, on or before April 30 of the current
year, July 31 of the current year, October 31 of the current year and
January 31 of the succeeding year, file a return and pay to the Officer
the amount of taxes deducted during the preceding three-month period
ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the current year,
September 30 of the current year and December 31 of the current year,
respectively. Such return unless otherwise agreed upon between the
Officer and employer shall show the name and social security number
of each such employee, the earned income of such employee during
said preceding three-month period, the tax deducted therefrom, the
political subdivisions imposing the tax upon such employee, the total
earned income of all such employees during such preceding threemonth
period and the total tax deducted therefrom and paid with the
return.
C. Any employer who for two of the preceding four quarterly periods has
failed to deduct the proper tax, or any part thereof, or has failed to pay
over the proper amount of tax to the Borough of Indiana, may be
required by the Officer to file his return and pay the tax monthly. In
such cases, payments of tax shall be made to the Officer on or before
the last day of the month succeeding the month for which the tax was
withheld.
D. On or before February 28 of the succeeding year, every employer shall
file with the Officer:
(1) An annual return showing the total amount of earned income paid,
the total amount of tax deducted and the total amount of tax paid to
the Officer for the period beginning January 1 of the current year
and ending December 31 of the current year.
(2) A return withholding statement for each employee employed
during all or any part of the period beginning January 1 of the
current year and ending December 31 of the current year, setting
forth the employee's name, address and social security number, the
amount of earned income paid to the employee during said period,
the amount of tax deducted, the political subdivisions imposing the
tax upon such employee and the amount of tax paid to the Officer.
Every employer shall furnish two copies of the individual return to
the employee for whom it is filed.
E. Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the
current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business,
file the returns and withholding statements hereinabove required and
pay the tax due.
F. Except as otherwise provided in Section 9 of Act 511 of 1965,126 every
employer who willfully or negligently fails or omits to make the
§ 414-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 414-6
1:343
§ 414-7. Powers and duties of Earned Income and Net Profits Tax
Officer.
deductions required by this section shall be liable for payment of the
taxes which he was required to withhold to the extent that such taxes
have not been recovered from the employee.
G. The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions
required by this section shall not relieve any employee from the
payment of the tax or from complying with the requirements of this
article relating to the filing of declarations and returns.
A. It shall be the duty of the Officer to collect and receive the taxes, fines
and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his duty to keep a
record showing the amount received by him from each person or
business paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
B. The Officer, before entering upon his official duties, shall give and
acknowledge a bond to the Borough of Indiana in such amount and with
such surety as designated from time to time by the Borough Council.
C. The Officer is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and
enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the
administration and enforcement of this article, including provisions for
the reexamination and correction of declarations and returns and of
payments alleged or found to be incorrect, or as to which an
overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred and to make refunds
in case of overpayment, for any period of time not to exceed six years
subsequent to the date of payment of the sum involved, and to prescribe
forms necessary for the administration of this article. No rule or
regulation of any kind shall be enforceable unless it has been approved
by resolution of the Borough Council. A copy of such rules and
regulations currently in force shall be available for public inspection.
D. The Officer shall refund, on petition of and proof by the taxpayer,
earned income tax paid on the taxpayer's ordinary and necessary
business expenses to the extent that such expenses are not paid by
taxpayer's employer.
E. The Officer and agents designated by him are hereby authorized to
examine the books, papers and records of any employer or of any
taxpayer or of any person whom the Officer reasonably believes to be an
employer or taxpayer, in order to verify the accuracy of any declaration
or return or if no declaration or return was filed, to ascertain the tax
due. Every employer and every taxpayer and every person whom the
Officer reasonably believes to be an employer or taxpayer is hereby
directed and required to give to the Officer, or to any agent designated
by him, the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination and
investigations, as are hereby authorized.
126. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6909.
§ 414-6 INDIANA CODE § 414-7
1:344
§ 414-8. Compensation of Officer.
The Officer shall receive such compensation for his services and expenses
as determined by the Borough Council.
§ 414-9. Suit for collection of tax.
F. Any information gained by the Officer, his agents or by any other official
or agent of the Borough of Indiana, as a result of any declarations,
returns, investigations, hearings or verifications required or authorized
by this article shall be confidential, except for official purposes and
except in accordance with a proper judicial order or as otherwise
provided by law.
G. The Officer is authorized to establish different filing, reporting and
payment dates for taxpayers whose fiscal years do not coincide with the
calendar year.
H. The Officer shall distribute earned income taxes to the appropriate
political subdivisions within 60 days of the deadline for payment by an
employer as set forth in § 414-6B. The political subdivisions shall not be
required to request the Officer to distribute the funds collected but
shall at least annually reconcile their receipts with the records of the
Officer and return to or credit the Officer with any overpayment. A
political subdivision shall not be required to pay a fee or commission to
the other political subdivision or its tax officer for tax revenue
distributed under this subsection. If the Officer, within one year after
receiving a tax payment, cannot identify the taxing jurisdiction entitled
to a tax payment, he shall make payment to the municipality in which
the tax was collected. If earned income taxes are not distributed to the
appropriate political subdivision within one year of receipt, the political
subdivision may make a written demand on a tax officer or political
subdivision for tax revenues collected and attributable to residents of
the political subdivision making the demand. If the taxes attributable to
residents of the political subdivision making the demand are not paid
within 30 days from the date of the demand, the political subdivision,
person, public employee or private agency designated by the political
subdivision may enter into an arbitration agreement with the officer
under 42 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 73, Subch. A (relating to statutory arbitration),
or bring an action in an appropriate court of common pleas in the name
of the taxing district for the recovery of taxes not distributed in
accordance with this subsection. The action must be brought within
seven years of the collection of the taxes.
A. The Officer may sue in the name of the Borough of Indiana for the
recovery of taxes due and unpaid under this article.
B. Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by this article shall be
begun within three years after such tax is due, or within three years
after the declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is later;
provided, however, that this limitation shall not prevent the institution
§ 414-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 414-9
1:345
§ 414-10. Interest and penalties.
of a suit for the collection of any tax due or determined to be due in the
following cases:
(1) Where no declaration or return was filed by any person although a
declaration or return was required to be filed by him under
provisions of this article there shall be no limitation.
(2) Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any
person or of other evidence relating to such declaration or return in
the possession of the Officer reveals a fraudulent evasion of taxes
there shall be no limitation.
(3) In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability of 25% or
more and no fraud, suit shall be begun within six years.
(4) Where any person has deducted taxes under the provision of this
article and has failed to pay the amounts so deducted to the Officer,
or where any person has willfully failed or omitted to make the
deductions required by § 414-6, there shall be no limitation.
C. This section shall not be construed to limit the Borough Council from
recovering delinquent taxes by any other means provided by law.
D. The Officer may sue for recovery of an erroneous refund provided such
suit is begun two years after making such refund, except that the suit
may be brought within five years if it appears that any part of the refund
was induced by fraud or misrepresentation of material fact.
A. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
per annum on the amount of said tax and an additional penalty of 1/2 of
1% of the amount of the said tax for each month or fraction thereof
during which the tax remains unpaid shall be added and collected.
Where suit is brought for the recovery of any such tax, the person liable
therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of collection and the
interest and penalties herein imposed.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A, the governing body
may, by ordinance or resolution, establish a one-time period during
which interest or interest and penalties that would otherwise be
imposed for the nonreporting or underreporting of earned income tax
liabilities or for the nonpayment of earned income taxes previously
imposed and due shall be waived in total or in part if the taxpayer
voluntarily files delinquent returns and pays the taxes in full during the
period so established. The governing body may adopt regulations to
implement the provisions of this subsection.
C. The provisions of Subsection B shall not affect or terminate any
petitions, investigations, prosecutions or other proceedings pending
under the provisions of this article or prevent the commencement or
further prosecution of any proceedings by the proper authorities for
§ 414-9 INDIANA CODE § 414-10
1:346
§ 414-11. Violations and penalties.
§ 414-12. Applicability.
This article shall not apply to any person or property as to whom or which
it is beyond the legal power of the Borough of Indiana to impose the tax or
duties herein provided for.
violations of this article. No proceedings shall, however, be commenced
on the basis of delinquent returns filed pursuant to Subsection B, if
the returns are determined to be substantially true and correct and the
taxes are paid in full within the prescribed time.
A. Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to make any declaration or
return required by this article, any employer who fails, neglects or
refuses to register or to pay the tax deducted from his employees or
fails, neglects or refuses to deduct or withhold the tax from his
employees and any person who refuses to permit the Officer or any
agent designated by him to examine his books, records and papers and
any person who knowingly makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent
return or attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full
disclosure of the amount of his net profits or earned income in order to
avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed by this
article shall, upon conviction thereof before any Magisterial District
Judge or court of competent jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $500 for each offense and costs and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs, to be imprisoned for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
B. Any person who divulges any information which is confidential under
the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before any
Magisterial District Judge or court of competent jurisdiction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500 for each offense and costs
and, in default of payment of said fines and costs, to be imprisoned for a
period not exceeding 30 days.
C. The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
D. The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for
making the declaration or returns required by this article shall not
excuse him from making such declaration or return.
§ 414-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 414-12
1:347

ARTICLE II
Tax Abatement for Improvements to Commercial, Industrial and
Business Properties
[Adopted 8-6-1985 by Ord. No. 1382 (Ch. XXIV, Part 4, Secs. 71 to
76, of the 1971 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 414-13. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meaning set forth below:
ELIGIBLE PROPERTY — Any industrial, commercial, or other business
property owned by an individual, association, partnership, or corporation,
located in the Borough of Indiana, County of Indiana, and Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, which has resulted in the creation of at least one additional
new job within three months after the completion of the improvements that
have benefited from this article.[Amended 8-6-1996 by Ord. No. 1691]
IMPROVEMENT — Repair, construction, renovation and reconstruction,
including alterations and additions, having the effect of rehabilitating a
deteriorated property, either commercial, industrial or business so that it
becomes habitable or attains a higher standard of safety, health, economic
use or amenity, or is brought into compliance with existing laws, ordinances
or regulations governing such standards. General and ordinary upkeep and
maintenance shall not be deemed as an improvement.
INDIANA COUNTY TAX CLAIMS BUREAU — The Tax Assessment Office of
Indiana County and hereafter referred to as the "Bureau."
LOCAL TAXING AUTHORITY — The County of Indiana, the school districts,
the municipal governing bodies, or any other governmental entity having
the authority to levy real estate property taxes within Indiana County.
P.R.O.S.P.E.R. (PROMOTED REHABILITATION OF SUBSIDIZED PROPERTY
FOR ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION) PROGRAM AREA — Those areas
within Indiana County, the boundaries of which have been fixed by a
municipal governing body or bodies pursuant to Act 76 of 1977,127 in which
improvements to deteriorated property are eligible for tax exemption.
§ 414-14. Exemption.
A. There is hereby exempt from real property taxation the assessed value
of improvements to deteriorated properties in the amounts and in
accordance with the provisions and limitations hereinafter set forth as
the corporate and geographic boundaries of the Borough of Indiana,
Indiana County, State of Pennsylvania.
B. The exemption from taxes created hereunder shall be limited to
additional assessment valuation attributable to 100% of the actual costs
of improvements to deteriorated property for five successive calendar
years beginning from the date of the first construction.
127. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 4722.
§ 414-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 414-14
1:349
§ 414-15. Maximum exemptions.
C. The exemption from taxes granted under this article shall be upon the
property and shall not terminate upon the sale, transfer, or exchange of
the property, provided said property shall be used for a purpose that
would constitute eligible property.
D. No dwelling unit or any portion of any property used for dwelling
purposes shall be eligible for the benefits of exemption under this
article. Dwelling units shall include houses, duplexes, townhouses, row
houses, apartments or any building intended for occupancy as living
quarters by an individual, family or other groups of persons.
E. No business operated for profit or pecuniary gain which permits or
promotes any lewd or immoral entertainment shall be eligible for a tax
exemption under this article. [Added 8-6-1996 by Ord. No. 1691]
A. The exemption from real property taxes shall be limited:
(1) To that portion of the additional assessments attributable to the
actual cost of improvements to deteriorated commercial, industrial
or business property.
(2) To the assessment valuation attributable to the cost of construction
of the new commercial unit on a previously improved or
unimproved commercial, industrial or business property.
B. In all cases the exemption from taxes shall be limited to that portion of
the additional assessments attributed to the improvement or new
construction, as the case may be, and for which a separate assessment
has been made by the County Board of Assessment Appeals and for
which an exemption has been separately requested.
C. No tax exemption shall be granted if the property owner does not
secure the necessary and proper permits prior to improving the
property.
D. In any case after the effective date of this article where deteriorated
commercial, industrial, or business property is damaged, destroyed or
demolished, by any cause or for any reason, and the assessed
evaluation of the property affected has been reduced as a result of the
said damage, destruction or demolition, the exemption from real
property taxation authorized by this article shall be limited to that
portion of the new assessment attributable to the original assessment
that existed prior to damage destruction or demolition of property.
E. After the effective date of this article, any exempted property which is
no longer used as industrial, commercial, or other business property,
shall no longer be entitled to a tax exemption. The owner must retain
the same number of employees that the owner had at the time the
application for the exemption was filed as well as creating and retaining
new jobs to be entitled to the exemption for subsequent years. Each
§ 414-14 INDIANA CODE § 414-15
1:350
§ 414-16. Procedure for obtaining exemption.
owner of a property that has been granted a tax exemption pursuant
to this article shall file an annual report with the Borough of Indiana
on a form prescribed by the Borough of Indiana which shall include but
not be limited to information concerning the use of the property and
the number of employees who have been retained since the filing of
the application for tax exemption as well as the number of employees
whose hiring was related to the improvements for which the tax
exemption was granted. Failure to file the annual report by the last day
of January of each year will result in a denial of a tax exemption for all
subsequent years. The failure to maintain the number of employees who
were working at the time the application was filed as well as achieving
and maintaining at least one additional job position shall result in
termination of the tax exemption for the following and all subsequent
years. [Added 8-6-1996 by Ord. No. 1691]
A. A person desiring a tax exemption pursuant to this article shall apply to
the Borough of Indiana at the time a building permit is secured and
shall pay an application fee, as set from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council, to the Borough of Indiana in addition to any fees or
applications that must be filed or paid to the county. [Amended
8-6-1996 by Ord. No. 1691128]
B. A Review Board of not more than five members appointed by the
Indiana County Board of Commissioners will determine the eligibility as
it pertained to this article. A Review Board shall consist of one member
representing a Borough in the county, one member representing a
township in the county, one member representing a school district in
the county, and two at large members from the county. The Review
Board shall not approve any application that is not in compliance with
this article. [Amended 8-6-1996 by Ord. No. 1691]
C. The Bureau will notify any local taxing authority that would be affected
by the Bureau's actions at the time an application is made and after a
decision on the application is made.
D. If an application for exemption is denied, the property owner or any
affected local taxing authority shall have the right to appeal the
decision of the Bureau's Review Board to the Board of Commissioners
acting as the Board of Assessment and Revision of Taxes. If the local
taxing authority or the property owner is dissatisfied with the decision
of the Board of Commissioners, either may make an appeal as provided
by law.
E. Upon completion of the improvement, the taxpayer shall notify the
Bureau and the Bureau shall then separately assess the improvement
for the purpose of calculating the amount of assessment eligible for the
tax exemption in accordance with the limits established by this article.
128. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 414-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 414-16
1:351
§ 414-17. Termination date. [Amended 6-7-1988 by Ord. No. 1442;
6-5-1990 by Ord. No. 1489; 11-3-1992 by Ord. No. 1563; 8-6-1996 by
Ord. No. 1691]
This article shall automatically expire and terminate on December 31, 2000;
provided, however, that any taxpayer that has received or applied for the
exemption granted in this article prior to the expiration date shall be
entitled to the full exemption period if the exemption is granted.
F. The cost of improvements to be exempted and the schedule of taxes
exempted existing at the time of the initial request for tax exemption
shall be applicable to that exemption request and subsequent
amendments to this article, if any, shall not apply to requests initiated
prior to the adoption of such amendments.
G. In the case of new construction, the Bureau shall assess separately, the
commercial unit and the land upon which the new construction stands
and shall otherwise perform its duties as above provided for
construction of improvements to commercial, industrial or business
properties.
H. The cost of improvements to commercial, industrial or business
properties to be exempted and the schedule of taxes exempted existing
at the time of the initial request for tax exemption shall be applicable to
that exemption request, and subsequent amendment to this article, if
any, shall not apply to requests initiated prior to their adoption.
I. The tax exemption shall commence in the year immediately following
the filing of the application. [Amended 8-6-1996 by Ord. No. 1691]
J. Appeals from the reassessment and the amount eligible for exemption
may be taken by the County of Indiana, the local taxing authority, or the
property owner, as provided by law.
§ 414-16 INDIANA CODE § 414-17
1:352
ARTICLE III
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 10-3-1972 by Ord. No. 1064 (Ch. XXIV, Part 2, Secs. 31 to
49, of the 1971 Code of Ordinances); amended in its entirety at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 414-18. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of
Borough of Indiana."
§ 414-19. Authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within Borough
of Indiana, regardless of where the documents making the transfer are
made, executed or delivered, or where the actual settlements on such
transfer took place as authorized by Article XI-D, "Local Real Estate
Transfer Tax," 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 414-20. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership, or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust,
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States, or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include
a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 414-25 of this article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of
its assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of
each class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members
of the same family. The business of agriculture shall include the leasing to
members of the same family of property which is directly and principally
§ 414-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 414-20
1:353
used for agricultural purposes. The business of agriculture shall not be
deemed to include:
FAMILY FARM PARTNERSHIP — A partnership of which at least 75% of
its assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of
the interests in the partnership are continuously owned by members of
the same family. The business of agriculture shall include the leasing to
members of the same family of property which is directly and principally
used for agricultural purposes. The business of agriculture shall not be
deemed to include:
LIVING TRUST — Any trust, other than a business trust, intended as a
will substitute by the settlor which becomes effective during the lifetime
of the settlor, but from which trust distributions cannot be made to any
beneficiaries other than the settlor prior to the death of the settlor.
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing, and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half-blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole-blood.
ORDINARY TRUST — Any trust, other than a business trust or a living
trust, which takes effect during the lifetime of the settlor and for which
the trustees of the trust take title to property primarily for the purpose
of protecting, managing or conserving it until distribution to the named
beneficiaries of the trust. An ordinary trust does not include a trust that
has an objective to carry on business and divide gains, nor does it either
Recreational activities such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing;
A.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities;
B.
C. Fur farming;
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
Recreational activities, such as but not limited to hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing;
A.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities;
B.
C. Fur farming;
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
§ 414-20 INDIANA CODE § 414-20
1:354
expressly or impliedly have any of the following features: the treatment of
beneficiaries as associates, the treatment of the interests in the trust as
personal property, the free transferability of beneficial interests in the trust,
centralized management by the trustee or the beneficiaries, or continuity of
life.
PERSON — Every natural person, association, or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both, the term "person," as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof, and as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within Borough of Indiana
including, without limitation, buildings, structures, fixtures, mines,
minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower
boundaries, trees, and other improvements, immovables or interests
which by custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance or land, but
excluding permanently attached machinery and equipment in an
industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including, without limitation, an estate in fee simple, life estate,
or perpetual leasehold; or
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or
possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of
B.
§ 414-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 414-20
1:355
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting, or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
§ 414-21. Imposition of tax; interest.
30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate; provided that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the value thereof shall be determined from the price set
forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties, or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations;
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interest; or
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executor
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
D.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording, shall be
subject to pay for, and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof,
a tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by
such document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
§ 414-20 INDIANA CODE § 414-21
1:356
§ 414-22. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth, or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 414-23. Excluded transactions.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the recorder whereon the date
of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the signature of the
collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., so that if any other political subdivision
shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same person or
transfer, then the tax levied by Borough of Indiana under the authority
of that Act shall, during the time such duplication of the tax exists,
except as hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate and such 1/
2 rate shall become effective without any action on the part of Borough
of Indiana; provided, however, that Borough of Indiana and any other
political subdivision which imposes such tax on the same person or
transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their respective rates to 1/2
of the rate herein provided, they will impose respectively different
rates, the total of which shall not exceed the maximum rate permitted
under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
D. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due shall be added and collected.
A. The tax imposed by § 414-21 shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation which reconveyance may include property line
adjustments, provided said reconveyance is made within one year
from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which Borough of Indiana is prohibited from taxing
under the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school
§ 414-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 414-23
1:357
district or county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax
claim bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided the property or interest therein subject to such transfer
was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to
the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent and
child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister or the spouse of a
brother or sister, and between a grandparent and grandchild or the
spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the
grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor
were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries that are entitled to receive the property
or proceeds from the sale of the property under the trust, whether
or not such beneficiaries are contingent or specifically named. A
trust clause which identifies the contingent beneficiaries by
reference to the heirs of the trust settlor as determined by the laws
of the intestate succession shall not disqualify a transfer from the
exclusion provided by this subsection. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the recorder of deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of a
living trust from the settlor of the living trust. No such exemption
shall be granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a
copy of the living trust instrument.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee of
an ordinary trust to a specifically named beneficiary that is entitled
to receive the property under the recorded trust instrument or to a
contingent beneficiary where the transfer of the same property
would be exempt if the transfer was made by the grantor of the
§ 414-23 INDIANA CODE § 414-23
1:358
property into the trust to that beneficiary. However, any transfer of
real estate from a living trust during the settlor's lifetime shall be
considered for the purposes of this article as if such transfer were
made directly from the settlor to the grantee.
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee of
a living trust after the death of the settlor of the trust or from a
trustee of a trust created pursuant to the will of a decedent to a
beneficiary to whom the property is devised or bequeathed.
(12) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from the trustee
of a living trust to the settlor of the living trust if such property was
originally conveyed to the trustee by the settlor.
(13) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(14) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party; or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would
be imposed under this article. Where the document by which title is
acquired by a grantee or agreement of value fails to set forth that
the property was acquired by the grantee from, or for the benefit
of, his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the
property is the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if
the grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this
subsection.
(15) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(16) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(17) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt or the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(18) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
(a) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding,
§ 414-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 414-23
1:359
processing, publishing, research and development,
transportation, energy conversion, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture; and
(b) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
(19) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(20) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transfer or for
commercial purposes.
(21) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1954, [68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its
primary purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational,
scenic, agricultural or open space opportunities; or a transfer from
such a conservancy to the United States, the commonwealth or to
any of their instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions; or
any transfer from such a conservancy where the real estate is
encumbered by a perpetual agricultural conservation easement as
defined by the act of June 30, 1981 (P.L. 128, No. 43), known as the
"Agricultural Area Security Law," and such conservancy has owned
the real estate for at least two years immediately prior to the
transfer.
(22) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(23) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm partnership by a member of the same family, which
family directly owns at least 75% of the interests in the
partnership.
(24) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company, family farm corporation or family
farm partnership which owns real estate.
(25) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(26) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
§ 414-23 INDIANA CODE § 414-23
1:360
§ 414-24. Documents relating to associations or corporations and
members, partners, stockholders or shareholders thereof.
Except as otherwise provided in § 414-23, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 414-25. Acquired company.
§ 414-26. Credits against tax.
Value may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural
gas or minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation
of the reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company; and of itself or together
with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
C. A family farm partnership is an acquired company when, because of
voluntary or involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm
partnership or when, because of transfer of partnership interests or
because of acquisition or transfer of assets that are devoted to the
business of agriculture, it fails to meet the minimum requirements of a
family farm partnership under this article.
D. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Declaration of Acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
§ 414-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 414-26
1:361
§ 414-27. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 414-28. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid, and have priority out of the
proceeds or any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made except the state realty transfer tax, and the sheriff, or other
officer, conducting said sale, shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the
first moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale
are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
§ 414-29. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983 (P.L.
40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to Borough of
Indiana based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax,
without compensation from the Borough of Indiana.
§ 414-26 INDIANA CODE § 414-29
1:362
§ 414-30. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete
value thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject
to tax under this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax
Statement of Value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of
this subsection shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which
are exempt from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents
presented for affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy
of the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 414-31. Civil penalties.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to
Borough of Indiana all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for
use of the county, together with a report containing the information as
is required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting
collections of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The two-percent
commission shall be paid to the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed
or record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the
state and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee has been
tendered.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 414-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 414-32
1:363
§ 414-32. Tax to become lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements, or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying, being situated,
wholly or in part within the boundaries of Borough of Indiana, which lands,
tenements, hereditaments, or interest therein, are described in or conveyed
by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax imposed,
assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time when the
tax under this article is due and payable, and continue until discharge by
payment, or in accordance with the law, and the solicitor is authorized to file
a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of Indiana County,
in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and Liens Act of
1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and amendments.
§ 414-33. Enforcement.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 414-34. Regulations.
The Borough Council of Borough of Indiana is charged with enforcement
and collection of the tax and is empowered to regulate and enforce
reasonable regulations for enforcement and collection of the tax. The
regulations which have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department
of Revenue under 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into and made a
part of this article.
§ 414-32 INDIANA CODE § 414-34
1:364
ARTICLE IV
Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights
[Adopted 1-5-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-01]
§ 414-35. Adoption and compliance.
The Borough Council hereby generally adopts the provisions of the Local
Taxpayers Bill of Rights and hereby mandates that Pennsylvania Municipal
Service Company shall take all appropriate action to be in compliance with
the provisions of the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights when carrying out its
duties as Borough tax collector for the Borough of Indiana.
§ 414-36. Disclosure statement.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Indiana does hereby adopt the
form of Disclosure Statement of the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights attached
hereto and made a part hereof, as amended from time to time in order to
be in compliance with applicable law, providing an explanation of taxpayer
rights and the obligations of the Borough of Indiana.
§ 414-37. Administrative appeals procedures.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Indiana hereby adopts and
establishes the Act 50 Administrative Appeals Procedures, attached hereto
and made a part hereof, as amended from time to time in order to be
in compliance with applicable law, providing for the right of taxpayers
to receive determinations on petitions pertaining to the assessment,
determination or refund of eligible taxes.
§ 414-38. Hearing officer.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Indiana hereby appoints and
designates Pennsylvania Municipal Service Co. as hearing officer to
adjudicate all taxpayer petitions pertaining to the assessment,
determination or refund of the eligible taxes.
§ 414-39. Taxpayer rights coordinator.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Indiana hereby appoints and
designates Pennsylvania Municipal Service Company as the Taxpayer
Rights Coordinator to act as a liaison between the taxpayer and the local
taxing authority in any disputes or with regards to any complaints.
§ 414-40. Annual fee.
The annual fee of PAMS is $1,500 for the additional services to be rendered
by it for purposes of taking all appropriate actions to be in compliance with
the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights, acting as hearing officer and acting as
Taxpayer Rights Coordinator is hereby approved.
§ 414-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 414-40
1:365

ARTICLE V
Tax Certifications
[Adopted 12-7-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-011]
§ 414-41. Word usage.
For the purpose of this article, "persons" shall mean individuals,
partnerships, corporations, ventures, and other entities requesting
information from the Tax Collector of Indiana Borough.
§ 414-42. Fee for certifications.129
All persons requesting certifications for real estate sales shall be assessed
a fee, as set from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council, per
certification.
§ 414-43. Fee for duplicate tax bills.130
All persons requesting duplicate tax bills shall be assessed a fee, as set from
time to time by resolution of the Borough Council, per duplicate.
§ 414-44. Handling fee for returned checks.131
If checks are returned to the Tax Collector for insufficient funds, the person
submitting the check shall be charged a handling fee, as set from time to
time by resolution of the Borough Council, per returned check.
129. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
130. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
131. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 414-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 414-44
1:367

ARTICLE VI
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 12-30-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-013; amended in its entirety
12-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-06]
§ 414-45. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency designated
by the political subdivision to collect and administer the tax herein imposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation as this term is defined in Section 13
[relating to earned income taxes] of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of
Dec. 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited liability
corporation, limited liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS OR HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the political subdivision.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession; or other activity, as this term is defined in Section 13 [relating
to earned income taxes] of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of Dec. 31,
1965, P.L. 1251, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, earned on or
performed within the corporate limits of the political subdivision for which
compensation is charged or received; whether by means of salary wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — The area within the corporate limits of the
Borough of Indiana.
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 414-46 of this article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
§ 414-46. Levy of tax.
For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and assessed,
commencing January 1, 2008; upon the privilege of engaging in an
§ 414-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 414-46
1:369
occupation with a primary place of employment within the Borough of
Indiana during the tax year. Each natural person who exercises such
privilege for any length of time during any tax year shall pay the tax for
that year in the amount of $52, assessed on a pro rata basis, in accordance
with the provisions of this article. This tax may be used solely for the
following purposes as the same may be allocated by the Borough of Indiana
from time to time: emergency services, which shall include emergency
medical services, police services and/or fire services; road construction and/
or maintenance; reduction of property taxes; or property tax relief through
implementation of a homestead and farmstead exclusion in accordance with
53 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 85, Subch. F (relating to homestead property exclusion).
The political subdivision shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived
from the tax for emergency services. This tax is in addition to all other
taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the political subdivision.
The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar year,
irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a person
maybe employed.
§ 414-47. Exemptions and refunds.
A. Exemptions. Any person whose total earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for
any calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment
of the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are
exempt from payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total one-hundred-percent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the political
subdivision and with the person's employer affirming that the
person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision of less than
$12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption certificate is
§ 414-46 INDIANA CODE § 414-47
1:370
filed. In the event the political subdivision utilizes a tax collection
officer, it shall provide a copy of the exemption certificate to that
officer. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy
of all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment
within the political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year
for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the
tax. Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise
instructed by the political subdivision or except as required by
Subsection B(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax from the
person during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar
year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall
ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to
employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a
form at the time of hiring. The exemption certificate form shall be
the uniform form provided by the political subdivision.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the political subdivision that the person has received
earned income and net profits from all sources within the political
subdivision equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or
that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that
calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within the municipality in an amount equal to or in
excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold
the local services tax from the person under Subsection B(3).
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per-payroll
amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld
per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that
calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this subsection is subsequently
severed in that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any
outstanding balance of tax due, and the political subdivision may
pursue collection under this article.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or
exempting any employee from the local services tax.
C. Refunds. The Borough Manager, in consultation with the Collector and
DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of refund claims
§ 414-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 414-47
1:371
§ 414-48. Duty of employers to collect.
for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption, which
procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the general municipal
law relating to refunds of overpayments and interest on overpayments.
Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or 75 days after the
last day the employer is required to remit the tax for the last quarter of
the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject to interest. No
refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a calendar year that do
not exceed $1. The Borough Manager or the Collector shall determine
eligibility for exemption and provide refunds to exempt persons.
A. Each employer within the political subdivision, as well as those
employers situated outside the political subdivision but who engage in
business within the political subdivision, is hereby charged with the
duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or
performing for him within the political subdivision and making a return
and payment thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer is hereby
authorized to deduct this tax for each employee in his or her employ,
whether said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and
whether or not all such services are performed within the political
subdivision.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax
levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest onehundredth
of a dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payrollperiod
basis for each payroll period in which the person is engaging in
an occupation, except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For
purposes of this subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate
annual rate of the tax levied by the school district and the municipality.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
§ 414-47 INDIANA CODE § 414-48
1:372
§ 414-49. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her
to an employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer
shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
§ 414-50. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the Collector on or before the 30th day following the end
of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 414-51. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of
employment within the political subdivision shall be required to comply with
this article and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the Collector on or
before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.
§ 414-52. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed. The political subdivision shall provide a
taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the political subdivision if the
failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by
the employee as to the employee's place or plates of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of § 414-47B of
this article and this section and remits the amount so withheld in
accordance with this article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
A. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person
§ 414-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 414-52
1:373
§ 414-53. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the political subdivision but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
political subdivision do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
the political subdivision. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the political subdivision and an employee of a nonresidential
employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed
person, and in the event his or her tax is not paid, the political subdivision
shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee
for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 414-54. Administration of tax.
working in more than one political subdivision during a payroll period,
the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in the
following order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or
her principal office or is principally employed;
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar
year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes
prima facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
A. The Collector shall be appointed by resolution of the political
subdivision. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive
payments of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount
received by him from each employer of self-employed person, together
with the date the tax was received.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
subject to municipal approval, to proscribe, adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the
examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this article,
the examination and correction of any return made in compliance with
this article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to
which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall have the right to appeal
consistent with the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights under Act 50 of 1998.
§ 414-52 INDIANA CODE § 414-54
1:374
§ 414-55. Suits for collection.
§ 414-56. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his or her custody and control setting forth the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his or her employment, or whoever fails or
refuses to file any return required by this article shall be guilty of a violation
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to
enforce the penalty herein prescribed may be instituted against any person
in charge of the business of any employer who shall have failed or who
refuses to file a return required by this article.
§ 414-57. Construal of provisions.
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with
interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of such
tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery of
this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
political subdivision to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the political subdivision
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 414-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 414-58
1:375
§ 414-58. Repealer.
Except as otherwise set forth hereinafter, all ordinances or parts of
ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. Nothing herein shall
be construed to repeal the imposition and collection of any occupational
privilege tax, plus applicable penalties and interest, or of an emergency and
municipal services tax, plus applicable penalties and interest, it being the
intention of this article that the Borough of Indiana shall be permitted to
collect any taxes due and owing under those prior ordinances in accordance
with their terms.
§ 414-59. Effective date.
The tax imposed by this article shall become effective on January 1, 2008,
and shall continue thereafter for all calendar years unless repealed or
modified by an ordinance passed by Borough Council.
§ 414-58 INDIANA CODE § 414-59
1:376
Chapter 421
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking meters — See Ch. 288.
Parking on private property — See Ch. 293.
Permit parking — See Ch. 305.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 400.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 440.
§ 421-1. Authority for removal of vehicles.
§ 421-2. Authorized towing and storage.
A. Pursuant to the authority granted under the Borough Code, the
Borough of Indiana shall cause the lawful removal of vehicles from
highways, roads, streets and public property of the Borough when
necessary, including illegally parked vehicles, impounded vehicles and
vehicles involved in accidents, and as otherwise permitted by law.
B. No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this chapter if, at the
time of the intended removal thereof, the owner or person at the time
being in charge of such vehicle is present and expresses a willingness
and intention to remove such vehicle immediately and is lawfully able to
do so.
C. Within reason, under the existing circumstances, whenever there is a
need for a vehicle to be towed and the owner or operator of the vehicle
is available, such owner or operator shall be permitted to select and to
pay for the tower. Notwithstanding the aforementioned, vehicles posing
safety concerns or that are left on the roadway after an accident shall
be removed forthwith by the most reasonable means available.
D. The Police Department shall keep a record of all vehicles impounded
and upon request the owners or agents of the owners thereof shall be
furnished with information as to the place of storage of such vehicles.
A. The Chief of Police shall have the administrative authority to maintain a
rotation tow list, not to exceed five tow companies at a given time, to
facilitate the immediate availability for the removal and/or storage of
vehicles at the Borough's request.
B. The Chief of Police is authorized to add towing and storage entities to
the rotation list as needed and is authorized to suspend and/or revoke
entities from the list for cause, including but not limited to violation of
this chapter, violation of law, and/or for any public safety concern.
C. Towing and storage entities shall be added to the rotation list as
needed. To be eligible, the following shall be provided:
§ 414-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 421-2
1:377
§ 421-3. Imposition of charges.
§ 421-4. Effect of payment of charges under protest and liability for
fines and penalties.
(1) Written request for consideration to be on the rotation list
including a description of equipment, towing, and storage
capabilities, the physical address of their facilities, and phone
numbers for both business hours and after business hours.
(2) Copy of current insurance policy specifically providing appropriate
coverage for towing and storage of vehicles.
(3) Copy of drivers license for each driver employed to operate towing
equipment, which shall be used to determine the status of each
license.
D. It shall be the responsibility of the towing and storage entity to provide
the Borough written notice of any changes to these requirements once
the entity is added to the rotation list.
E. Prior to being added to the list, towing and storage entity must provide
the Borough of Indiana with an insurance certificate naming the
Borough of Indiana as an additional insured.
A. The following fees, as set from time to time by resolution of the Borough
Council, are hereby established as the charges that shall be made for
the towing and storage of any vehicle towed and impounded under the
authority granted by this chapter:132
(1) A maximum charge for any vehicle towed in a conventional manner.
(2) A charge in addition to the maximum charge for any vehicle that
must be towed in an unconventional manner (e.g., use of an
adapter, towing dolly or the removal of a driveshaft).
(3) An additional charge to the maximum charge for any vehicle that
must be rolled over or otherwise manipulated due to severe
accident damage.
(4) There shall be no storage charge for the first 24 hours after the
vehicle is towed.
(5) A maximum charge per day for storage after the initial twenty-fourhour
period of storage.
B. These fixed charges are subject to change by resolution of Council.
A. The owner or agent of the owner of a vehicle towed and/or impounded
shall be responsible for all fees incurred before such vehicle is released.
132. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 421-2 INDIANA CODE § 421-4
1:378
§ 421-5. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 427
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grass, weeds and other vegetation — See Ch.
234.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 327.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
405.
§ 427-1. Short title.
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Indiana Borough
Shade Tree Commission Ordinance."
§ 427-2. Definitions.
Definitions. For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases,
words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein, unless
the context clearly indicates a different meaning. When not inconsistent
with the context, words in the plural include the singular, and words in the
singular include the plural.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Indiana.
BOROUGH ARBORIST — The Arborist of the Borough of Indiana appointed
or contracted by the Council.
COMMISSION — The Shade Tree Commission of Indiana Borough.
B. Owners or agents of owners of a vehicle to be towed who appear at the
location after the arrival of the tow equipment shall be required to pay
the towing fee whether the vehicle is towed or not.
C. In the event that any towing and impounding charges so imposed shall
be paid under protest, the vehicle owner or agent of the owner shall be
entitled to a hearing before a Magisterial District Judge or court of
record having jurisdiction, upon initiation by the owner or agent of the
owner within 10 days after payment of any towing and impounding
charges.
A. Towing and storage entities who violate any provisions of this chapter
shall immediately be suspended from the rotation list.
B. Towing and storage entities that are suspended from the rotation list
may seek reinstatement and shall be required to pay a reinstatement
fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.133
133. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 421-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 427-2
1:379
COUNCIL — The governing body of Indiana Borough.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Planning/Zoning or Code Enforcement
of the Borough.
DIRECTOR — The heads of the Departments of Planning/Zoning or Code
Enforcement of the Borough.
HERITAGE TREE — Any tree that has a trunk with a circumference of 36
inches or more measured at 54 inches above the natural grade; or has any
of the qualities, attributes, or associations noted below.
MANAGER — The Manager of the Borough or his/her designee.
NEW TREE — Any tree planted by the Borough in a public right-of-way,
except a replacement tree.
PERMIT — A permit, in writing, as issued by the Commission through the
Department of Zoning and Code Enforcement.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, public utility, or organization or entity.
PROPERTY LINE — The outer edge of a street, highway, public way or rightof-
way when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of
right, for the purposes of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
PUBLIC AREA — Includes all grounds, including, but not limited to, public
streets, avenues, boulevards, lanes, or alleys, tree lawns, parks and
parklets, rights-of-way, easements, or other areas under control of the
Borough.
PUBLIC HIGHWAY — All publicly maintained ways.
PUBLIC TREE — All trees, shrubs, and all other vegetation, living or dead,
occupying or designated by the Borough as occupying a public place on
all streets, avenues, boulevards, lanes, or alleys, parks, rights-of-way,
easements, or other areas under control of the Borough.
REPLACEMENT TREE — A tree planted in a location formerly occupied by
another tree.
RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR ARBOR WORK — A separate publication
providing specific guidelines and procedures for tree maintenance practices
or other operations, which may impact public trees. Such practices or
operations can include, but are not limited to: planting, transplanting,
A notable specimen because of its size, form, shape, beauty, age, color,
rarity, genetic constitution, or other distinctive features;
A.
B. A prominent community landmark;
C. A specimen associated with a historic person, place, event or period;
A representative of a crop grown by ancestors and their successors that
is at risk of disappearing from cultivation;
D.
E. A tree associated with local folklore.
§ 427-2 INDIANA CODE § 427-2
1:380
pruning, cabling or bracing, removing, applying fertilizer or any chemical
substance, excavating within any tree protection zone, or otherwise
disturbing any tree located in public areas or trees under control of the
Borough.
SHRUB — A perennial, woody plant that is never tree-like in habit and
produces shoots from or near the base.
TREE — A perennial, woody plant that is usually single stemmed, at least
12 to 15 feet tall, and having a distinct head in most cases.
TREE DRIPLINE — A line derived by the horizontal line extending along a
radius from the trunk of a tree to the outermost tips of branches.
TREE LAWN — The part of a street or highway, not covered by sidewalk or
other paving, lying between the property line and that portion of the street
or highway usually used for vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
§ 427-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 427-2
1:381
TREE PROTECTION ZONE — The three-dimensional area within the dripline
including from the crown to the root system of each public tree.
UNIQUE TREE — A tree whose species or growth habit is highly unusual,
extraordinary, or rare.
§ 427-3. Commission.
A. Creation. There shall be created a board to be known as the Shade Tree
Commission of Indiana Borough, hereinafter known as the
"Commission." The Commission has exclusive custody and control of
public trees. The Commission, or its designee, also has authority to
enter upon private property with due cause to inspect trees, shrubs,
and other vegetation to determine if the subject trees, shrubs, or other
vegetation constitute a hazard to public safety, are creating a nuisance
situation, or are in violation of some other ordinance or statute.
B. Membership. The Commission shall consist of five members, all of
whom shall be residents of the Borough.
C. By resolution, the members of the Commission shall be appointed by
the Borough Council of Indiana for terms of five years. These terms
shall be staggered so that one member's term expires each year.
D. A vacancy on the Commission, which occurs for reasons other than the
expiration of a term, shall be filled by Borough Council for the
unexpired portion of the term.
E. A member may remain on the Commission after expiration of his or her
term until a replacement is duly appointed.
F. The Commission members shall serve without pay, but may be
reimbursed for expenses previously authorized by the Council, from the
funds budgeted annually for such purposes.
G. Organization, Recordkeeping, and Meetings. The Commission shall
elect a chairperson and such other officers as they deem necessary. The
Commission will meet with whatever frequency they consider
necessary to accomplish the work at hand, but no less frequently than
every month. A written record shall be kept of all meetings, and made
available to the Council for its reference. The Commission shall submit
annually a full report of its activities, and a summary of approved
expenses for the last fiscal year of the Borough.
H. Responsibilities.
(1) The Commission shall study the problems and determine the needs
of the Borough in connection with a tree planting, maintenance,
and removal program. It will also assess the need for regulations
pertaining to tree preservation, tree protection and tree
replacement specifications and guidelines for new construction and
renovations projects.
§ 427-2 INDIANA CODE § 427-3
1:382
§ 427-4. Authorized activity.
The Commission is hereby authorized, but is not limited, to perform the
following activities in regard to trees:
(2) The Commission shall study, investigate, counsel, and develop and
update as required, and administer a written plan for the care and
maintenance, preservation, pruning, planting, re-planting, removal
or disposition of trees within the control of the Borough, including
tree preservation, tree protection and tree replacement
specifications and guidelines for new construction and renovation
projects. Such plan will be presented as required to the Council,
and upon its approval by Resolution, shall constitute the official
comprehensive Tree and Environmental Plan for the Borough of
Indiana.
(3) The Commission shall prepare a list containing the type and kind of
trees to be planted along or upon the Borough streets, avenues,
boulevards, lanes, or alleys, parks, rights-of-way, easements, or
parts of the Borough streets, avenues, boulevards, lanes, or alleys,
parks, rights-of-way, easements, as well as all other areas under
control of the Borough.
(4) The Commission shall disseminate, or cause to be disseminated,
news and information regarding the selection, planting,
maintenance, value, and importance of the trees within the
corporate limits of the Borough or public property.
(5) The Commission may, with approval of Council, solicit and accept
grants and contributions on behalf of the Borough. All funds
obtained by the Commission shall be expended for the specific
purpose(s) or under the stipulations set by the contributor or the
Commission with specific approval of Council.
(6) The Commission shall provide regular and special meetings at
which the subject of the planting, maintenance, and removal of the
trees in the Borough may be discussed by the members of the
Commission, officers, and personnel of the Borough, and all others
interested in the Tree/Environmental Program.
(7) The Borough Arborist, Chairman of the Commission or his/her
designee may review land development plans and major capital
renovation projects such as roadway construction or repair, or pipe
installation or replacement, etc., to determine the impact of such
plans on public trees and to make recommendations on steps
needed to mitigate such impacts. All land development plans or
landscape plans shall show all existing trees. Trees proposed to be
saved and removed shall be indicated. Every possible effort shall be
made to preserve desirable trees. All public trees adjacent to said
projects shall also be shown on the plans along with the required
Tree Protection Zone.
§ 427-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 427-4
1:383
A. The Chairman of the Commission or his or her designee and/or the
Borough Manager or his or her designee is hereby authorized to
remove or prune, or direct to be removed or pruned, any tree or part of
a tree that poses a hazard to public safety as further described in
§ 427-4F, § 424-4G, § 427-4H, and § 427-4I.
B. Adopt policies to control tree pruning, cabling, spraying, root cutting,
and other work on trees in public areas by contractors, abutting
property owners and/or others. With such policies in place, the
Commission may issue permits as described in § 427-6 of this chapter.
C. Maintain existing public trees. In carrying out maintenance work, the
Department shall adhere as closely as possible to the Borough Rules
and Regulations for Arbor Work. While maintenance of public trees is
the responsibility of the adjacent property owner, there may be
instances where tree work is contracted directly by the Borough. In
cases where such maintenance of public trees is to be carried out by a
private contractor hired by the Borough, it is the responsibility of the
Director, Borough Arborist or authorized designee to see that the rules
and regulations for Arbor Work are adhered to. It is mandatory that at
least one ISA Certified Arborist be on the job site at all times for
pruning operation only. The designation of ISA Certified Arborist is
through the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA), Champaign,
Illinois, and shall be the only certification accepted. [Amended
4-17-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-07]
D. The Director or Borough Arborist shall monitor contractors employed
by utility companies and others for any work on, or in the vicinity of
public trees, or in the Tree Protection Zone of public trees.
E. Working in collaboration with the Commission, the Department of
Public Works may plant new trees or replacement trees in accordance
with the comprehensive tree and environmental plan for the Borough as
referred to in § 427-3H(2) of this chapter.
F. Notification by Commission. Whenever the Commission proposes to
plant, transplant or remove trees on any street, notice of the time and
place of the meeting at which such work is to be considered shall be
given in one newspaper of general circulation in the Borough once a
week for two weeks immediately preceding the time of the meeting. The
notice shall specify in detail the streets or portions upon which trees
are proposed to be so planted, replanted, or removed.
G. Deal with potentially hazardous trees on private property. The Code,
Planning, or Public Works Department Directors, the Borough Arborist,
or an authorized designee may order the removal, partial removal, or
treatment of any tree(s) on private property which in his/her opinion is
sufficiently diseased, damaged, or in such condition as to constitute a
potential hazard to the public, or to trees on public property. This
includes: branches, limbs, or foliage that are closer than eight feet
above a sidewalk, or closer than 16 feet above the roadway of a street
§ 427-4 INDIANA CODE § 427-4
1:384
or alley; and any branches, limbs, or foliage that obstruct or shade
the streetlights, traffic signals or signs, or view of any street or alley
intersection. When a tree or portions of a tree on private property is
infected with an infectious disease such as Dutch Elm Disease, Oak
Wilt, a severe insect infestation, or another disease that constitutes a
hazard to the public or to trees or other property, whether public or
private, the property owner shall immediately be notified of the hazard
and requested to eliminate it. Property owners shall be notified by mail
and be given 30 days from receipt of the notice to comply with the
order. The property owner may appeal the decision to Borough Council
by means of the Public Safety Committee and shall have 10 days after
receipt of the order to appeal the decision. The decision of the Council
shall be appealable as provided by law. Appeals to the Council shall
be recorded in the minutes of Borough Council, and shall include a
determination of the facts of the case. Following a determination by
the Council that a certain action shall be taken with respect to a tree,
the property owner shall have 10 days to comply. If the property owner
fails or refuses to comply, the property owner shall be subject to the
penalty specified in § 427-8 of this chapter. In addition, the Director,
Borough Arborist or an authorized designee is authorized to remove
said hazardous tree(s) or portions thereof. All costs for such work
plus 10% additional shall be assessed and, if not paid, shall be a lien
against the property in accord with § 427-8 of this chapter. [Amended
4-17-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-07]
H. Deal with potentially hazardous trees in public areas. When trees in
public areas that, in the opinion of the Director, or Borough Arborist, or
an authorized designee, are seriously damaged, diseased, disfigured or
constitute a hazard to the public or to trees on private property, the
tree(s) may be removed or pruned by the Director, Borough Arborist, or
an authorized designee. This includes: branches, limbs, or foliage that
are closer than eight feet above a sidewalk, or closer than 16 feet above
the roadway of a street or alley; and any branches, limbs, or foliage that
obstruct or shade the streetlights, traffic signals or signs, or view of any
street or alley intersection. If the tree in question is the responsibility of
the abutting property owner, the property owner shall be notified by
mail and be given 30 days from receipt of the notice to comply with the
order. The property owner may appeal the decision to Borough Council
and shall have 10 days after receipt of the order to appeal the decision.
The decision of the Council shall be appealable as provided by law.
Appeals to the Council shall be recorded in the minutes of Borough
Council, and shall include a determination of the facts of the case.
Following a determination by the Council that a certain action shall be
taken with respect to such a tree, the property owner shall have 10 days
to comply. If the property owner fails or refuses to comply, the property
owner shall be subject to the penalty specified in § 427-8 of this chapter.
In addition the Director, Borough Arborist, or an authorized designee is
authorized to remove or treat said hazardous tree(s) or portions
thereof. All costs for such work plus 10% additional shall be assessed
and, if not paid, shall be a lien against the property in accord with
§ 427-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 427-4
1:385
§ 427-8 of this chapter. [Amended 4-17-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-07134]
I. Deal with immediate hazards in public areas. When in the opinion of the
Director, Borough Arborist, or an authorized designee, a tree or
portions of a tree in public areas constitutes an immediate hazard to
persons or property, and the tree in question is the responsibility of the
abutting property owner, the abutting property owner shall
immediately be notified of the hazard and requested to eliminate it. If
the property owner fails to comply within five days after the notice, the
Director, Borough Arborist, or an authorized designee is authorized to
remove or order removal of the hazard without further notice or appeal.
All costs for such work plus 10% additional shall be assessed and, if not
paid, shall be a lien against the property in accord with § 427-8 of this
chapter.
J. Review of land development plans. [Amended 4-17-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-07]
(1) Concept plan. One copy of any concept (preliminary) plan shall be
submitted to the Borough Arborist, or his/her designee, for a
review of the proposed land development's effect on any public
tree(s). Within 15 working days of the receipt of a concept plan, the
Borough Arborist, or his/her designee, shall provide to the
Planning/Zoning Official written comments on the effect of said
land development on any public tree(s).
(2) Final plan. One copy of any final plan shall be submitted for review
and approval to the Borough Arborist, or his/her designee, for a
review of the proposed land development's effect on any public
tree(s). Within 15 working days of the receipt of a final plan, the
Borough Arborist, or his/her designee, shall provide to the
Planning/Zoning Official written comments on the effect of said
land development on any public tree(s).
K. Regulate activity within the tree protection zone of public trees.
(1) No activity is permitted within the Tree Protection Zone without a
tree work permit issued in accordance with § 427-6 of this chapter.
Within five working days of the receipt of the permit application,
the Borough Arborist, or his/her designee, shall determine the need
for and location of the Tree Protection Zone fencing around all
public trees located on or adjacent to the site. [Amended
4-17-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-07]
(2) Review of building permit applications. All applications for
sidewalk permits, driveway permits and permits for demolition,
construction or expansion that may affect the Tree Protection Zone
134. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection H, regarding immediate
hazards on private property, and redesignated former Subsections I through L as
Subsections H through K, respectively.
§ 427-4 INDIANA CODE § 427-4
1:386
§ 427-5. Responsibility for tree costs.
The cost of planting, transplanting, or pruning or removing trees in and
along the highways, streets and alleys in the Borough shall be paid for
by the abutting property owner. However, at the discretion of the Shade
Tree Commission, such work may be paid for through other funds, such as
those budgeted annually for shade trees, or those awarded for such projects
through proposals submitted, or donations made by public or private
persons or agencies.
§ 427-6. Permits.
of public trees shall be reviewed by the Director, in consultation
with the Borough Arborist if necessary before a permit is issued.
(3) Where determined necessary by the Borough Arborist, or his/her
designee, the property owner shall install or cause to be installed a
staked construction fence at least 48 inches in height, consisting of
posts measuring at least two inches by four inches in cross-section
with two, two-inch-by-four-inch continuous planks attached
thereto; or an alternative as approved by the Borough Arborist, or
his/her designee, around all portions of the Tree Protection Zone,
excluding any portions occupied by sidewalks, street cartway,
curbs/gutters or a driveway. The fencing shall be positioned at the
dripline of the tree unless a lesser distance is approved by the
Borough Arborist or his/her designee. [Amended 4-17-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-07]
A. The Commission, and/or its designee are authorized to issue permits for
certain work on public trees by persons not Borough employees, and to
charge an administrative fee for issuance of such permits, fees and
amounts to be set by resolution by Borough Council as deemed
appropriate, such fees to be accounted for and added to the total
budget for the public trees in the Borough. Outside contractors or
property owners seeking a permit must follow the Rules and
Regulations for Arbor Work and any and all other applicable rules and
regulations. Permits must be displayed on the front door, or on a
window adjacent to the front door of the property.
B. All Tree Work Contractors who wish to perform work on street trees or
trees in public locations in the Borough of Indiana must be registered
with the Indiana Borough Department of Zoning and Code Enforcement
and will be placed on the Borough's approved tree work contractors list
when proof of all registration requirements have been submitted to the
Borough and verified, fees and amounts to be set by resolution by
Borough Council as it deems appropriate. Such fees shall be accounted
for and added to the total budget for the public trees in the Borough.
Tree work contractors who perform work on public trees and have
failed to register with the Indiana Borough Department of Zoning and
§ 427-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 427-6
1:387
Code Enforcement will be subjected to penalties in accord with § 427-8
of this chapter. Permits shall be required for the following acts:
(1) Planting, transplanting, pruning, removing, applying fertilizer, or
any chemical substance or biological pesticide or otherwise
disturbing any tree located in public areas or within any tree
protection zone.
(2) Trimming, pruning, or removing any tree on private property, or
portions of such a tree, if the tree or parts of it may reasonably be
expected to fall in public areas and cause damage to persons or
property, or interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic using the
public right-of-way or public easements.
(3) Placing in public areas or within any tree protection zone, either
above ground or below ground level, a container for trees, shrubs,
or other plants.
(4) Transplanting any tree located in public areas or within any tree
protection zone.
(5) Attaching any rope, wire (non-electric wire), sign, poster, banner,
or other object or device to any tree in any public area or to any
guard about such tree.
(6) Removing or tampering with any object or device set for the
protection or treatment of any tree in any public area or within any
Tree Protection Zone.
(7) Damaging or cutting roots two inches in diameter or larger by
tunneling, trenching, or digging in public areas or within any tree
protection zone for the purpose of installation or repair of sidewalk,
curb, driveway, gas or plumbing pipes or conduits, electric lines,
etc.
(8) Storage of construction materials within the tree protection zone.
(9) Soil compaction within the tree protection zone.
(10) Creating construction site access, whether permanent or
temporary, within any Tree Protection Zone.
(11) Construction of a curb cut and/or driveway within the tree
protection zone.
C. Permits shall be in writing and shall specify which of these activities is
to be permitted and the time period in which it may be carried out,
which shall not exceed 90 days. All work shall be performed in
accordance with the Rules and Regulations for Arbor Work and any and
all other applicable rules and regulations which the Commission or
Department shall make available to the applicant. Whenever possible,
the Director or Borough Arborist, or authorized designee will ascertain
that the applicant is following the rules and Regulations for Arbor Work
§ 427-6 INDIANA CODE § 427-6
1:388
§ 427-7. Prohibited activities.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
and any and all other applicable rules and regulations, and, in the case
of observed or reported violations, may revoke the permit. Revocations
may be appealed to the Borough Manager within five days of the notice
of revocation, at which time the Manager may, at his/her discretion,
present the matter to Council for fact-finding.
D. Nothing in this part shall be construed as exempting abutting property
owners or public utility companies, or any other person or agency from
any of the requirements of this chapter.
E. Extended-term pruning permits may be applied for by persons desiring
to perform volunteer pruning on young public trees. In order to qualify
for an extended-term pruning permit, the applicant must prove that
they have completed a pruning training program approved by the
Shade Tree Commission of Indiana Borough. Those persons issued an
extended-term pruning permit shall be required to notify the
Commission, in writing, as to what type of pruning will be performed,
along with a list of the trees involved, prior to any pruning being
performed. The Shade Tree Commission of Indiana Borough will decide
each request on a case by case basis and inform the applicant within a
reasonable amount of time of their decision.
A. Cut, break, climb with spikes, disturb the roots of, or otherwise injure
or destroy trees in any public area or within any tree protection zone or
to authorize such actions. It shall not be considered a violation to trim
trees or perform other activities with a valid permit from the Borough
specific to the tree(s) involved in accord with § 427-6A of this chapter.
B. Cause or authorize any wire or other conductor or device charged with
electricity to be hung in, or from, or attached to, in any way, any tree in
any public area, or to any guard about such tree. This also applies to the
Tree Protection Zone if the wire or conductor is placed in such a
manner that it may injure or kill the tree.
C. Intentionally cause or authorize in any public area or within any tree
protection zone, any oil, gasoline, herbicide, paint, brine, hot water,
steam, or other gas, liquid or solid substance deleterious to the tree to
contact any tree or to enter the soil about the base or root system of a
tree in any manner that may injure or kill it.
D. Interfere, cause or authorize an interference with the Borough or any of
its agents or employees while they are engaged in planting, inspecting,
maintaining, or removing trees.
E. Supervise or authorize construction, alterations, repairs or demolition
activities in the vicinity of any tree in any public area or within any Tree
Protection Zone without first placing sufficient guards or protectors as
shall prevent injury or destruction of said tree arising out of said
§ 427-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 427-7
1:389
§ 427-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
before a Magisterial District Judge of appropriate jurisdiction, be liable to
pay costs of prosecution and a fine as follows:
activities. The placement of guards or protectors shall be in accord with
the Rules and Regulations for Arbor Work or upon written authorization
of the Director or Borough Arborist.
F. Place or maintain upon the ground any asphalt, cement, stone, or other
material or substances in such a manner as may obstruct or further
obstruct free access of air and water to the roots of any trees in any
public areas or within any tree protection zone.
G. Pile any building material or make any mortar or cement within six feet
of any tree in any public area or within any Tree Protection Zone.
H. Hitch or fasten any animal, bicycle, or vehicle to any tree in any public
area.
A. For willingly injuring or killing a living tree in any public area or within
any Tree Protection Zone by cutting, carving, debarking, breaking, by
the use of herbicides, use of a vehicle or in any other manner wherein it
is determined by the District Judge that such damage or destruction
was intentionally inflicted, a fine of not less than $100 nor more than
$1,000, plus the cost of prosecution and value of the destroyed or
damaged tree; and/or the cost of repair or replacing each damaged tree
plus 10% additional, shall be levied. The value of the tree or trees
removed or damaged shall be determined by the Borough Arborist or
other ISA Certified Arborist selected by the Borough using a valuation
method approved by the International Society of Arboriculture (such as
The Guide for Plant Appraisal, Ninth Edition, 2000, or its most current
replacement). If the person found guilty of violating this subsection is
an abutting property owner, the total costs and fines shall be assessed
against the property in accordance with Section 2730 of the Borough
Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. For failure of a property owner to remove, partially remove or treat a
tree on public or private property, as ordered in accord with this
chapter in § 427-4G and § 427-4I the guilty person shall be fined not
more than $100 per day. Each day the property owner remains in
violation shall constitute a separate offense. Total fines shall not exceed
$1,000.
C. For all other violations, where it is determined by the District Judge that
such damage or destruction was not willfully inflicted, a fine of not less
than $25 nor more than $100, plus the cost of repairing or replacing
each damaged tree plus 10% additional, shall be levied. If the person
found guilty of violating this part is an abutting property owner, the
total costs and fines shall be assessed against the property in
§ 427-7 INDIANA CODE § 427-8
1:390
§ 427-9. Appeals.
With the exceptions of the procedures provided for in § 427-6 and § 427-8,
any action of the Commission may be appealed to and heard by the Council.
To be effective, an appeal must be filed within 30 days after the decision of
the Commission. The appeal shall be in writing and shall clearly specify the
reasons for which a hearing is requested. The decision of the Council shall
be final unless that decision is appealed within 30 days from the date of the
notice of the decision as provided for by administrative code.
§ 427-10. Liability disclaimer.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to impose any liability
upon the Borough, its officers or employees, nor to relieve the owner of
any private property of the duty to keep any tree, shrub or plant upon
his property or under his control in such a condition as to prevent it
from constituting a hazard or an impediment to travel or vision upon any
Borough street, avenue, boulevard, lane, alley, or public parks, rights-ofway,
easements, as well as all other areas under control of the Borough.
Chapter 434
URINATION IN PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 184.
§ 434-1. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate in public. For the purposes
of this chapter, "urination in public" shall include, but not be limited to,
urination on streets, sidewalks, yards, porches, any other areas in which the
act of urination can be or is viewed by any person, including a police officer.
accordance with Section 2730 of the Borough Code of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
D. For failure by a contractor to register with the Indiana Borough
Departments of Planning/Zoning, and Code Enforcement before
performing work on street trees or public trees, the penalties shall be
as follows: First offense, a written warning will be issued and kept on
file with the Indiana Borough Departments of Planning/Zoning, and
Code Enforcement; second offense, a fine of $100 shall be levied; third
offense and any subsequent offenses, a fine of $500 shall be levied.
[Amended 4-17-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-07]
§ 427-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 434-2
1:391
§ 434-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-2-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-03]
Any person violating this chapter, shall upon conviction before a Magisterial
District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 and not
more than $300 for the first offense, not less than $300 for the second and
subsequent offenses, together with cost of prosecution, and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 10 days.
Chapter 440
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking meters — See Ch. 288.
Parking on private property — See Ch. 293.
Permit parking — See Ch. 305.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 400.
Towing — See Ch. 421.
§ 434-2 INDIANA CODE § 434-2
1:392
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 440-1. Definitions and interpretation.135
§ 440-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances or as parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of
the Borough of Indiana.
§ 440-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code Of Pennsylvania, as now in
force,136 or as hereafter amended, enacted or reenacted, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
A. The Mayor shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and
parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations.
(2) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or
prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not
more than 72 hours.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Mayor and the Police Department in the same manner as permanent
regulations. Any person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in
violation of any such regulation, or who shall move, remove, destroy,
injure or deface any sign erected or posted to give notice of any such
regulation shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such
nature, and, in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than
$50 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine
and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 10 days.
135. Editor's Note: Section 3 of Article IV repealed Ord. No. 446, Ord. No. 582, Ord. No. 590,
Ord. No. 603, Ord. No. 607, Ord. No. 662, Ord. No. 685, Ord. No. 710, Ord. No. 751, Ord.
No. 752, Ord. No. 757, Ord. No. 771, Ord. No. 786, Ord. No. 823, Ord. No. 892, Ord. No.
903, Ord. No. 914, Ord. No. 959, and Ord. No. 989.
136. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 440-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-4
1:393
§ 440-4. Experimental regulations.
The Borough Council may, from time to time, designate places upon and
along the highways in the Borough where, for a period of not more than
90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions and
restrictions shall be in force and effect and shall designate such locations by
proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions and restrictions
shall be effective just as if they had been specified in this chapter. No
person shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any such
regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move, remove,
destroy or deface any sign or marking erected or made by authority of this
section. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section, shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty set forth in the law or
elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature, and, in case of a
violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law or elsewhere in
this chapter, to a fine of not more than $10 and costs of prosecution, and, in
default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than
five days. Provided: the purpose of this section is to allow for the test and
experimental determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent
changes in the ordinances of the Borough relative to traffic and parking.
§ 440-5. Authority of Police Officers.
The Police Officers of the Borough are hereby given authority to direct
traffic on the highways of the Borough, and at intersections thereof.
§ 440-4 INDIANA CODE § 440-5
1:394
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 440-6. Driving on sidewalks prohibited.
No person shall operate any motor vehicle longitudinally upon any sidewalk
in the Borough; nor shall any person operate any motor vehicle upon or
across any sidewalk except in order to gain access to or egress from a
driveway or alley at such locations where the curb, if such sidewalk is
curbed, shall have been properly cut down for the purpose. Any person who
shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $50 and costs of prosecution, and,
in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more
than 10 days.
§ 440-7. Speed limits. [Amended 4-7-1981 by Ord. No. 1291;
2-2-1993 by Ord. No. 1574; 11-7-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-07;
3-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-04; 4-8-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-02]
§ 440-8. Traffic signals.
A. In accordance with the authority of Title 75 (Pennsylvania Vehicle
Code), Chapter 33, Section 3362(a)(1.2),137 pertaining to the
establishment of speed limits within a residence district, when the
highway is not a numbered traffic route and is functionally classified by
the Department of Transportation as a local highway, the speed limit of
25 miles per hour is established for all such streets of the Borough of
Indiana.
B. In accordance with Title 75 (Pennsylvania Vehicle Code), Chapter 33,
Section 3362(b)(1),138 pertaining to the posting of established speed
limits, the Indiana Borough Police Department shall be responsible,
under the authority set forth under Title 75, to enforce speed limits
within the Borough of Indiana when said limits are posted in a manner
prescribed by regulations set forth in Title 75.
C. Any person who shall operate a vehicle or tractor at a speed in excess of
that hereby established therefor, upon any of the portions of highways
herein specified, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of
$10 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine
and costs, to imprisonment for not more than five days.
A. At the following intersections, official traffic signals shall be erected (or
if heretofore erected are hereby ratified) and traffic at such
intersections shall be directed by such signals:
137. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3362(a)(1.2).
138. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3362(b)(1).
§ 440-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-8
1:395
§ 440-9. Permitted right turns. [Added 5-8-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-05]
A right turn shall be permitted at the following locations:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Carpenter Avenue North Water Street
§ 440-10. U-turns prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle or tractor to make
a U-turn anywhere upon any highway in the Borough. Any person who
shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be
Intersection
Chestnut Street and Fourth Street
Church Street and Ninth Street
Church Street and Seventh Street
Oakland Avenue and Eleventh Street
Oakland Avenue and Tenth Street
Oakland Avenue, Maple Street, Thirteenth Street
Philadelphia Street and Eleventh Street
Philadelphia Street and Fifth Street
Philadelphia Street and Fourth Street
Philadelphia Street and Ninth Street
Philadelphia Street and Seventh Street
Philadelphia Street and Sixth Street
Philadelphia Street and Third Street
Philadelphia Street and Thirteenth Street
School Street, Sixth Street and Wayne Avenue
Water Street and Fifth Street
Water Street and Ninth Street
Water Street and Sixth Street
Wayne Avenue and Locust Street
Wayne Avenue and Maple Street
Wayne Avenue and Seventh Street
B. Any operator of a vehicle or tractor who shall disobey the directions of
any traffic signal shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine of $5 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than three days.
§ 440-8 INDIANA CODE § 440-10
1:396
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $10 and costs of prosecution, and,
in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more
than five days.
§ 440-11. One-way highways. [Amended 9-5-1972 by Ord. No. 1062;
11-5-1974 by Ord. No. 1118; 2-7-1978 by Ord. No. 1202]
A. The following are hereby established as one-way highways:
Highway From To
Direction of
Travel
Carpenter Avenue Philadelphia
Street
School
Street
South
Carpenter Avenue Philadelphia
Street
Water
Street
North
Carpenter Avenue
[Added 10-5-1993 by
Ord. No. 1593]
Nixon
Avenue
Water
Street
North
Traffic departing
the parking garage
onto Carpenter
Avenue may
proceed north or
south
Church Street Third Street Ninth
Street
West
Clark Street Sixth Street Fifth
Street
East
Court Way Philadelphia
Street
Nixon
Avenue
North
Eleventh Avenue Oakland
Avenue
Church
Street
North
Gompers Avenue Eighth
Street
Fifth
Street
East
Klondyke Avenue Seventh
Street
Eighth
Street
West
Nixon Avenue Fifth Street Eighth
Street
West
Paper Mill Avenue
[Added 9-4-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-05]
Philadelphia
Street
Church
Street
South
Park Place [Added
11-2-1999 by Ord.
No. 1999-09]
Carpenter
Avenue
Sixth
Street
East
Porter Avenue Oak Street Shryock
Avenue
South
§ 440-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-11
1:397
Highway From To
Direction of
Travel
Pratt Drive School
Street
Grant
Street
South
Rice Avenue [Added
12-21-1993 by Ord.
No. 1601]
South Street School
Street
North
School Street Oakland
Avenue
Eleventh
Street
West
School Street Oakland
Avenue
Third
Street
East
Shryock Avenue Fifth Street Fourth
Street
West
South Eighth Street
and West Avenue
[Added 12-21-1993
by Ord. No. 1601]
Philadelphia
Street
South
Street
South
South Street [Added
6-3-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-03; repealed
10-7-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-05]
Station Avenue
[Added 9-4-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-05]
Philadelphia
Street
Water
Street
North
Station Avenue
[Added 6-2-1992 by
Ord. No. 1543]
Philadelphia
Street
Water
Street
South
Taylor Avenue Philadelphia
Street
Church
Street
South
Taylor Avenue Philadelphia
Street
Water
Street
North
Washington Street Third Street Seventh
Street
West
Washington Street
[Added 9-5-1995 by
Ord. No. 1660]
Second
Street
Third
Street
West
B. Any person who shall operate a vehicle or tractor upon any street or
portion thereof hereby established as a one-way street other than in the
direction hereby established for vehicular traffic shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $10 and costs of
prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment for not more than five days.139
§ 440-11 INDIANA CODE § 440-12
1:398
§ 440-12. Stop intersections. [Amended 8-6-1974 by Ord. No. 1111;
11-5-1974 by Ord. No. 1119; 10-7-1975 by Ord. No. 1140; 2-3-1976
by Ord. No. 1149; 3-2-1976 by Ord. No. 1152; 7-6-1976 by Ord. No.
1162; 9-7-1976 by Ord. No. 1167; 10-4-1977 by Ord. No. 1193;
4-4-1978 by Ord. No. 1206; 9-5-1978 by Ord. No. 1215; 11-7-1978 by
Ord. No. 1218; 11-5-1979 by Ord. No. 1249; 2-5-1980 by Ord. No.
1257; 9-2-1980 by Ord. No. 1275; 11-4-1980 by Ord. No. 1277;
10-22-1984 by Ord. No. 1362; 2-5-1985 by Ord. No. 1372; 9-3-1985
by Ord. No. 1386; 12-3-1985 by Ord. No. 1394; 3-3-1987 by Ord. No.
1418; 1-5-1988 by Ord. No. 1439; 8-2-1988 by Ord. No. 1447;
12-27-1988 by Ord. No. 1453; 2-7-1989 by Ord. No. 1459; 5-2-1989
by Ord. No. 1466; 8-8-1989 by Ord. No. 1470; 10-3-1989 by Ord. No.
1475; 11-7-1989 by Ord. No. 1476; 12-5-1989 by Ord. No. 1477;
4-3-1990 by Ord. No. 1488; 10-7-1990 by Ord. No. 1496; 3-18-1991
by Ord. No. 1504; 8-6-1991 by Ord. No. 1513]
A. The following intersections are hereby established as stop intersections
and official stop signs shall be erected (or are hereby confirmed if
heretofore erected) in such a position so as to face traffic approaching
the second-named highway upon the first-named highway, in the
direction or directions hereby indicated. All vehicles and tractors
approaching any such intersection upon the first-named highway, in the
direction or directions hereby indicated in each case, shall come to a
full stop, within a reasonable distance, before entering such
intersections.
Stop Highway Through Highway Direction of Travel
Anderson Avenue Fourth Street West
Anderson Avenue Third Street West
Carpenter Avenue Church Street South
Carpenter Avenue Gompers Avenue South
Carpenter Avenue Nixon Avenue North
Carpenter Avenue School Street South
Carpenter Avenue Shryock Avenue South
Carter Avenue Seventh Street West
Carter Avenue Sixth Street East
Carter Avenue Wayne Avenue West
Charles Street Third Street West
Cherry Avenue Burns Avenue North and south
Cherry Avenue Nixon Avenue South
Cherry Avenue Oak Street North
139. Editor's Note: The last sentence of Ord. No. 1118 stated that in all other respects the
section was to remain unchanged.
§ 440-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-12
1:399
Stop Highway Through Highway Direction of Travel
Cherry Avenue [Added
10-4-1994 by Ord. No.
1635]
School Street North and south
Cherry Avenue Washington Street North and south
Cherry Avenue Water Street North and south
Chestnut Street Ninth Street East and west
Chestnut Street North Fifth Street East and west
Chestnut Street North Third Street East and west
Chestnut Street Seventh Street East and west
Chestnut Street Station Avenue East and west
Church Street Church Street North and south
Church Street Eleventh Street East and west
Church Street Fifteenth Street East and west
Church Street Fifth Street West
Church Street Fourteenth Street East and west
Church Street Fourth Street West
Church Street Sixth Street West
Church Street Tenth Street East and west
Church Street Third Street West
Church Street Thirteenth Street East and west
Clairvaux Avenue (aka
St. Bernard Drive)
[Added 9-8-1992 by
Ord. No. 1558]
Gabriel Avenue West
Clark Avenue [Added
10-3-1995 by Ord. No.
1662]
Maryland Way West
Clark Street Fifth Street East
Clark Street Sixth Street East
Carpenter Avenue
[Added 11-5-1996 by
Ord. No. 1694]
Locust Street North and south
Carpenter Avenue
[Added 11-5-1996 by
Ord. No. 1694]
Wayne Avenue North
Cherry Avenue [Added
3-2-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-02]
Gompers Avenue North and south
§ 440-12 INDIANA CODE § 440-12
1:400
Stop Highway Through Highway Direction of Travel
Clymer Avenue [Added
2-2-1993 by Ord. No.
1575]
Church Street North and south
Clymer Avenue Gompers Avenue North and south
Clymer Avenue Oak Street South
Clymer Avenue Philadelphia Street North and south
Coulter Avenue Burns Avenue North and south
Coulter Avenue Gompers Avenue North and south
Coulter Avenue Nixon Avenue North and south
Coulter Avenue [Added
10-7-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-05]
School Street North and south
Croyland Avenue
[Added 11-7-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-06]
Eighth Street East and westbound
Croyland Avenue Ninth Street West
Croyland Avenue Sixth Street East
East Avenue [Added
10-4-1994 by Ord. No.
1635]
Waster Street North and south
Edgewood Avenue Chestnut Street South
Eighth Street Chestnut Street North and south
Eighth Street Church Street North and south
Eighth Street Croyland Avenue North
Eighth Street Oak Street North and south
Eighth Street Philadelphia Street North and south
Eighth Street School Street North and south
Eighth Street Water Street North and south
Eleventh Street Chestnut Street North and south
Eleventh Street Church Street North
Eleventh Street [Added
6-3-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-04]
Grant Street North
Eleventh Street Grant Street South
Eleventh Street Maple Street North and south
Eleventh Street Oak Street North and south
Eleventh Street School Street North
Eleventh Street Washington Street North
§ 440-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-12
1:401
Stop Highway Through Highway Direction of Travel
Eleventh Street Water Street North and south
Elm Street [Added
9-7-1999 by Ord. No.
1999-03]
Third Street East and west
Elm Street Fifth Street West
Elm Street Fourth Street East and west
Elmer Avenue Foundry Avenue East and west
Fifteenth Street Church Street North and south
Fifteenth Street Philadelphia Street North and south
Fifteenth Street School Street South
Fifth Street Chestnut Street North and south
Fifth Street Grandview Avenue South
Fifth Street Grant Street North and south
Fifth Street Locust Street North and south
Fifth Street and
Washington Street
Washington Street North and south
First Street [Added
10-4-1994 by Ord. No.
1635]
East
First Street Oak Street North and south
First Street Philadelphia Street North
First Street [Added
10-4-1994 by Ord. No.
1635]
Water Street South
Fisher Avenue Church Street North and south
Fisher Avenue Gompers Avenue North and south
Fisher Avenue Oakland Avenue South
Fisher Avenue Oakland Avenue South
Fisher Avenue [Added
7-6-1993 by Ord. No.
1587]
School Street North and south
Fisher Avenue Washington Street North and south
Fleming Avenue Lowry Street South
Foundry Avenue Elmer Avenue North
Foundry Avenue Gompers Avenue North and south
Foundry Avenue Klondyke Avenue North and south
Foundry Avenue Philadelphia Street North and south
§ 440-12 INDIANA CODE § 440-12
1:402
Stop Highway Through Highway Direction of Travel
Fourteenth Street
[Added 8-3-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-08]
Church Street Noth and south
Fourteenth Street Philadelphia Street North and south
Fourteenth Street School Street North and south
Fourteenth Street Washington Street North and south
Fourth Street Elm Street North and south
Fourth Street Grandview Avenue South
Fourth Street Grant Street North and south
Fourth Street Locust Street North and south
Fourth Street School Street North and south
Fourth Street Washington Street North and south
Fourth Street extension Fourth Street South
Gabriel Avenue Oak Street South
Gabriel Avenue Street Bernard Drive North and south
Garman Avenue Locust Street North and south
Garman Avenue Maple Street South
Garman Avenue South Street North
Gompers Avenue
[Amended 3-2-2004
by Ord. No. 2004-02]
Cherry Avenue East and west
Gompers Avenue Coulter Avenue East and west
Gompers Avenue East Avenue East and west
Gompers Avenue Eleventh Street East and west
Gompers Avenue Fifteenth Street East and west
Gompers Avenue
[Added 3-4-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-03]
Fisher Avenue West
Gompers Avenue Fourteenth Street East and west
Gompers Avenue Fourth Street East and west
Gompers Avenue Rex Avenue East and west
Gompers Avenue Second Street East and west
Gompers Avenue Seventh Street East
Gompers Avenue Sixth Street East
Gompers Avenue Taylor Avenue East
Gompers Avenue
[Added 11-7-1995 by
Ord. No. 1663140]
Tenth Street East and west
§ 440-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-12
1:403
Stop Highway Through Highway Direction of Travel
Gompers Avenue Third Street East and west
Gompers Avenue Thirteenth Street East and west
Grandview Avenue Sixth Street West
Grant Street Eleventh Street East and west
Grant Street Fifth Street East and west
Grant Street Fourth Street East and west
Grant Street Oakland Avenue West
Grant Street Pratt Drive East and west
Grant Street Seventh Street East and west
Grant Street Sixth Street East and west
Grant Street Third Street East and west
Grant Street Wayne Avenue East and west
Klondyke Avenue Eighth Street West
Locust Street College Avenue West
Locust Street Fifth Street East and west
Locust Street Fourth Street North and south
Locust Street [Added
12-7-1993 by Ord. No.
1599; amended
1-18-1994 by Ord. No.
1609]
Garman Avenue East
Locust Street [Added
2-4-1992 by Ord. No.
1534]
Garman Avenue West
Locust Street Sixth Street East and west
Locust Street [Added
6-2-1992 by Ord. No.
1544]
Third Street All
Locust Street [Added
9-3-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-07]
Thirteenth Street East
Lowry Street Fleming Avenue East
Maple Street Eleventh Street East and west
Maple Street Pratt Drive East and west
Maple Street Seventh Street East and west
Maple Street Sixth Street East and south
140. Editor's Note: Gompers Avenue at Tenth Street, east and west, was also added 7-12-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-05.
§ 440-12 INDIANA CODE § 440-12
1:404
Stop Highway Through Highway Direction of Travel
Maryland Way Grant Street North and south
Maryland Way South Street North
Nixon Avenue Carpenter Avenue West
Nixon Avenue [Added
1-18-1994 by Ord. No.
1609]
Cherry Avenue All
Nixon Avenue Clymer Avenue East and west
Nixon Avenue Coulter Avenue East and west
Nixon Avenue Eighth Street West
Nixon Avenue Foundry Avenue East and west
Nixon Avenue [Added
7-7-1998 by Ord. No.
1731]
Fourteenth Street East and west
Nixon Avenue [Added
12-7-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-011]
North Thirteenth
Street
East and west
Nixon Avenue Seventh Street West
Nixon Avenue Sixth Street West
North Avenue Fourth Street East
North Sixth Street
[Added 5-8-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-04]
Clark Street South
Oak Street Fifth Street East and west
Oak Street First Street East
Oak Street Fourth Street East and west
Oak Street Gabriel Avenue West
Oak Street Ninth Street East and west
Oak Street [Added
3-7-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-02]
North Seventh
Street
West
Oak Street Second Street East and west
Oak Street Sixth Street East and west
Oak Street Tenth Street East and west
Oak Street Tenth Street East and west
Oak Street Third Street East and west
Oak Street Twelfth Street East
Olive Street Third Street West
Papermill Avenue Church Street North and south
§ 440-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-12
1:405
Stop Highway Through Highway Direction of Travel
Papermill Avenue
[Added 6-4-1996 by
Ord. No. 1684]
Klondike Avenue North and south
Papermill Avenue Philadelphia Street North
Papermill Avenue
[Added 12-8-1992 by
Ord. No. 1568]
School Street North and south
Papermill Avenue
[Added 6-2-1992 by
Ord. No. 1544]
Washington Street South
Poplar Avenue Fourth Street East and west
Poplar Avenue Lowry Avenue East and west
Pratt Drive Grant Street North and south
Pratt Drive Maple Street North and south
Pratt Drive South Street South
Rex Avenue Gompers Avenue North and south
Rice Avenue and School
Street [Added
6-2-1992 by Ord. No.
1544]
Seventh Street and
Eighth Street
North
Rice Avenue Washington Street North and south
School Street Eleventh Street East and west
School Street Fifth Street East
School Street Fourteenth Street East and west
School Street Seventh Street East
School Street Third Street East and west
School Street Thirteenth Street East and west
School Street [Added
10-5-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-09]
Wine Avenue East and west
Second Street Church Street North and south
Second Street Oak Street North
Second Street Oak Street North
Second Street Philadelphia Street North and south
Second Street School Street South
Second Street Water Street North and south
Seventh Street Carter Avenue South
Seventh Street Chestnut Street North
§ 440-12 INDIANA CODE § 440-12
1:406
Stop Highway Through Highway Direction of Travel
Seventh Street Grant Street North and south
Seventh Street Maple Street North and south
Seventh Street Oak Street North and south
Seventh Street Water Street North
Shryock Avenue Fifth Street East and west
Shryock Avenue Fourth Street East and west
Sixteenth Street Gompers Avenue South
Sixteenth Street Philadelphia Street North and south
Sixteenth Street [Added
12-30-1991 by Ord.
No. 1530]
Water Street North
Sixth Street Chestnut Street North and south
Sixth Street Oak Street North and south
South Avenue [Added
10-3-1995 by Ord. No.
1662]
Maryland Way East and west
South Avenue [Added
10-3-1995 by Ord. No.
1662]
Seventh Street West
South Fifth Street
[Added 12-7-1993 by
Ord. No. 1599;
amended 1-18-1994
by Ord. No. 1609]
School Street North and south
South Second Street
[Added 9-5-1995 by
Ord. No. 1659]
Washington Street North
South Street College Avenue West
South Street Seventh Street East and west
South Street Wayne Avenue East
South Tenth Street
[Added 12-7-1993 by
Ord. No. 1599;
amended 1-18-1994
by Ord. No. 1609]
Church Street North and south
Stannard Avenue
[Added 8-5-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-09]
North Sixth Street West
Stannard Avenue
[Added 5-5-1998 by
Ord. No. 1727]
Taylor Avenue East and west
§ 440-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-12
1:407
Stop Highway Through Highway Direction of Travel
Station Avenue Oak Street North and south
Station Avenue Philadelphia Street South
Station Avenue Water Street North and south
Taylor Avenue Burns Avenue North and south
Taylor Avenue Clark Street North
Taylor Avenue Gompers Avenue South
Taylor Avenue Nixon Avenue North
Taylor Avenue Shryock Avenue South
Tenth Street Chestnut Street North and south
Tenth Street Oak Street North and south
Tenth Street Philadelphia Street North South
Tenth Street School Street North and south
Tenth Street Water Street North and south
Third Street Chestnut Street North and south
Third Street Elm Street North and south
Third Street Locust Street North and south
Third Street Oak Street North and south
Third Street School Street North and south
Third Street Water Street North and south
Thirteenth Street Maple Street North
Thirteenth Street School Street North and south
Thirteenth Street Washington Street North and south
Twelfth Street
[Amended 9-8-1992
by Ord. No. 1558]
Chestnut Street North and south
Twelfth Street Church Street South
Twelfth Street Maple Street South
Twelfth Street Oak Street North and south
Twelfth Street Philadelphia Street North and south
Twelfth Street Water Street North and south
Virginia Avenue Sixth Street East
Walnut Street Church Street North and south
Walnut Street Gompers Avenue North
Walnut Street Locust Street South
Walnut Street School Street North and south
Walnut Street Washington Street North and south
§ 440-12 INDIANA CODE § 440-12
1:408
§ 440-13. Weights of vehicles limited. [Amended 9-6-1977 by Ord.
No. 1190]
Stop Highway Through Highway Direction of Travel
Washington Street
[Added 7-2-1996 by
Ord. No. 1690]
Eleventh Street West
Washington Street Fifth Street West
Washington Street Fourteenth Street East and west
Washington Street Fourth Street West
Washington Street Oakland Avenue East
Washington Street Rice Avenue East and west
Washington Street Seventh Street East and west
Washington Street Sixth Street West
Washington Street Third Street West
Washington Street Thirteenth Street East and west
Washington Street
[Added 9-5-1995 by
Ord. No. 1659]
Walnut Street West
Washington Street Wayne Avenue West
Water Street Fifteenth Street East and west
Water Street Fourteenth Street East and west
Water Street Fourth Street East and west
Water Street Second Street East and west
Water Street Third Street East and west
Water Street Thirteenth Street East and west
Willow Avenue Papermill Avenue East and west
Willow Avenue Sixth Street East
Wine Avenue
[Amended 5-8-2001
by Ord. No. 2001-04]
Church Street North and south
Wine Avenue School Street North and south
Wine Avenue Washington Street South
B. Any operator of a vehicle or tractor who shall fail to come to a full stop,
within a reasonable distance, before entering any such stop
intersection, as hereinabove required, shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $5 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than
three days.
§ 440-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-13
1:409
§ 440-14. Play highways authorized.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to designate as play highways, whenever
he shall deem such action is advisable, and for whatever period of time
directed by him, any portion of any highway in the Borough, whereon
sledding and coasting shall be permitted. Such highway shall be set apart
for the purpose under the direction of the Mayor. No person shall operate
any motor vehicle or tractor upon any play highway at any time when such
highway shall be so designated, except in case of emergency, with special
permission of the Mayor or of the police officer in charge, who shall first
clear such play highway of all persons using such highway for sledding or
coasting. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall,
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle or tractor, or
tractor-trailer combination, having a gross weight in excess of that
herein respectively prescribed, upon any of the following portions of
highways, except where the operation of such vehicle or tractor, or
tractor-trailer combination shall be for the purpose of picking up or
delivering goods, wares, merchandise or material from or to any
premises located upon such portion of highway:
Street Location
Maximum
Gross Weight
(tons)
Eleventh Street From Maple Street to Philadelphia
Street
8
Fourth Street From Philadelphia Street to Locust
Street
8
Gompers
Avenue
From Fourteenth Street to Fifteenth
Street
8
Locust Street From Third Street to Seventh
Street
8
Seventh Street From Locust Street to Carter
Avenue
8
Third Street From Philadelphia Street to Locust
Street
8
Thirteenth
Street
From Oakland Avenue to
Philadelphia Street
8
Wayne Avenue From Sixth Street to Seventh Street 12
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $50 and
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs,
to imprisonment for not more than 10 days.141
141. Editor's Note: The last sentence of Ord. No. 1190 provided that in all other respects this
section was to remain as theretofore.
§ 440-13 INDIANA CODE § 440-14
1:410
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $10
and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs,
to imprisonment for not more than five days.
§ 440-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-14
1:411

ARTICLE III
Parking
§ 440-15. Parking without lights authorized.
The boundary limits of the Borough of Indiana are hereby established as a
zone in which motor vehicles may remain standing without lights, and all
highways within such boundary limits are hereby designated as highways
where motor vehicles may remain standing without lights.
§ 440-16. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space shall be marked off on any highway for the parking of
an individual vehicle, every vehicle there parked shall be parked within the
lines bounding such space.
§ 440-17. Parking between curbline and sidewalk prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle between the
curbline and sidewalk on any highway in the Borough without first having
obtained permission from the Borough Council so to do. The Council shall
grant such permission only if:
§ 440-18. No parking. [Added 2-2-1993 by Ord. No. 1576]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the following streets
or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
Diamond Avenue [Added
2-2-1993 by Ord. No.
1576]
South From Fleming Avenue to Wayne
Avenue
Church Street [Added
9-5-1995 by Ord. No.
1658]
South 2 spaces nearest to intersection of
Church Street and South Sixth
Street
Fleming Avenue [Added
2-2-1993 by Ord. No.
1576]
East From Maple Street to Carter
Avenue
Locust Street [Added
9-5-1995 by Ord. No.
1658]
East Locust Street
A. In its judgment there shall be cogent reasons for such parking; and
B. Any vehicle there parked shall not be a menace to traffic safety by
reason of obstruction of the vision of operators of vehicles and tractors
traveling upon such highway or any highway intersecting such highway
in the vicinity.
§ 440-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-18
1:413
Name of Street Side Location
Maple Street [Added
5-7-1996 by Ord. No.
1683]
Both 500 block from 30 feet east of
South Sixth Street to Indiana
Borough boundary line
North Ninth Street
[Added 9-3-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-05]
East The first parking space
immediately north of Oak Street
North Ninth Street
[Added 9-3-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-05]
East The first parking space
immediately south of Oak Street
Park Place [Added
11-2-1999 by Ord. No.
1999-010]
South From Carpenter Avenue to Sixth
Street
Sixteenth Street [Added
12-7-1993 by Ord. No.
1600]
West From Philadelphia Street to
Gompers Avenue
Spring Alley [Added
5-7-1996 by Ord. No.
1683]
Both 300 block of Spring Alley
Taylor Avenue [Added
4-4-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-01]
Both Between Chestnut Street and
Water Street
Taylor Avenue [Added
10-7-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-05]
East From Chestnut Street to the north
for a distance of 125 feet
Water Street [Added
7-6-1993 by Ord. No.
1590]
South Immediately east of Carpenter
Avenue
§ 440-19. Parking prohibited at certain times. [Amended 2-5-1980
by Ord. No. 1258]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or tractor, or to
allow the same to remain parked, at any time between the hours of 1:00
a.m. and 6:00 a.m. in any of the following locations:
Highway Side Location
Carter Avenue North From Wayne Avenue to Sixth
Street
North Fourth Street Both From North Borough line to
Philadelphia Street
North Ninth Street East From North Borough line to Water
Street
North Ninth Street West From Water Street to Philadelphia
Street
§ 440-18 INDIANA CODE § 440-19
1:414
Highway Side Location
Philadelphia Street Both From B & O Railroad to Long
Avenue
Philadelphia Street Both From First Street to Fourth Street
South Ninth Street East From Philadelphia Street to
Church Street
South Seventh Street East From Philadelphia Street to Locust
Street
South Seventh Street West From Philadelphia Street to School
Street
South Sixth Street East From Philadelphia Street to
Church Street
South Sixth Street West From Philadelphia Street to School
Street
Water Street North From Fourth Street to Fifth Street
Water Street North From Eighth Street to Ninth Street
Water Street North From Sixth Street to Carpenter
Avenue
Water Street South From Fourth Street to Fifth Street
Water Street South From Sixth Street to Ninth Street
Wayne Avenue West From Locust Street to South
Borough line
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or tractor to allow
the same to remain parked at any time between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m. in any of the following places:
Highway Side Location
North Seventh Street
[Added 1-18-1994
by Ord. No. 1610]
Both From Philadelphia Street to Water
Street
Philadelphia Street Both From Fourth Street to B & O
Railroad track
South Eighth Street
[Added 2-8-1994 by
Ord. No. 1614]
Both From Philadelphia Street to School
Street
Water Street Both From Fifth Street to Sixth Street
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or tractor, or to
allow the same to remain parked, at any time between the hours of 4:00
a.m. and 6:00 a.m. in any of the following locations: [Added 4-7-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-01]
§ 440-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-19
1:415
§ 440-20. Parking prohibited in certain locations on school days
between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or tractor, or to allow
the same to remain parked in any of the following locations at any time on
school days between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.:
Highway Side Location
Chestnut Street North From Fifth Street to Coulter Avenue
North Fifth Street East From a point approximately 25 feet
south of Shryock Avenue to
Chestnut Street
North Fifth Street West From Shryock Avenue to Chestnut
Street
School Street North From Fifth Street to a point
approximately 115 feet east thereof
§ 440-21. Parking, stopping and standing prohibited in certain
locations on school days between 7:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. [Added
11-3-1992 by Ord. No. 1562; amended 4-6-1993 by Ord. No. 1579]
§ 440-22. Parking prohibited certain days and hours on part of
Philadelphia Street.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or tractor, or to allow
the same to remain parked on the south side of Philadelphia Street, between
Fourth Street and Fifth Street, at any time on Sunday or on any legal
Highway Side Location
North Seventh Street Both From Nixon Avenue to Philadelphia
Street
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or tractor, or to
allow the same to remain parked, in any of the following locations at
any time on school days between 7:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m.:
Highway Side Location
Chestnut Street South From Fourth Street to Fifth Street
Shryock Avenue North From Fourth Street to Fifth Street
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to stop or stand a vehicle or tractor
in any of the following locations at any time on school days between
7:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m.:
Highway Side Location
Chestnut Street North From Fourth Street to Fifth Street
North Fifth Street West From Chestnut Street to Oak Street
§ 440-19 INDIANA CODE § 440-22
1:416
holiday, or at any time between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m.,
Monday through Saturday.
§ 440-23. Parking time limits.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or tractor, or to allow
the same to remain parked, for longer than the time herein indicated, in any
of the following locations:
Street Side Location
Parking Time
Limit
(hours)
North Fifth Street West From Shryock Avenue to
Oakland Avenue
2
Philadelphia Street Both From Tenth Street to B
& O Railroad
2
§ 440-24. Special purpose parking zones established; parking
otherwise prohibited. [Amended 8-6-1974 by Ord. No. 1112;
12-23-1985 by Ord. No. 1399]
The following are hereby established as special purpose parking zones, and
it shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or tractor, or to allow
the same to remain parked, in any such zone, except as specifically provided
for such zone:
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose
Church Street South 1 space between Sixth
Street and Carpenter
Avenue
Loading zone
Eighth Street
[Added 7-6-1993
by Ord. No. 1590]
East From Gompers Avenue
to Philadelphia Street
Patient
unloading on
Monday through
Friday from 7:00
a.m. to 6:00
a.m.142
Foundry Avenue West 1 space between
Washington Street and
Oakland Avenue
Loading zone
Gompers Avenue North 1 space between
Seventh Street and
Eighth Street
Loading zone
142. Note: One handicapped metered space shall be located immediately north of the
unloading area and one handicapped parking meter shall be located immediately south of
the parking area.
§ 440-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-24
1:417
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose
Gompers Avenue North 1 space between Fifth
Street and Sixth Street
Loading zone
Klondyke Avenue North 1 space between
Oakland Avenue and
Clymer Avenue
Loading zone
Nixon Avenue South 1 space between Sixth
Street and Taylor
Avenue
Loading zone
North Fifth Street West 1 space between Water
Street and Burns
Avenue
Loading zone
North Seventh
Street
East 6 spaces between Nixon
Avenue and Water
Street
2 police cars
2 Borough
Officials
2 Official
Business (30
minutes)
North Seventh
Street
West 1 space between Nixon
Avenue and Water
Street
Loading zone
Philadelphia Street South 2 spaces between Ninth
Street and Clymer
Avenue
2 Cab stops
School Street North 1 space between
Carpenter Avenue and
Seventh Street
Loading zone
School Street
[Added 1-18-1994
by Ord. No. 1609]
Both From Fifth Street to
Coulter Avenue
School unloading
zone
South Carpenter
Avenue
West 1 space between Church
Street and School Street
Loading zone
South Tenth Street East 1 space between
Philadelphia Street and
Gompers Avenue
Loading zone
Water Street North 1 space between Sixth
Street and Taylor
Avenue
Loading zone
West Avenue West 1 space between
Washington Street and
South Street
Loading zone143
§ 440-24 INDIANA CODE § 440-25
1:418
§ 440-25. Angle parking. [Added 12-21-1993 by Ord. No. 1602]
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described in this section, except at the angle designated and only within the
painted stall lines. On all streets or portions thereof where angle parking is
now or shall hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked thereon shall be
parked with the front thereof nearest the curb.
Name of Street Side Location
South Eighth Street East From Philadelphia Street to School
Street
South Fifth Street
[Added 2-8-1994 by
Ord. No. 1613]
East From Washington Street to School
Street144
§ 440-26. Twelve-hour parking limit on all streets. [Added
11-20-1972 by Ord. No. 1065]
Any person owning or having control over any motor vehicle or vehicles is
hereby prohibited from parking the same on any street or avenue in the
Borough of Indiana and permitting or suffering such vehicle to remain so
parked for more than 12 hours, provided that such street or avenue is so
posted by the proper officials of the Borough of Indiana.
§ 440-27. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person violating any provision of this article or aiding or abetting or
assisting in the violation thereof shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine as follows:
(1) Over-parking at meters. [Amended 11-1-1994 by Ord. No.
1638]
(a) The fine for over-parking if paid within 48 hours after the
violation occurred: $2.
(b) After the 48 hours: $5.
(c) After 30 days: $10.
(2) Over-parking in a free zone: $5.
(3) Over-parking in a two hour zone: $10.
(4) Over-parking in a 1:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. zone: $15.
(5) Parking where prohibited: $15.
(6) Parking too close to an intersection: $15.
143. Editor's Note: The last sentence of Ord. No. 1112 stated that in all other respects this
section was to remain unchanged.
144. Note: The angle parking area shall be for school use only while school is in session.
§ 440-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-27
1:419
(7) Backed into meter space: $5.
(8) Parking too close to a fire hydrant: $15.
(9) Parking in handicapped zone: $50.
(10) Parking in excess of 12 hours: $10. [Added 11-20-1972 by Ord.
No. 1065; amended 9-3-1991 by Ord. No. 1516]
(11) All other parking violations: $10.
B. Violators shall also be responsible for the cost of prosecution and upon
failure to make payment of said fine and costs, to be sentenced to
imprisonment for five days.
(1) Provided, the police officers of the Borough shall place a parking
ticket with applicable notice upon every vehicle parked at a parking
meter indicating that the period of legal parking shall have elapsed
and the owner or operator of the said vehicle shall have the
privilege before midnight (12:00 p.m.) of the date of issue of
placing the said parking ticket with the sum of $0.50 in the United
States Mail or turning in the said ticket and the sum of $0.50 at the
Borough Police Station in full satisfaction of such violation and in
such case no prosecution shall be held for such violation. Provided
further, the placement of one parking ticket upon a vehicle shall not
excuse a continuance of over-parking and the police officers shall
have the authority to place an additional parking ticket in the
amount of $2 upon any such vehicle whenever the period of a 60
minutes shall have elapsed following the prior placement of the
parking ticket thereon. [Amended 3-3-1981 by Ord. No. 1288;
9-3-1991 by Ord. No. 1516]
§ 440-27 INDIANA CODE § 440-27
1:420
ARTICLE IV
Community Development Committee
[Added 7-5-1994 by Ord. No. 1627]
§ 440-28. Authorization of Committee to make changes.145
The Community Development Committee is hereby authorized by Borough
Council to implement the following changes in regard to parking policies:
§ 440-29. Changes in effect upon marking or signage.
Any changes made to the existing parking regulations shall not take effect
until all such parking spaces and zones are marked in an appropriate
manner including the signage for the zoned area and appropriate markings
on the meters.
§ 440-30. Overrule of decisions by Borough Council.146
Any decisions made by the Community Development Committee regarding
the aforementioned matters may be overruled by Borough Council by
motion duly passed by a majority of any members present at any Council
meeting.
A. Create and change parking meter areas, including the right to establish
a maximum time period for parking as well as the rate per hour for
parking, providing, however, that the rate per hour shall be no greater
than the highest existing rate per hour for parking in Indiana Borough
at a meter.
B. To establish, change and regulate loading zones.
C. To designate handicapped parking spaces.
145. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
146. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 440-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-30
1:421

ARTICLE V
Booting of Motor Vehicles
[Added 2-3-1998 by Ord. No. 1720]
§ 440-31. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms and words are defined as
follows:
BOOT, BOOTING, or BOOTED — The act of immobilizing a motor vehicle in
such a manner as to present its operation with a device or by means which
will cause no damage to such vehicle unless it is moved or an attempt to
move it is made while such device is in place or such means are employed.
UNSETTLED CITATION — Citations for unpaid parking violations for which
a citation or summons has been issued for which there has been either:
UNSETTLED PARKING VIOLATIONS — Violations of the parking, standing,
or stopping regulations of the Borough of Indiana or the Pennsylvania Motor
Vehicle Code which are outstanding and unpaid for a period of 15 days from
the date of issuance.
§ 440-32. Boot installation.
A motor vehicle found parked within the Borough of Indiana upon any public
street or property at any time may, by or under direction of the Borough
Manager or any employee of the Borough of Indiana designated by the
Borough Manager, be booted if there are two or more unsettled parking
violations, two or more unsettled citations, or one or more arrest warrants
as a result of parking, standing, or stopping regulations pending against
the owner of the motor vehicle that are at least 150 days past the date of
issuance.
§ 440-33. Notice of booting.
Upon the booting of any motor vehicle an employee of the Borough of
Indiana, designated by the Borough Manager, shall place or cause to be
placed on the vehicle, in a conspicuous manner, notice sufficient to warn
any individual that the vehicle has been immobilized and that any attempt
to move the vehicle or remove the boot may result in damage to the vehicle.
This notice shall outline the procedures for obtaining the removal of the
boot. As soon as practicable, the designated employee shall provide the
owner of the booted vehicle, at his or her request, with a list of unsettled
citations for which or on account of which the vehicle was booted.
§ 440-34. Removal of boot.
A. No response made for which a warrant has been issued; or
Adjudicated citations for which the fines and costs imposed have not
been paid in full.
B.
§ 440-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-34
1:423
§ 440-35. Hearing.
The owner of a booted vehicle or other authorized representative shall have
the right to litigate any violations or citations which can still be litigated
under applicable law. In the event that the owner or other authorized
representative is successful in litigating these cases, any fines and costs
collected relative to those particular incidents shall be returned if found not
guilty by the Magisterial District Judge, however, as to all other unsettled
citations and unsettled parking violations, all fines and costs shall be
retained. All costs of the booting or towing shall be retained by the Borough
of Indiana unless it is determined by the Magisterial District Judge that the
requirements for booting pursuant to § 440-32 have not been met. In such
case, all costs for the booting and towing shall be returned to the owner of
the vehicle.
§ 440-36. Towing and storage of booted vehicle.
The boot shall remain in place for 72 hours, except as provided below or
unless the owner has complied with the payment of all fines, costs and fees
pursuant to § 440-34 of this article. If such compliance has not occurred
within 72 hours, the vehicle shall be towed and impounded pursuant to
provisions of Chapter 421, Towing. If the booting occurs when the vehicle is
parked in violation of any provision of the Pennsylvania State Motor Vehicle
Code or any ordinance of the Borough of Indiana, if the booted vehicle
or the immobilization device appears to have been tampered with, or the
vehicle cannot be booted or immobilized, then the vehicle shall be subject
to immediate towing and impounding.
§ 440-37. Booting fee.147
The owner of the booted vehicle shall be subject to a fee, as set from
time to time by resolution of the Borough Council, for such booting or
immobilization or such other fee as the Borough Council shall determine by
resolution.
A. The owner of the booted vehicle or other authorized representative
shall be permitted to secure the release of the vehicle upon paying the
amount of the fine, penalty, and court costs, if any, in full for each
unsettled citation and each unsettled parking violation including any
towing expenses pursuant to Chapter 421, Towing, of the Code of the
Borough of Indiana, if applicable.
B. The boot shall be removed between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00
p.m., Monday through Friday, excluding legal holidays. If the owner
desires to have the boot removed at any other time, an additional fee of
$50 shall be paid.
147. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 440-34 INDIANA CODE § 440-38
1:424
§ 440-38. Tampering with boot prohibited.
Any person who shall tamper with, remove, or attempt to remove any
device used to immobilize a motor vehicle that has been booted pursuant
to this article or who shall move or attempt to move a booted vehicle
before the release of the vehicle has been officially secured, shall be guilty
of a summary offense and, upon conviction thereof before the Magisterial
District Judge, shall be fined $500 together with costs of prosecution; or,
in default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned for a period of not more
than 30 days.
§ 440-39. Implementation and enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the employee of Indiana Borough, designated by the
Borough Manager, to act in accordance with the instructions of the Borough
Manager to enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 440-40. Right to hearing not waived.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to deprive any person of that
person's constitutional right to a hearing or a trial as to the violations for
which parking notices or citations have been issued.
§ 440-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-40
1:425

ARTICLE VI
Interpretation
§ 440-41. Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately prior to the enactment
of this chapter, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and
regulations and not as new enactments. The provisions of this chapter shall
not affect any act done or liability incurred, nor shall they affect any suit
or prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any of these repealed
ordinances or regulations.
§ 440-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-41
1:427

ARTICLE VII
Stopping, Standing and Parking of Delivery Vehicles
[Added 11-4-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-09]
§ 440-42. Authorized stopping, standing, and parking for deliveries
and pickups.
§ 440-43. Prohibited activities.
§ 440-44. Violations and penalties.
A. When access is available, deliveries shall be made at the rear of
businesses by the use of alleyways parallel to Philadelphia Street,
including the use of Gompers Avenue on the south side and Nixon
Avenue on the north side.
B. At blocks where alleyway access is not available or accessible due to
vehicle size and/or configuration, vehicles are authorized to utilize the
center lane of Philadelphia Street for the purpose of deliveries and
pickups for a period not to exceed 15 minutes.
C. Delivery vehicles may utilize legal parking spaces for deliveries without
being ticketed for over-parked meters when flashers are activated and
for a period not to exceed 15 minutes.
A. In accordance with the Vehicle Code providing for restrictions on
stopping, standing, and parking on state roadways, delivery vehicles
are prohibited from utilizing the center lane of Philadelphia Street
during peak traffic hours from 3:00 p.m. to 6:30 p.m. as has been
determined by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
B. Delivery vehicles utilizing the center lane shall not stop, stand, or park
upon the center lane within 20 feet of an intersection or place where
vehicles are authorized to make left turns from Philadelphia Street onto
intersecting streets.
C. Delivery vehicles are prohibited from stopping, standing, or parking
within a yellow zone or 20 feet from an intersection or crosswalk along
the south or north side curb of Philadelphia Street.
A. Delivery vehicles stopped, standing, or parked in a manner not
authorized herein shall be ticketed under Indiana Borough parking
ordinances or cited under Pennsylvania Vehicle Code for the parking
violation incurred.
B. Delivery vehicles ticketed or cited shall be subject to the fines and costs
associated with the specific ordinance or statute under which the ticket
or citation is issued.
§ 440-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-45
1:429
§ 440-45. Construal of provisions.
All other ordinances or parts thereof pertaining to stopping, standing, or
parking shall remain in effect.
§ 440-45 INDIANA CODE § 440-45
1:430
Chapter 460
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 78.
Amusement devices — See Ch. 133.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 170.
Sewers — See Ch. 360.
Sexually oriented businesses — See Ch. 365.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 395.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 400.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
405.
Trees — See Ch. 427.
§ 440-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-45
1:431

ARTICLE I
Preliminary Provisions
§ 460-1. Short title; statutory authority; scope.
§ 460-2. Purpose.
The provisions of this chapter are deemed necessary to:
A. This chapter and attached Zoning Map shall be known as and may be
cited as "The Indiana Borough Zoning Ordinance of 1998."
B. The authority of the Borough to enact and apply zoning regulations
comes from the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of
1968, as amended by Act 170 of 1988, and as may be further amended
from time to time in the future.148
C. This chapter:
(1) Regulates the location and use of buildings and land for residence,
commerce, business and institutions;
(2) Specifies the minimum size of properties, and the height and
placement of buildings and other structures on their lots;
(3) Divides the Borough into zone districts of such size, shape, area
and interrelationship as to provide the most harmonious and
mutually compatible arrangement to serve the public interest; and
(4) Establishes concise and timely procedures for the administration,
enforcement and amendment of this chapter.
A. Uphold the public health, safety, morals and general welfare;
B. Promote orderly development by protecting the character and
maintaining the stability of residential and business areas;
C. Conserve property values through the most appropriate and efficient
uses of land and arrangement of zone districts;
D. Prevent overcrowded and blighting conditions, encroachment into
floodplains, and congestion and dangerous conditions on streets;
E. Encourage provision and efficient placement of community services,
such as sanitary sewer, water and storm drainage systems, schools,
recreation parks, off-street parking and business servicing;
F. Establish reasonable open spaces on each lot consistent with the land
use to allow the passage of light and air and prevent the spread of fire;
148. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 460-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-2
1:433
§ 460-3. Community development objectives. [Amended 2-2-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-03]
In addition to the general purposes which are the foundation of this chapter
(§ 460-2 above), the following specific community development objectives
are the basis for designing the contents of this chapter. These objectives
were identified in the 1962 to 1965 Indiana Borough Comprehensive Plan
and were reinforced in more recent planning studies such as the 2011
plan update and the 2016 Indiana Community University District Study,
with respect to land use relationships, density of population, commercial
and business requirements and an adequate and efficient arrangement of
streets and public utilities.
G. Prevent incompatible uses from intermingling with the predominant
uses in a zone district and encourage the gradual voluntary phasing out
of nonconforming uses.
H. To transition higher-intensity uses to lower-intensity uses through
setbacks, bulk regulations, screening, street wall, fencing and density
controls, and by offering permitted uses that are conducive to a
traditional neighborhood setting. [Added 2-2-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-03]
I. To effectuate the comprehensive plan and the Indiana Community
University District Study. [Added 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
A. Preserve the existing character of the Borough and patterns of
residential development, including density of development, building
bulk, and open space between buildings;
B. Maintain the existing stock of well-kept housing, renovate and upgrade
deteriorated housing, and remove dilapidated or abandoned housing;
C. Encourage a variety of housing types to meet the shelter needs of all
elements of the population;
D. Coordinate with the University on its Long Range Campus Development
Plan of 2015, and support any expansion of the University into privately
held property only after careful, detailed study.
E. Support new business development by broadening the types of
enterprises that are encouraged, in line with current business needs
and directions;
F. Provide for adequate protection for housing where it abuts business
through buffering by landscaping, fences, or both placed by the
business developer;
G. Respect storm drainage and potential flooding limitations that may
affect future development;
§ 460-2 INDIANA CODE § 460-3
1:434
§ 460-4. Interpretation.
§ 460-5. Conflicts with other provisions.
§ 460-6. Municipal liability and continuity.
H. Make off-street parking an integral part of any new construction project
or major renovation, and access driveways should be located to
minimize congestion and danger on adjacent streets.
A. The regulations contained in this chapter shall be held to be the
minimum required to uphold the public health, safety, morals and
general welfare.
B. The language of this chapter shall be interpreted, where doubt exists as
to the intended meaning as written and enacted, in favor of the
property owner or applicant, and against any implied extension of a
restriction.
A. Conflict. Where conflicts exist between this chapter and other
regulations of the Borough, or of a higher level of government, or with
legal restrictive covenants applied by landowners to the development of
their property, the ordinance, regulation or covenant establishing the
highest standard shall prevail. All ordinances or parts thereof in conflict
with this chapter, inconsistent with its provisions, or less restrictive are
hereby overridden to the extent necessary to give this chapter full force
and effect. This section shall not imply that the Borough has any power
to enforce restrictive covenants. However, any restrictive covenant
provisions that are less restrictive than the corresponding provisions of
this chapter shall be superseded by this chapter.
A. Municipal liability. The grant of a building permit to undertake a land
development in accordance with the terms of this chapter shall not
constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind by
Indiana Borough or by any of its officials or employees concerning the
practicality, safety, or economic success of the use, building or structure
covered by the permit, and shall create no liability upon the Borough,
its officials or employees.
B. Continuity. This chapter is intended as a continuation of Indiana
Borough Zoning Ordinance No. 1227 of 1989 and amendments thereto.
Upon adoption of this chapter, the prior zoning regulations, to the
extent they are not duplicated in this chapter, will become null and void.
The adoption of this chapter does not make legitimate development
activity illegal under provisions of the prior regulations, nor does it
annul any litigation currently being pursued or that may be pursued in
the future against such illegal activity.
§ 460-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-7
1:435
§ 460-7. Duties of public officials.
While the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code may from time to time
in the future assign new duties to local officials or withdraw and reassign
duties, the lists below represent the current (1998) assignments stipulated
in the code.
A. The Borough Council shall be responsible for:
(1) Convening public hearings to take testimony on this chapter;
(2) Appointing the members of the Planning Commission and of the
Zoning Hearing Board and the Zoning Officer; making
appointments to fill unexpired terms of members who have
resigned, or to fill vacancies, or reappoint members at the end of
expired terms; removing members of the Zoning Hearing Board or
Planning Commission after investigation and positive findings of
malfeasance, misfeasance and nonfeasance while in office; and
(3) Referring amendment requests for review and comment to the
Planning Commission and County Planning Commission before
public hearing and decision.
B. The Planning Commission shall be responsible for:
(1) Initiating proposed amendments to this chapter or reviewing
proposals made by citizen petition or by Borough Council, and
providing recommendations on each such amendment proposal to
Council;149
(2) Examining proposed land subdivisions and land developments
relative to conformance with the terms of this chapter, and
approving or denying such proposals, with or without conditions
attached to approval; and
(3) Periodically reviewing this chapter text and map to determine if
they remain relevant to development trends and planning concerns
that are current.
C. The Zoning Hearing Board shall be responsible for:
(1) Calling and holding public hearings in a timely manner to take
testimony on all matters brought before it, and arranging for
preparation of a stenographic record of each hearing.
(2) Evaluating testimony and making a decision on each contested
issue, commencing and concluding each matter within the
mandated time constraints;
(3) Communicating decisions to applicants in a timely manner;
149. Editor's Note: Original Subsection 1.722, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-02.
§ 460-7 INDIANA CODE § 460-7
1:436
(4) Hearing appeals from decisions of the Zoning Officer;
(5) Hearing challenges to the validity of this chapter or any parts
thereof;
(6) Hearing proposals for approval of special exceptions;150
(7) Hearing requests for variances from strict application of the terms
of this chapter because an alleged hardship to the applicant
exists;151
(8) Hearing requests for modifications of the Borough flood hazard
area regulations as they affect specific properties.
D. The Zoning Officer shall be responsible for:
(1) Administering this chapter in accordance with its literal terms;
(2) Issuing building and occupancy permits after assurance that the
permitted development is fully in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter, and then following up to make certain
that construction and use of building and land concurs with the
permit;
(3) Defending his/her actions, if challenged, before the Zoning Hearing
Board or in court; and
(4) Providing information to the public on this chapter, keeping
records of his/her actions, and providing periodic reports to
Borough Council.
150. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2005-02, adopted 5-3-2005, provided that the term "special
use" be changed to "special exception" throughout this chapter.
151. Editor's Note: Original Subsection 1.738, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repeated 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-02.
§ 460-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-7
1:437

ARTICLE II
Zoning District Regulations
§ 460-8. Official Zoning Map.
§ 460-9. Application of district regulations.
A. The Zoning Map, which shows graphically the edges of all the zoning
districts and identifies each by name, is an integral part of this chapter.
Copies may be bound into this Code book or may be obtained separately
from the Borough office.152 Such copies may not represent the current
status of all zoning boundaries or districts.
B. The Official Zoning Map shall be kept in the Borough office and shall be
updated by the Secretary immediately after any amendment affecting
zoning boundaries or districts has been adopted by vote of Borough
Council in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. The
Official Zoning Map shall supersede any copies of the Zoning Map when
disputes arise over boundaries or districts.
C. The Official Zoning Map shall bear the signatures of the President of
Borough Council and Secretary of the Borough, as well as the date of
adoption and ordinance number.
D. The Zoning Map shall be amended only by official action of Borough
Council at an advertised meeting, after public hearing. Any revisions to
the map not following Council action shall be a violation of this chapter
and a civil offense.
E. The Zoning Map shows district boundaries as accurately as possible
considering the Map's scale. Boundaries that appear to follow roads,
streams, railroads or property lines shall be construed to follow the
center lines of such features or be coterminous with a property line.
Where zone districts boundaries are dimensioned by reference to a
road, stream, railroad or property line, they shall be construed as
dimensioned from the feature center line or property line.
F. Where disputes arise over the exact location of a zoning boundary, the
Zoning Officer shall make the initial determination, using the rules
outlined above and a field visit to the location in question. If either or
both parties to the dispute disagree with the Zoning Officer's ruling, it
may be appealed to the Zoning Hearing Board.
A. The regulations governing development in a zone district shall apply
uniformly to every proposed development in that zone district.
B. No building, structure or land area shall, after the adoption of this
chapter, be erected, used or altered unless in conformance with the
regulations of the zone district containing the property to be developed
unless a variance has been granted by the Zoning Hearing Board
152. Editor's Note: A copy of the Zoning Map is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 460-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-9
1:439
§ 460-10. Purpose of each zone district.
allowing specific modifications of the regulations for the proposed
development.
C. No yard or lot area shall be reduced in size or dimension so as to be less
than the minimums prescribed for the zone district where such yard or
lot is located. No yard or lot area or off-street parking space required by
one building, structure or land use shall be claimed by another building,
structure or land use.
D. Within each zone district lands, buildings, and structures shall be used
and buildings and structures shall be erected, altered or enlarged only
for any of the uses permitted by right in the particular zone district in
which such buildings, structures, and lands are located. The Zoning
Hearing Board may approve, after public hearing, any of the special
exceptions within the zone districts where they are listed, for specific
sites in accordance with the requirements of this chapter (see
§ 460-50C).
E. When a use that is not specifically listed in any zone district is proposed
for a particular location, the developer may either:
(1) Allege that the use is covered within the definition of a permitted
use or special exception already included for the zone district
where he/she hopes to build and ask the Zoning Officer for a
decision appealable to the Zoning Hearing Board; or
(2) Propose an amendment to this chapter for action by the Planning
Commission and Borough Council that would add the use in
question to those that are permitted by right or special exception in
the zone district where the development is proposed.
F. Zoning of land annexed by the Borough.
(1) Any land annexed by the Borough after the adoption of this chapter
shall be placed, from the date of annexation, in the R-1 Residential
Zone District.
(2) Within a reasonable time after annexation, the Planning
Commission shall prepare and submit to Council a report of its
recommendations for the most appropriate zoning classification of
the annexed land.
(3) Borough Council shall submit the report to the County Planning
Commission for review and comment and shall schedule a public
hearing, following the same procedures as for any other
amendment of this chapter.
A. Districts. [Amended 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-05; 4-6-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-02; 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
§ 460-9 INDIANA CODE § 460-10
1:440
(1) Indiana Borough is hereby divided into nine zone districts as
follows:
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
R-2 Two-Family Residential District
R-3 Multifamily Residential District
U-1 University-Related Residential-Commercial District
P-1 Public District
C-1 Retail Business and Commercial District
C-2 General Business and Commercial District
M-1 Manufacturing District
MU-1 Mixed-Use District
B. The R-1 District is intended to be the most protected residential district
in the Borough, where traditional family-oriented values can flourish
and where only single-family detached dwellings are permitted for
housing. This is the largest zone district in the Borough, including the
peripheral areas around the edges and surrounding the core, removed
from traffic, business, and institutional interference. Larger lots and
well-maintained properties characterize this district.
C. The R-2 District is intended to be the location for one- and two-family
homes with supporting community facilities and services in a setting
that fosters traditional family values. This zone is convenient to
transportation routes, shopping, services and institutions and allows a
greater density of families than R-1. Dwellings are generally older and
more modest with less open space on the lot than in R-1.
D. The R-3 District is intended as a high-density residential district with all
types of housing provided for, along with a full range of community
facilities and services. While traditional family values are supported in
this district, unrelated individual and nontraditional occupancy of
dwelling units is equally encouraged. Downtown shopping and public
and religious institutions are within walking distance and major traffic
arteries abut or are within a block of the R-3 zoned areas. A mix of
housing types, greater lot coverage, and more traffic and parking
congestion mark this district.
E. The U-1 District is intended as a support zone for the University
community, by providing land principally for housing but also for retail
outlets and service businesses adjacent to the campus; and by
encouraging containment of university-generated activity to the
immediate vicinity of the campus. All types of housing are permitted
with emphasis on mixed residential/commercial development/student
housing above ground level shops. A broad array of retail, service and
institutional uses aimed at the University community are permitted.
Major streets serve this district which is characterized by student
apartments, shops, restaurants, services and parking.
§ 460-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-10
1:441
F. The P-1 Public District is intended to include publicly owned land.
Except for the contiguous property owned by Indiana University of
Pennsylvania, the areas in this zone district are scattered and represent
the current location of publicly owned land. In addition to the
University, the courthouse, Borough Building, jail, Borough
maintenance yard, three public school properties, three public parks
and recreation grounds, and the post office are located in the P-1
District.
G. The C-1 District is intended to accommodate retail sales and services in
a compact grouping promoting comparison and window shopping on
foot. Parking is provided curbside or in group parking facilities that do
not interrupt the tight grouping along the street. The area is
characterized by broad sidewalks, some vehicular and pedestrian
congestion at times, and with nearly all sales activity occurring indoors.
Properties are usually narrow along the street with considerable depth,
and little if any open space on the lot, particularly along the sides of the
buildings. Many buildings have three or more floors, with the upper
floors used for business offices, apartments or storage, or are vacant.
H. The C-2 District is intended to provide a setting for a broad range of
business uses from retail and wholesale sales, light manufacturing and
assembly, to distribution and warehousing. The district is auto oriented
and the buildings typically one story. Parking lots, truck maneuvering
space and outdoor display and storage of merchandise are accepted.
The properties are larger than in C-1 with much more open space on
each lot, often paved for parking or display. Properties are developed
individually without much relationship to neighbors. Very little
pedestrian traffic occurs between properties.
I. The M-1 District is intended to accommodate manufacturing,
fabricating, transportation and other nonretail businesses on land
adjacent to other such businesses, screened by landscaping to protect
nearby residential development, and subject to control of nuisance
infringements that might affect adjacent neighborhoods.
J. The MU-1 District is intended to promote development supporting the
university and public community; providing a mixed-use of residential
housing and neighborhood commercial and retail services. A broad
array of commercial and institutional uses are permitted. Parcels facing
residential districts will be developed as a transition property and shall
take on the characteristics of the adjacent district. Major corridors
serve this district which is characterized by student housing, shops,
restaurants and services. [Added 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
§ 460-10 INDIANA CODE § 460-10
1:442
ARTICLE III
Provisions that Apply in Each Zone District
§ 460-11. R-1 Single-Family Residence District.
§ 460-12. R-2 Two-Family Residence District.
A. Principal permitted uses:
(1) Single-functional family detached dwellings. [Amended 8-7-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-03]
(2) Libraries, parks and playgrounds.
(3) Essential services.
B. Accessory uses:
(1) Private garage and parking areas for three or less vehicles.
[Amended 10-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04; 2-2-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-03]
(2) Other accessory uses and structures, including tool sheds,
children's playhouses, swimming pool, play court, etc.
C. Special exceptions:
(1) Transitional residential facilities (group homes).
(2) Nursery schools or day-care centers.
(3) Churches and church social and educational buildings.
(4) Schools: public, parochial and private, elementary and secondary
(not including commercial or trade schools).153
(5) Home occupations.
(6) Student housing shall be permitted, providing the property is the
permanent residence of the owner of such property. [Added
8-7-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-03]
(7) Rooming house and/or boardinghouse as defined in § 460-62.
[Added 8-7-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-03]
(8) Private garage and parking areas for four or more vehicles. [Added
10-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04; amended 2-2-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-03]
(9) Expansion and construction of driveways or parking areas at front
of property. [Added 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
153. Editor's Note: Original Subsection 3.135, Public parking lot, which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-04.
§ 460-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-12
1:443
A. Principal permitted uses:
(1) Single-functional family detached dwellings. [Amended 8-7-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-03]
(2) Two-functional family dwellings. [Amended 8-7-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-03]
(3) Libraries, parks and playgrounds.
(4) Essential services.
(5) Health services office.
B. Accessory uses:
(1) Private garages and parking areas for three or less vehicles.
[Amended 10-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04; 2-2-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-03]
(2) Other accessory uses and structures, including tool sheds,
children's playhouses, swimming pools, play court, etc.
C. Special exceptions:
(1) Nursing homes.
(2) Transitional residential facilities (group homes).
(3) Nursery schools or day-care centers.
(4) Churches and church social and educational buildings.
(5) Schools: public, parochial and private, elementary and secondary
(not including commercial or trade schools).154
(6) Home occupations.
(7) Student housing shall be permitted, providing the property is the
permanent residence of the owner of such property. [Added
8-7-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-03]
(8) Funeral homes.
(9) Rooming house and/or boardinghouse as defined in § 460-62.
[Added 8-7-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-03]
(10) Private garages and parking areas for four or more vehicles.
[Added 10-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04; amended 2-2-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-03]
(11) Expansion and construction of driveways or parking areas at front
of property. [Added 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
154. Editor's Note: Original Subsection 3.236, Public parking lot, which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-04.
§ 460-12 INDIANA CODE § 460-13
1:444
§ 460-13. R-3 Multifamily Residence District.
A. Principal permitted uses:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Townhouses or row houses.
(4) Multiple-family dwelling buildings.
(5) Nursing homes.
(6) Nursery schools or day-care centers.
(7) Libraries, parks and playgrounds.
(8) Essential services.
(9) Health services office.
(10) Funeral homes.
B. Accessory uses:
(1) Home occupations.
(2) Private garages and parking areas for three or less vehicles.
[Amended 10-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04; 2-2-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-03]
(3) Other accessory uses and structures, including tool sheds,
children's playhouses, swimming pools, play courts, etc.
C. Special exceptions:
(1) Transitional residential facilities (group homes).
(2) Membership social organizations, clubs, lodges (not including
college-related fraternity or sorority).
(3) Churches and church social and educational buildings.
(4) Schools: public, parochial, private, elementary and secondary (not
including commercial or trade schools).
(5) Athletic complex.
(6) Health services clinic.155
(7) Private garages and parking areas for four or more vehicles.
[Added 10-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04; amended 2-2-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-03]
155. Editor's Note: Original Subsection 3.347, Public parking lot, which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-04.
§ 460-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-13
1:445
§ 460-14. U-1 University-Related Residential-Commercial District.
D. Conditional uses: [Added 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
(1) All other required parking other than parking at rear of property.
A. Principal permitted uses:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Townhouses or row houses.
(4) Multiple-family dwelling buildings.
(5) High-rise apartment buildings not to exceed six stories or 65 feet.
(6) Nursing homes.
(7) Nursery schools or day-care centers.
(8) Libraries, parks and playgrounds.
(9) Essential services.
(10) Health services clinic.
(11) Health services office.
(12) Churches and church social and educational buildings.
(13) Schools: public, parochial, private, elementary, secondary or
collegiate (not including commercial or trade schools)
(14) Funeral homes.156
B. Accessory uses:
(1) Home occupations.
(2) Private garages and parking areas.
(3) Other accessory uses and structures, including tool sheds,
children's playhouses, swimming pools; play courts, etc.
(4) Storeroom on the ground floor or basement level of a mixed
residential and commercial building, provided the use of the
storeroom is a retail commercial or retail service use listed in
Subsection C below, and the residential floor area in the building is
at least equal to that allocated for storerooms.
C. Special exceptions:
156. Editor’s Note: Original Subsection 3.425, regarding apartments within integrated
residential commercial buildings, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-02.
§ 460-13 INDIANA CODE § 460-14
1:446
§ 460-15. P-1 Public District.
(1) Apartments within an integrated residential-commercial building.
(2) Transitional residential facilities (group homes).
(3) Dormitories, private or university-related.
(4) Rooming houses/boardinghouses and motels.
(5) Joining of residential buildings existing prior to September 1, 1963,
to create one structure.
(6) Clubs, lodges, fraternities and sororities, provided no fraternity or
sorority fronts on a street across from an R-1 or R-2 Zone District.
(7) Athletic complex.
(8) Hospital.
(9) Public parking lot.
(10) Parking facilities, university-related.
(11) Bicycle rental, repair and sales, excluding motorized vehicles.
(12) Bus waiting room and ticket office.
(13) Banks, savings and loan or credit union.
(14) Food sales.
(15) Offices, business, professional or college.
(16) Personal services: barber, beauty shop, laundromat, dry cleaning
pickup, tutorial services, etc.
(17) Restaurant.
(18) Retail sales.
D. Conditional uses: [Added 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
(1) All other required parking other than parking at rear of property.
A. Principal permitted uses:
(1) Public facilities, including properties owned and operated by the
United States, Indiana County and Indiana Borough governments
and by the Indiana Area School District.
(2) Academic and convocation facilities.
(3) Housing owned and operated by the University.
(4) Athletic and physical fitness facilities.
§ 460-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-15
1:447
§ 460-16. C-1 Retail Business and Commercial District.
(5) Student support services.
(6) Administrative offices, maintenance and utilities generation and
distribution/collection facilities.
(7) Public garages and parking areas.
B. Accessory uses:
(1) Private garages, parking and servicing areas.
(2) Other accessory uses and structures that are customarily
appurtenant to the principal use.
C. Conditional uses: [Added 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
(1) All other required parking other than parking at rear of property.
A. Principal permitted uses in the C-1 Zone:
(1) Antique sales.
(2) Apartments within an integrated residential-commercial building.
(3) Automotive parts sales.
(4) Bakeries with all product sold at retail on premises.
(5) Banks, savings and loans and credit unions.
(6) Barbershops and beauty salons.
(7) Blueprinting, photostating and photocopying establishments.
(8) Books, magazines, newspapers, stationery goods.
(9) Catalog stores.
(10) Churches and other places of worship, including educational
facilities and social halls.
(11) Clothing sales, including shoes.
(12) Computing equipment software and instruction.
(13) Day-care centers.
(14) Department or variety stores.
(15) Drugstores.
(16) Dry cleaning, dyeing and pressing.
(17) Floor covering and carpet sales.
§ 460-15 INDIANA CODE § 460-16
1:448
(18) Florists.
(19) Food sales, including supermarkets, delicatessens and specialty
foods.
(20) Funeral homes.
(21) Furniture sales.
(22) Gift and card shops.
(23) Hardware and paint sales, including home improvement centers.
(24) Hotel.
(25) Household appliance sales.
(26) Interior decorating services.
(27) Jewelry, watches, china and silverware sales and repair.
(28) Laundromat and/or dry cleaning pickup.
(29) Leather goods and luggage sales.
(30) Locksmiths.
(31) Mailing services.
(32) Medical, dental, chiropractic and optical offices, laboratories and/
or clinics.
(33) Music, musical recording, television and musical instrument sales.
(34) Newsstands.
(35) Offices: business, professional, institutional or governmental.
(36) Office and business machine sales and service.
(37) Office supplies sales.
(38) Package liquor stores.
(39) Parking lots and garages, private. [Amended 5-3-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-04]
(40) Photographic studios and photography supplies and film
developing.
(41) Publicly owned facilities and service buildings.
(42)Radio, television and recording studios and facilities.
(43) Repair services for small household appliances: electric, electronic
and computing equipment and business machines.
§ 460-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-16
1:449
(44) Restaurants.
(45) Rental of videos and party goods.
(46) Social halls, lodges, fraternal organizations and clubs, but not
including fraternities or sororities.
(47) Sporting goods stores.
(48) Tailors and dressmakers.
(49) Taverns.
(50) Theaters.
(51) Upholsterers.
B. Accessory uses:
(1) Crematories. [Added 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03157]
(2) Private parking and servicing areas.
(3) Other accessory uses and structures that are customarily
appurtenant to the principal use.
C. Special exceptions:
(1) Apartment building, residential only.
(2) Back-office operations without walk-in customer services.
(3) Business school.
(4) Retail sales or personal/business service use not listed as a
principal permitted use above, but which, in the opinion of the
Planning Commission, as noted in its recommendation to the
Zoning Hearing Board, meets at least two of the following criteria:
(a) It is similar to and compatible with the uses that are permitted
by right in the C-1 Zone.
(b) The entire operation is conducted indoors and walk-in
customers are encouraged.
(c) Any drive-through part of the business is accommodated from
a side or rear street.
(d) There are display windows facing the sidewalk advertising
goods and/or services available on the premises.
(e) There is a demonstrated need for location with direct access to
a sidewalk.
157. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection
B(1) and (2) as Subsection B(2) and (3), respectively.
§ 460-16 INDIANA CODE § 460-16
1:450
§ 460-17. C-2 General Business and Commercial District.
D. Conditional uses: [Added 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-04]
(1) Parking lot, public.
(2) All other required parking other than parking at rear of property.
[Added 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
A. Principal permitted uses:
(1) Antique sales.
(2) Amusement enterprises (billiards, pool, bowling, roller-skating,
game machines, etc.).
(3) Automotive parts sales.
(4) Automotive tire sales and installation and glass replacement.
(5) Automotive repair.
(6) Automotive sales and service, new vehicles and used.
(7) Automotive washing and/or rental.
(8) Back-office operations without walk-in customer services.
(9) Bakery.
(10) Banks, savings and loans and credit unions.
(11) Barbershops and beauty salons.
(12) Beverage distributorship.
(13) Bicycle sales, accessories and service.
(14) Blueprinting, photostating and photocopying establishments.
(15) Books, magazines, newspapers and stationery goods.
(16) Boat and other watercraft sales, accessories and repairs.
(17) Bottling works.
(18) Brewery, mini.
(19) Building material sales.
(20) Bus waiting room and ticket office.
(21) Business school.
(22) Cabinet making, custom carpentry and millwork.
(23) Catalog store.
§ 460-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-17
1:451
(24) Catering business.
(25) Churches and other places of worship, including educational
facilities and social halls.
(26) Clothing sales, including shoes.
(27) Computing equipment, software and instruction.
(28) Contractor's office and storage yards.
(29) Convenience sales, including gasoline sales.
(30) Day-care centers.
(31) Department or variety stores.
(32) Drugstores.
(33) Dry cleaning, dyeing and pressing.
(34) Floor covering and carpet sales.
(35) Florists.
(36) Food sales, including supermarkets, delicatessens and specialty
foods.
(37) Funeral homes.
(38) Furniture sales.
(39) Gift and card shops.
(40) Hardware and paint sales, including home improvement centers.
(41) Hotel or motel.
(42) Household appliance sales.
(43) Interior decorating services.
(44) Jewelry, watches, china and silverware sales and repair.
(45) Laundromat and/or dry cleaning pickup.
(46) Lawn and garden supplies, including nursery stock and
greenhouses.
(47) Leather goods and luggage sales.
(48) Locksmiths.
(49) Mailing services.
(50) Manufacture, assembling and/or packaging of finished or semifinished
products or components from parts or previously prepared
§ 460-17 INDIANA CODE § 460-17
1:452
materials produced elsewhere. [Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-03]
(51) Manufacturing, assembling and/or packaging or electric, electronic
and/or computing equipment, instruments or devices or parts
thereof.
(52) Manufacture of clothing, carpeting, drapery, footwear, luggage
items, furniture and similar products made from textiles and
leather produced elsewhere.
(53) Medical, dental, chiropractic and optical offices, laboratories and/
or clinics.
(54) Music, musical recording, television and musical instrument sales.
(55) Newsstands.
(56) Offices, business, professional, institutional or governmental.
(57)Office and business machine sales and service office supplies sales.
(58) Package liquor sales.
(59) Parking lots and garages, private. [Amended 5-3-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-04]
(60) Pet shops and supplies.
(61) Photographic studios and photography supplies, and film
developing.
(62) Printing, engraving, job printing and photo engraving.
(63) Publicly owned facilities and service buildings, maintenance
facilities and storage yards.
(64) Public utility buildings, garages and storage yards.
(65)Radio, television and recording studios and facilities.
(66) Repair services for household appliances, electric, electronic and
computing equipment and business machines.
(67) Restaurants.
(68) Rental of tools, equipment, videos, appliances and party goods.
(69) Social halls, lodges, fraternal organizations and clubs, but not
including fraternities or sororities.
(70) Sporting goods stores.
(71) Tailors and dressmakers.
(72) Taverns.
§ 460-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-17
1:453
(73) Taxidermists.
(74) Technical and trade schools.
(75) Theaters.
(76) Truck transportation terminal, including storage and distribution
facilities.
(77) Upholsterers.
(78) Used merchandise sales.
(79)Warehousing, storage, cold storage and mini self-storage.
B. Accessory uses:
(1) Crematories. [Added 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03158]
(2) Private parking and servicing areas.
(3) Other accessory uses and structures that are customarily
appurtenant to the principal use.
C. Special exceptions:
(1) Apartments within an integrated residential commercial building.
(2) Apartment building, residential only.
(3) Manufacture of machine tools, dies, jigs, patterns, machinery,
motors; generators, pumps, compressors, sheet metal components,
automobile or aircraft parts, or doors, sash or other building
components.
(4) Manufacturing process involving stamping, forging, plating,
heating, grinding, coating, welding, polishing, stripping or
vulcanizing.
(5) Single-family dwelling as provided for in § 460-25D.
(6) Business use not listed as a principal permitted use above, but
which, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, as noted in its
recommendation to the Zoning Hearing Board, meets at least two
of the following criteria:
(a) It is similar to and compatible with the uses that are permitted
by right in the C-2 Zone.
(b) The use would be inappropriate in the C-1 Zone because it
requires a large site and/or depends on vehicular access from
the street on which it fronts.
158. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection
B(1) and (2) as Subsection B(2) and (3), respectively.
§ 460-17 INDIANA CODE § 460-17
1:454
§ 460-18. M-1 Manufacturing District.
(c) If a processing, assembly or manufacturing business, all
aspects of the business are conducted indoors, except for
finished products ready for sale, such areas screened from
adjacent residential properties.
D. Conditional uses: [Added 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-04]
(1) Parking lot, public.
(2) All other required parking other than parking at rear of property.
[Added 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
A. Principal permitted uses:
(1) Automobile and metal appliance manufacturing and assembly.
(2) Automobile service stations, including major repairs.
(3) Automobile, truck, trailer, and motorcycle sales and repairs.
(4) Bakeries.
(5) Building materials sales, including lumberyards.
(6) Bus, train, and truck terminals.
(7) Industrial and scientific research and testing centers.
(8) Manufacturing, assembly or packing of products from previously
prepared materials, such as cloth, rubber, plastic, paper, leather,
precious or semiprecious metals, or stones.
(9) Manufacturing of electrical and electronic instruments and
devices, such as televisions, radio, and photographic equipment.
(10) Manufacturing of food products, pharmaceuticals and the like, but
not including production of fish or meat products, sauerkraut,
vinegar or the like, or the rendering or refining of fats and oils.
(11)Radio, televisions transmitting or receiving towers and facilities.
(12)Railroad yards and freight stations.
(13) Structural steel fabricating shops, machine shops, forges and
foundries.
(14) Wholesale offices and storerooms, including storage, distribution
and sales establishments.
(15) Wholesale produce and meat markets.
(16) Crematories. [Added 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
B. Accessory uses:
§ 460-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-18
1:455
§ 460-18.1. MU-1 Mixed-Use District. [Added 2-2-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-03]
(1) Private parking and loading areas.
(2) Signs.
(3) Other accessory uses and structures customarily appurtenant to a
permitted use.
C. (Reserved)159
D. Conditional uses: [Added 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
(1) All other required parking other than parking at rear of property.
(2) Single-family dwelling.
(3) Low-density, nonstudent housing in the M-1 Manufacturing
District.
A. Principal permitted use:
(1) Amusement enterprises (billiards, pool, bowling, roller-skating,
game machines, etc).
(2) Antique sales.
(3) Athletic and physical fitness facilities.
(4) Automotive parts sales.
(5) Bakeries with all products sold at retail on premises.
(6) Barbershops and beauty salons.
(7) Banks, savings and loan or credit union.
(8) Blueprinting, photostating and photocopying establishments.
(9) Bicycle rental, repair and sales, excluding motorized vehicles.
(10) Books, magazines, newspapers, stationery goods.
(11) Catalog stores.
(12) Catering business.
(13) Churches and church social and educational buildings.
(14) Clothing sales, including shoes.
(15) Computing equipment software and instruction.
159. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, Special exceptions, as amended, was repealed
2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03.
§ 460-18 INDIANA CODE § 460-18.1
1:456
(16) Day care.
(17) Department or variety stores.
(18) Dormitories, private or university-related.
(19) Drugstores.
(20) Dry cleaning, dyeing and pressing.
(21) Essential services.
(22) Floor covering and carpet sales.
(23) Florists.
(24) Food sales, including supermarkets, delicatessens and specialty
foods.
(25) Funeral homes.
(26) Furniture sales.
(27) Gift and card shops.
(28) Hardware and paint sales, including home improvement centers.
(29)Home occupations, commercial ground floor/residential second
floor.
(30) Student housing not including fraternities or sororities.
(31) Household appliance sales.
(32) Industrial and scientific research and testing centers.
(33) Interior decorating services.
(34) Jewelry, watches, china and silverware sales and repair.
(35) Laundromat and/or dry-cleaning pickup.
(36) Leather goods and luggage sales.
(37) Libraries, parks and playgrounds.
(38) Locksmiths.
(39) Mailing services.
(40) Medical, dental, chiropractic and optical offices, laboratories and/
or clinics.
(41) Motel/hotel and bed-and-breakfast (three stories or less).
(42) Music, musical recording, television and musical instrument sales.
(43) Newsstands.
§ 460-18.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-18.1
1:457
(44) Offices: business, professional, institutional or governmental.
(45) Office and business machine sales and services.
(46) Office supplies sales.
(47) Pet shops and supplies.
(48) Photographic studios and photography supplies and film
developing.
(49) Printing, engraving, job printing and photo engraving.
(50)Radio, television and recording studios and facilities.
(51) Repair services for small household appliances: electric, electronic
and computing equipment and business machines.
(52) Rental of videos and party goods.
(53) Restaurant.
(54) Schools: public, parochial, private, elementary and secondary (not
including commercial or trade schools).
(55) Single-functional family detached dwellings.
(56) Sporting goods stores.
(57) Tailors and dressmakers.
(58) Taxidermists.
(59) Theaters.
(60) Townhouses or row houses.
(61) Two-functional family dwellings.
(62) Upholsterers.
(63) Used merchandise sales.
B. Accessory uses:
(1) Private garage and parking area as per use (§ 460-37F).
(2) Other accessory uses and structures, including tool sheds,
children's playhouses, swimming pool, play court, etc.
(3) Other accessory uses and structures that are customarily
appurtenant to the principal use with Planning and Zoning Official
approval.
C. Conditional uses:
(1) Athletic complex.
§ 460-18.1 INDIANA CODE § 460-18.1
1:458
(2) Automotive repair and service.
(3) Automobile service stations, including major repairs.
(4) Commercial businesses along the peripheral edge of the district.
(5) Clubs and lodges.
(6) Fraternities and sororities, are only permitted west of South 7th
Street between Washington Street and Locust Street and West of
Wayne Avenue between Locust Street and Maple Street.
(7) Mini self-storage.
(8) Rooming house and/or boardinghouse as defined in § 460-62.
(9) Principal use of private garages and parking areas.
(10) Public parking lot.
(11) All other required parking other than parking at rear of property.
§ 460-18.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-18.1
1:459

ARTICLE IV
Supplementary Regulations
§ 460-19. Lot requirements.
A. Existing lots of record with inadequate area and/or width. The Zoning
Officer may, without referral to the Zoning Hearing Board, issue a
building permit to the owner of a lot with inadequate area and/or width
recorded prior to September 1, 1963, and located in a residential zone
district, for the erection of a single-family detached dwelling on the lot,
or for expansion of an existing building on the lot, provided: [Amended
3-2-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-02]
(1) The owner of the lot does not also own adjoining property which,
when combined with the lot, would create a conforming or less
nonconforming lot;
(2) No side yard abutting another lot shall be less than four feet in
width; no side yard abutting a street shall be less than 10 feet in
width; no rear yard shall be less than 10 feet in depth, and no front
yard shall be less than 15 feet in depth. Lot coverage shall be not
more than 40% of the lot area;
(3) A lot legally recorded prior to September 1, 1963, abutting two or
more streets and enclosing two principal buildings, at least one of
which contains dwelling units, may be subdivided so that each
building occupies its own lot with separate full width access to a
street, provided each dwelling unit will have its own off-street
parking spaces as required by this chapter and utility entrances
will be separated for each building.
B. Connection to public water and sewerage systems. Every lot containing
a building which is attached to a potable water supply shall be
connected to a public wastewater collection system.
C. Lot width and frontage.
(1) The width of a lot shall be measured along the front setback line
between side lot lines. The front setback line and front lot line
(abutting the street to which the lot has its principal access) shall
be parallel whether such lines are tangents or arcs.
(a) Within the MU-1 district, the width of a lot shall be measured
along the front setback line between side lot lines. The front
setback line and front lot line (abutting the street to which the
lot has its principal access) shall be parallel to the majority of
structures within that block whether such lines are tangents or
arcs. Final decision for the principal access shall be
determined by the Planning/Zoning Director. [Added
2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
§ 460-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-19
1:461
(2) The width of any lot in a residential zone district shall be not less
than 30% of the lot depth (front lot line to rear lot line).
D. Corner lots.
(1) The front yard of any corner lot shall be established on the wider of
the two streets abutting the lot, generally the street with the
shorter dimension next to the street.
(2) When a lot abuts two streets intersecting at one corner of the lot,
the side yard setback depth adjacent to the side street (the street
on which the lot does not front) shall be:
(a) Twice the minimum required for a side yard not abutting a
street but not less than 10 feet if the lot was recorded prior to
September 1, 1963; or
(b) Not less than the depth of the front yard for the district in
which the lot is located, unless development on adjacent lots
has established a lesser setback line.
(3) Line of sight. [Amended 6-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-07;
2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
(a) A clear sight area shall be maintained at all private street
intersections as a public safety measure to aid drivers
approaching the intersection. No obstruction shall be placed
within a sight triangle whose sides shall be lot lines which
intersect at the corner of the lot abutting the intersection in
any zoning district. At points 20 feet along each lot line
measured from the intersection of the lines, a third line
connecting such points shall be drawn to enclose the sight
triangle. Within the triangle no obstruction shall be placed that
exceeds 30 inches in height; nor shall existing obstructions
except tree trunks be increased in size or moved to further
reduce driver sight distances.
(b) A clear sight area shall be maintained at all public street
intersections as a safety measure to aid drivers approaching
the intersection. No obstruction shall be placed within the
PennDOT sight triangle which intersect at the corner of the lot
abutting the intersection. Within the triangle, no obstruction
shall be placed that exceeds 30 inches in height; nor shall
existing obstructions except tree trunks be increased in size or
moved to further reduce driver sight distances. All line of sight
determinations shall comply with the current adopted
PennDOT Line of Site requirements table.
§ 460-19 INDIANA CODE § 460-19
1:462
PennDOT Sight Triangle Regulations
Speed
MPH
(V) Average Percent Grade (G)
Approaching vehicle is traveling upgrade
0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 7.0 8.0 9.0 10.0
25 147 145 144 143 141 140 139 138 137 136 135
30 196 194 191 189 187 185 183 182 180 178 177
35 249 245 242 239 236 233 231 228 226 224 221
40 314 309 304 299 295 291 287 284 280 277 274
45 383 376 370 364 358 353 348 343 338 334 330
50 462 453 444 436 429 422 415 409 403 397 392
55 538 527 517 508 499 490 482 475 467 461 454
60 634 621 608 596 584 573 563 554 545 536 528
65 725 708 693 679 666 653 641 630 620 609 600
E. Occupancy of and access to a lot.
(1) Any recorded lot may be occupied by one principal use allowed by
right or permitted as a special exception. On a residential lot only
one dwelling building shall be permitted as well as not more than
two accessory buildings, including a private garage. On a lot
occupied by a business use several buildings may contain the
principal use and in a plan of multiple dwelling buildings
(apartments) several such buildings may occupy the same lot.
(2) Every recorded lot shall abut directly on a public street with a
minimum lot frontage of 50 feet on such street.160
F. Required area or space cannot be reduced.
(1) The area or dimensions of any lot; yard, parking area or other space
shall not be reduced to less than the minimums required by this
chapter, and, if already less, may be continued but shall not be
further reduced.
(2) No yard area required for one building or land use shall be claimed
as meeting requirements for a second building or land use.
G. MU-1 District building design requirements. [Added 2-2-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-03]
(1) Building separation on the same parcel shall be a minimum of 15
feet.
160. Editor's Note: Original Subsection 4.160, Through lots, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-02.
§ 460-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-19
1:463
(2) All building designs shall be architecturally designed for
consistency throughout the MU-1 District, with respect to style,
color, and facade details including doors and windows.
(3) The ground and upper levels front facade of any building on a
public street shall have windows and the main entrance door
covering at least 20% of the horizontal length. Windows must
maintain a height of 2 1/2 to eight feet above grade or walkways.
(4) The front facade must face the public street on which the physical
address is located.
(5) The principal entrance shall use special architecturally designed
features, changes in the roof line or similar features to emphasize
the building's entrance.
(6) Building facades shall consist of texture or building material
changes with a combination of at least two horizontal and vertical
breaks, such as but not limited to:
(a) Building recesses.
(b) Variations in roof lines.
(c) Awnings or canopies.
(d) Overhangs.
(e) Dormers.
(f) Arches.
(g) Balconies.
(h) Other architectural features such as moldings and tile
integrated into the structure.
(7) Buildings designed above two stories shall be architecturally
distinguished between ground floor facade and upper facade with a
cornice, canopy, balcony, arcade or other element.
(8) Buildings with a wall length of 75 feet or larger must have a
minimum offset of at least 18 inches. For every additional 50 feet
over 75 feet of wall length one additional horizontal and vertical
break must be used.
(9) A minimum width of 15 feet is required for all townhouses.
(10) Design guidelines for street wall:
(a) Must be constructed of either brick or stone.
(b) Must be a minimum height of six feet at its lowest point and a
maximum overall height of 10 feet.
§ 460-19 INDIANA CODE § 460-19
1:464
§ 460-20. Height measurement.
§ 460-21. Setback variations and yard encroachments.
(c) Top of wall must be scalloped or, with permission from the
Zoning Department, may be parallel.
(d) Must have a stone or concrete cap.
(e) Must have offsets every 10 feet to 12 feet and on the corners or
end of the wall to have the appearance of pillars.
A. Measurement. Height shall be measured as the vertical distance
between the average elevation at grade of all the building walls and the
top of the highest wall, or halfway between the eave and ridge line on a
gable-roofed building.
B. Height exceptions. The height limitations imposed by this chapter (see
Schedules 1 and 2)161 shall not apply to church spires or belfries,
cupolas or domes, monuments, water towers, chimneys, flag poles,
radio, telephone and telecommunications towers, masts, aerials,
amateur ham radio towers and antennas, air handling or other
mechanical equipment necessary for the normal functioning of a
building and erected thereon, and parapet walls surrounding a flat roof,
which may extend to four feet above the permitted maximum height.
A. Building wall not parallel to property line. Where the side and/or rear
walls of a building are not parallel to the adjacent side and/or rear
property lines, the average of the points on the wall nearest and
furthest from the adjacent property line shall be not less than the
minimum required for the yard depth, whether side or rear, in the zone
district where the property is located, provided no part of the wall
which is not parallel to the property line is less than 1/2 the required
setback distance from the adjacent property line. All parts of a front
wall, however, shall be behind the front setback line, except as modified
by the following sections.
B. Extension of a nonconforming wall. Where a wall on any building
erected prior to September 1, 1963, is parallel or nearly parallel to an
adjacent side lot line but less than the minimum permitted distance
from the lot line, such a wall may be extended once along its established
line provided:
(1) Such extension does not exceed the length of the existing wall or 20
feet, whichever is less;
(2) The extension is no higher than the existing wall;
(3) The extension does not violate minimum setbacks in other required
yards on the property; and
161. Editor's Note: Said schedules are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 460-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-21
1:465
(4) The building addition of which the wall is a part does not violate the
maximum lot coverage that applies in the zone district.
C. Front yard depth exception. Where two lots, one on either side of an
undeveloped lot, contain principal buildings that are closer to the
abutting street than the minimum permitted front yard setback,
construction of a principal building on the undeveloped lot may be set
back not less than the average of the two buildings on the adjacent lots,
or the average of one of the building setbacks and the minimum
permitted setback.
D. Permitted projections into minimum yard areas.
(1) Building projections.
(a) Cornices, canopies, eaves and other architectural features may
project not more than two feet into the minimum front, side or
rear yard areas.
(b) Bay windows, balconies, open porches, decks, chimneys and
uncovered exterior stairways may project up to two feet into
the minimum required yard area, provided that the total of all
such projections on any wall extending into the minimum yard
area does not exceed 1/3 of the length of the building wall on
which they are located. Fire escapes that are not enclosed may
project not more than four feet six inches into a minimum yard
area.
(2) Ground level projections. [Amended 10-7-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-04; 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
(a) Paved areas, including patios and walkways, may extend up to
three feet from any side or rear property line. By written
agreement between neighboring property owners, approved
by the Planning/Zoning Department, and filed with the
Borough, paved areas may extend to the common property
line. Only a driveway, not more than 18 feet wide, and/or a
walkway may cross a front yard or side yard abutting a street.
(b) In the case of a corner lot, no paved areas except driveways
shall extend into the yard areas abutting either street.
E. Additional setbacks on lots in the C-1, C-2 and M-1 Zones abutting any
residential zone. Developers of lots in the C-1 or C-2 Zone Districts that
abut the side or rear lines of properties in a residential zone shall set
back buildings and paved areas along such common lines as required
for side or rear yard setbacks in the abutting residential zone district.
F. Additional requirements on lots in the MU-1 Zone. [Added 2-2-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-03]
§ 460-21 INDIANA CODE § 460-21
1:466
§ 460-22. Accessory structures.
(1) No development greater than three units may face toward a
residential district, park, museum or other similar use on any
peripheral edge of the MU-1 Zoning District.
(2) Existing properties abutting or adjacent to a residential district,
park or historical structure on any peripheral edge of the MU-1
Zoning District shall be limited to three or less multifamily dwelling
units.
(3) Properties abutting, adjacent and/or directly across the street from
a residential district, park or historical structure on any peripheral
edge of the MU-1 Zoning District shall be limited to construction of
three dwelling units. The structure must maintain the integrity to
the character of the adjacent residential district and the structure
design must approved by the Planning and Code Directors.
(4) Parking for more than five vehicles that is abutting, adjacent and/or
directly across the street from any residential, park or historical
structure shall be set back 18 feet at the rear 10 feet at the side of
the property and require a brick or stone street wall with a well
maintained grass planted buffer and vegetation design elements.
(5) Additional parking setbacks on corner lots. Parking for more than
five vehicles along the peripheral edge of the district that is
abutting, adjacent and/or directly across the street from any
residential, park or historical structure shall be set back 18 feet at
the rear or 10 feet at the side of the property and require a brick or
stone street wall with a well maintained grass planted buffer and
vegetation design elements.
(6) Sidewalks must be five feet wide and transitioned to meet existing
sidewalk abutting the adjacent parcels.
(7) Residential only uses within the MU-1 District.
(a) Parcels fronting Wayne Avenue between Washington Street
and South Street.
(b) Parcels fronting South 7th Street between Locust Street and
Maple Street.
A. Location on lot; attachment to principal building.
(1) An accessory structure, which is not attached to the principal
building on the lot by means of a common wall or connecting
permanent roof, may be erected in either side yard or rear yard of
the lot, provided such accessory structure is not closer than:
(a) Fifty feet from the street upon which the lot fronts;
(b) Three feet from interior side or rear property lines;
§ 460-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-22
1:467
(c) Ten feet from a street abutting the lot with a right-of-way of 25
feet or less;
(d) Depending on the zone district, setback required for the
principal building on lot from a street with a right-of-way
exceeding 25 feet when the lot does not front on such abutting
street.
(2) Any accessory structure, if not attached to the principal building on
the lot, shall be separated from the principal building by at least 10
feet.
(3) If the accessory structure is attached to the principal building, it
shall be set back from property lines and streets as required for a
principal building.
(4) Accessory structures in nonresidential zone districts shall be set
back from adjacent property lines and streets as required for
principal buildings, except that accessory structures may be no
closer than 10 feet from a rear property line.
B. Maximum height and occupied lot area.
(1) The maximum permitted height shall be 25 feet. [Amended
11-7-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-011]
(2) All accessory structures on a lot in a residential zone district shall
not exceed an area on the ground of 15% of the lot area. Lot
coverage of accessory structures shall be included in measuring
maximum lot coverage. Accessory uses within the principal
building need not be included.
C. Swimming pools. [Amended 11-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-09]
(1) A privately owned swimming pool, whether permanently in place or
capable of being dismantled, shall be permitted as an accessory
structure on the same zone lot as the principal use it serves. Pools
shall be located to the side or rear of the principal building on the
lot. The edge of the pool structure shall be not less than 25 feet
from the front lot line and not less than 10 feet from side or rear lot
lines or building on the property. Where a deck or paved area
surrounds the pool, the edge of the deck or paved area may extend
to four feet of the side or rear lot line or to the wall of a building on
the property.
(2) Residential swimming pools shall comply with Act 45162 and
Sections 3109.4.1 through 3109.4.3 of the current adopted
International Building Code (IBC). Exception: A swimming pool
with a power safety cover or a spa with a safety cover complying
with American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) F 1346.
162. Editor's Note: "Act 45" refers to the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, 35 P.S.
§ 7210.101 et seq.
§ 460-22 INDIANA CODE § 460-22
1:468
(3) Swimming pools shall comply with the requirements of this section
and other applicable sections of the current adopted International
Building Code (IBC).
(4) A "swimming pool" is any structure intended for swimming,
recreational bathing or wading that contains water over 24 inches
(610 millimeters), deep. This includes in-ground, aboveground and
on-ground pools; hot tubs; spas; and fixed-in-place wading pools.
(5) The top of the barrier shall be at least 48 inches (1,219
millimeters), above ground, measured on the side of the barrier
that faces away from the swimming pool. The maximum vertical
clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier shall be two
inches (51 millimeters), measured on the side of the barrier that
faces away from the swimming pool. Where the top of the pool
structure is above grade, the barrier is authorized to be at ground
level or mounted on top of the pool structure, and the maximum
vertical clearance between the top of the pool structure and the
bottom of the barrier shall be four inches (102 millimeters).
(a) Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of a four-inch
diameter (102 millimeters) sphere.
(b) Solid barriers which do not have openings shall not contain
indentations or protrusions, except for normal construction
tolerances and tooled masonry joints.
(c) Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical
members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal
members is less than 45 inches (1,143 millimeters) the
horizontal members shall be located on the swimming pool side
of the fence. Spacing between vertical members shall not
exceed 1 3/4 inches (44 millimeters) in width. Where there are
decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the
cutouts shall not exceed 1 3/4 inches (44 millimeters) in width.
(d) Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical
members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal
members is 45 inches (1,143 millimeters) or more, spacing
between vertical members shall not exceed four inches (102
millimeters). Where there are decorative cutouts within
vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed
1 3/4 inches (44 millimeters) in width.
(e) Maximum mesh size for chain-link fences shall be a 2 1/4 inch
square (57 millimeters square) unless the fence is provided
with slats fastened at the top or the bottom which reduce the
openings to no more than 1 3/4 inches (44 millimeters).
(f) Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members, the
maximum opening formed by the diagonal members shall be no
more than 1 3/4 inches (44 millimeters).
§ 460-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-22
1:469
§ 460-23. Lot development.
(g) Access doors and gates shall comply with the requirements of
Sections 3109.4.1.1 through 3109.4.1.6 of the IBC and shall be
equipped to accommodate a locking device. Pedestrian access
doors and gates shall open outward away from the pool and
shall be self-closing and have a self-latching device. Doors or
gates other than pedestrian access doors or gates shall have a
self-latching device. Release mechanisms shall be in
accordance with Sections 1008.1.9 and 1109.1 of the IBC.
Where the release mechanism of the self-latching device is
located less than 54 inches (1,372 millimeters) from the bottom
of the door or gate, the release mechanism shall be located on
the pool side of the door or gate at least three inches (76
millimeters) below the top of the door or gate, and the door or
gate and barrier shall have no opening greater than 1/2 inch
(12.7 millimeters) within 18 inches (457 millimeters) of the
release mechanism.
(h) Where an aboveground pool structure is used as a barrier or
where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, and
the means of access is a ladder or steps, then the ladder or
steps either shall be capable of being secured, locked or
removed to prevent access, or the ladder or steps shall be
surrounded by a barrier which meets the requirements of
Sections 3109.4.1.1 through 3109.4.1.8 of the IBC. When the
ladder or steps are secured, locked or removed, any opening
created shall not allow the passage of a four-inch diameter
(102 millimeters) sphere.
(i) Barriers shall be located so as to prohibit permanent
structures, equipment, or similar objects from being used to
climb the barriers.
(6) Suction outlets shall be designed and installed in accordance with
ANSI/APSP-7.
(7) Swimming pools shall meet all electrical requirements in Chapter
42 of the current International Residential Code (IRC).
D. Temporary and mobile accessory uses.
(1) A construction building for an office and/or to store tools may be
erected on a construction site only during the period actual work is
being done on the site, without the need for a permit.
(2) A temporary building or structure for a civic event may be
approved by Borough Council for a specific limited time consistent
with the nature of the event.
A. Optional fencing, walls and perimeter planting.163
§ 460-22 INDIANA CODE § 460-23
1:470
(1) A fence or wall may be built along a property line but all parts of
the wall or fence, including foundations, shall be on the property of
the wall or fence owner unless adjacent owners agree, in writing,
that the wall or fence may straddle the common property line. Any
hedge plantings along property lines shall be installed entirely
within the property of the owner installing the plant materials
unless adjacent owners agree, in writing, to plantings on the
common property line.
(2) Fences, walls, and perimeter hedge plantings shall be no higher
than eight feet above grade at any point within three feet of any
rear or side property line, and no more than four feet above grade
at any point within three feet of any front property line. Trees
planted along, but inside a property line, are exempt from height
restrictions. If any fence or wall has a finished or decorative side,
such side shall face the adjacent property or street if the property
is residentially zoned or the property across the street is
residentially zoned. No fence, wall, or hedge shall be so high as to
violate the provisions of § 460-19D(3) or to interfere with the vision
of drivers backing from a driveway. [Amended 5-3-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-02; 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
(3) Any retaining wall whose exposed face is over four feet high shall
be designed or approved by a registered professional engineer. A
building permit shall be required for the erection of such a wall.
B. Perimeter planting. [Amended 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-02;
10-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
(1) Perimeter planting, when selected instead of or in combination
with fencing, shall be placed in a strip of land not less than three
feet wide along the property line or lines abutting and/or directly
across the street from any residential zone. Any hedge materials
used shall be maintained when mature at a height of not less than
four feet or more than eight feet. Within the planting strip, the
following shall be placed for each 100 feet of strip length:
(2) Three canopy (shade) trees selected from the Borough list titled
"Trees Suitable for Urban Street Plantings, Medium Trees (30 feet
to 45 feet).
(3) Three understory (ornamental) trees selected from the Borough list
for small trees (under 30 feet).
(4) Nine shrubs, such as azaleas, forsythias, rhododendrons, etc.
(5) Any portion of a perimeter strip more or less than 100 feet in length
shall be planted proportionately.
163. Editor's Note: Original Subsection 4.511, regarding height of fences, walls and perimeter
hedge plantings, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 5-3-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-02.
§ 460-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-23
1:471
(6) In lieu of the plantings required by Subsection B(1)(a), (b) and (c)
above, evergreen trees, shrubs or hedging planted on six-foot
centers may be substituted.
(7) Canopy trees shall have a diameter of at least 2 1/2 inches when
planted, measured four feet above ground level. Understory trees
shall have a diameter of at least 1 1/2 inches four feet above the
ground. Shrubs shall be at least three feet high when planted, while
evergreens shall be at least five feet high when planted.
C. Grading.
(1) No earth moving shall be permitted in the Borough without a
permit for such work having been issued by the Zoning Office.
[Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
(2) Such a permit shall be issued only where such grading will be done
as part of the preparation of a property to receive new or additional
improvements for which a building permit has been issued or will
be issued concurrently with a grading permit, or where such
grading is necessary to place public facilities, such as streets or
utility lines, or to prepare lots in an approved subdivision plan for
sale for development.
(3) The application for a grading permit shall include a scaled drawing
of the property to be graded indicating the exact location and
extent of the area to be affected and the proposed maximum grades
at completion of work, together with location of surface drainage
systems and proposed treatment of graded surfaces where not
paved or occupied by structures.
(4) Graded slopes shall not exceed the following maximums:
(a) Where earth materials are excavated from areas where the
surface has not been altered for at least two years, the
maximum grade shall not exceed one-foot vertical rise to each
1 1/2 feet of horizontal run.
(b) Where earth materials are placed upon previously undisturbed
soil or grading is carried out in areas where previous earth
moving has occurred less than two years before, the maximum
grade shall not exceed one-foot vertical rise to each two feet of
horizontal run.
(c) Where soil conditions apparently will tolerate steeper grades
without sacrificing the stability of the graded slope and the
areas the slope supports, the developer shall provide a report
prepared by a registered professional engineer, bearing his
Pennsylvania seal, testifying that the soil conditions in the area
to be disturbed will tolerate grades up to a maximum slope
established by the engineer.
§ 460-23 INDIANA CODE § 460-23
1:472
(5) Areas to be built up through grading shall be keyed in to
preexisting undisturbed earth and well compacted in layers not to
exceed eight inches in thickness. The toe of a slope shall be either
graded to a natural existing drainageway or storm drain system.
Where a slope continues upward beyond the limits of grading, the
top of the graded area shall be protected from the accumulation of
stormwater by a bench sloped to a storm drain system.
(6) Slope areas not to be paved or built upon shall be planted with
erosion-resisting plant materials immediately upon completion of
grading work. Areas of the property not occupied by buildings or
paved surfaces shall be landscaped and maintained upon
completion of development.
D. Drainage.164
(1) Stormwater shall not be permitted to collect upon any portion of
any property except as part of a storm drainage retardation system,
nor flow from any property over a public street, nor over adjacent
properties without benefit of an easement for such purpose.
(2) A stormwater drainage system shall be designed and installed
when the amount of cover of the lot by buildings and/or paved
surfaces will increase as the result of new development by at least
3,500 square feet. Such increase may be accumulated over several
small increases over a period of time or one expansion. The system
shall be designed within the following parameters:
(a) The maximum water release rate after development shall be
the predevelopment two-year twenty-four-hour peak
discharge.
(b) The minimum storage capacity to accommodate
postdevelopment coverage shall be that volume required to
contain the ten-year twenty-four-hour frequency storm for
release at a rate not to exceed the predevelopment two-year
twenty-four-hour peak discharge.
(c) The maximum runoff velocity to a stream, swale or on to the
ground shall not exceed the permissible velocity as contained
in "The Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Indiana
County."
(d) All system designs shall use the soil cover complex method for
computing runoff contained in the Soil Conservation Service
Technical Release No. 55. "Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds."
(3) Any retaining walls or storm drainage structures or subsurface
drainage systems shall be designed by a registered professional
164. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 395, Stormwater Management.
§ 460-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-23
1:473
§ 460-24. Development on lands subject to flooding.
engineer and presented on drawings and in specifications prepared
by him as the basis for securing a permit to build such structures.
(4) Continuous maintenance of stormwater retention facilities,
including holding basins, inlet and outlet structures, and grass
areas surrounding the basin shall be the responsibility of the
owners of the property on which the facilities are located.
Maintenance shall include mowing of grass areas, if any, and
removal of silt and debris to assure free flow of stormwater through
the system at all times. At its option, the Borough may assume
maintenance of a stormwater facility that is abandoned or
neglected and charge the property owner for the work done.
[Added 9-8-1998 by Ord. No. 1737]
(5) Whenever a plan of lots contains a separate parcel which is
retained by the developer to provide space for facilities to retard
stormwater runoff, such parcel shall be deeded by the developer, on
or prior to the date his/her interest in the plan ceases, to the
homeowners' association to which all property owners in the plan
shall belong. The deed for each lot to be sold in the plan shall state
that the lot owner and his/her successors in interest shall be
obligated on a pro rata basis for maintaining the separate parcel
and facilities within it until relieved by action of the Borough
Council. The obligation shall include taxes assessed on the parcel,
liability insurance, and auditing expenses of the association. The
bylaws and regulations to be adopted by the association shall be
prepared by the developer and approved by the Borough Solicitor
as providing adequate protection for the Borough and the residents
of the plan. [Added 9-8-1998 by Ord. No. 1737]
A. General conditions.
(1) For purposes of this section, areas considered to be in the
"floodplain" shall be those identified as being submerged by the
one-hundred-year flood in the current Flood Insurance Study
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
and shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), available for
inspection in the Borough office. The one-hundred-year floodplain
includes the floodway fringe and general floodplain areas.
[Amended 11-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-09]
(2) The "floodway" shall be considered the normal stream channel plus
the areas on either side that must be kept free of encroachment in
order that the one-hundred-year flood may be passed without
raising the water level more than one foot at any point along the
stream. The "flood fringe areas" shall be those areas on either side
of the floodway that will be submerged by the one-hundred-year
flood. The "general floodplain areas" shall be those areas that will
§ 460-23 INDIANA CODE § 460-24
1:474
likely be submerged by the one-hundred-year flood but for which
no detailed flood profiles or elevations have been developed.
(3) The Zoning Officer shall refuse to issue a building permit for any
construction or development within the one-hundred-year
floodplain unless the requirements of this section are met.
B. Any applicant proposing to develop in the floodplain shall provide a plan
of his proposal, showing existing buildings and all other improvements
on the property, property lines with bearings and distances, the run,
contours at one-foot intervals for at least 100 feet from the top of the
bank abutting his property; improvements proposed for which the
permit is being applied for, and a cross-section through the run and the
property showing existing and proposed ground elevations, building
floor elevations and the level of the one-hundred-year flood, such
mapping to be prepared and sealed by a registered engineer using
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques, and tied to known
USGS benchmarks or National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929. In
addition, the engineer shall certify that the proposed construction is
designed to withstand one-hundred-year flood elevations, pressures
and uplift forces; that the proposed construction does not adversely
affect the channel capacity by creating higher levels for the onehundred-
year flood; that any proposals to alter or relocate the stream
have been reviewed and approved by the State Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Dams and Waterway
Management, with notification sent to White Township, the Department
of Community and Economic Development and the Federal Insurance
Administration; and that all state and federal government permits
relative to the proposed construction have been obtained.
C. The Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) shall be interpreted as an
overlay upon the Borough Zoning Map.
(1) The following uses shall be permitted in any floodplain area,
provided the applicant can demonstrate that the proposed
construction or development will not increase the elevation of the
one-hundred-year flood at any point upstream or downstream of
this project:
(a) Public and private recreational uses not including enclosed
structures;
(b) Accessory one-family or two-family uses, including yards,
gardens and car parking on pervious surfaces or on impervious
surfaces if not in the floodway; and
(c) Accessory multifamily residential, commercial and industrial
uses such as yard areas and parking and loading areas on
impervious surfaces but not in the floodway.
(2) The following uses may be permitted in any floodplain area as
special exceptions, provided the applicant can demonstrate that
§ 460-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-24
1:475
the proposed construction or development will not increase the
elevation of the one-hundred-year flood at any location along the
stream:
(a) Any use permitted by right or as a special exception in the
underlying zoning district;
(b) Public utilities floodproofed if below the regulatory flood
elevation, and other public improvements;
(c) Temporary uses for a period not to exceed 30 days; and
(d) Storage of materials and equipment, provided that they are not
buoyant, flammable or explosive.
(3) The following uses shall be prohibited in the floodplain:
(a) Storage of any radioactive substance, or any of the following
materials in amounts exceeding 550 gallons or comparable dry
measure: acetone, ammonia, benzene, calcium carbide, carbon
disulfide, celluloid, chlorine, hydrochloric acid, hydrocyanic
acid, magnesium, nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen, petroleum
products, phosphorus, potassium, sodium, sulphur or sulphur
products and pesticides;
(b) Mobile homes; mobile home parks, or nursing homes, hospitals
or jails.
D. Existing structures in a floodplain area.
(1) The right to remain of any structure or other improvement legally
existing in any floodplain area prior to adoption of these
regulations but not in conformity with them is guaranteed.
(2) No expansion of any existing structure or any development in any
floodway area shall be permitted which will increase the elevation
of the one-hundred-year flood.
E. Variances for construction in any floodplain area and amendments to
boundaries of such areas.
(1) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use or activity that would result in any increase in the one-hundredyear
flood elevation.
(2) No variance shall be granted for a prohibited use.
(3) If a variance is granted, the Zoning Hearing Board shall inform the
applicant that the variance will allow construction that could
increase the risk to life and property on his premises and that his
flood insurance premiums will be raised significantly.
(4) The boundaries of any floodplain area may be amended by the same
procedure for amending any other part of this chapter if a study
§ 460-24 INDIANA CODE § 460-24
1:476
prepared by a registered professional engineer with demonstrated
expertise in hydrology and hydraulics documents the fact that a
particular boundary should be adjusted to a specific new location
based on alterations within the one-hundred-year floodplain. Such
proposed amendment shall be approved by the FEMA before such
adoption by Council.
F. Construction standards within any floodplain area.
(1) The lowest flood elevation, including basement, of any residential
structure shall be at least 1 1/2 feet above the one-hundred-year
flood elevation.
(2) The lowest floor elevation, including basement, of any
nonresidential structure shall be at least 1 1/2 feet above the onehundred-
year flood elevation or constructed so that the space
enclosed below that elevation is completely or essentially dry in
accordance with the standards contained in the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers "Flood-proofing Regulations," published in June 1972
and as may be amended. [Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-03]
(3) Graded areas receiving fill shall be no steeper than one vertical to
two horizontal, and shall extend at least 15 feet laterally from any
building wall toward a stream or drainageway. Fills shall consist of
soils or small rock materials only, shall be thoroughly compacted,
and shall be protected from erosion along banks by rip-rap,
vegetative plantings or bulkheads. Areas to receive fill shall be
stripped of topsoil prior to grading.
(4) Developed areas shall be graded so that the surface slopes away
from all building walls toward a stream or drainageway, and so that
runoff does not flow across adjacent properties.
(5) Sanitary and water systems, particularly building laterals, shall be
designed to eliminate infiltration of floodwaters and discharge from
the sanitary sewers into floodwaters.
(6) Materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or prohibited or
vessels containing them shall be stored at least 1 1/2 feet above the
one-hundred-year flood level.
(7) Buildings, structures and equipment shall be located to offer
minimum obstruction to stream flow and shall be securely
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
(8) Interior materials used in portions of a building lower than 1 1/2
feet above the one-hundred-year flood level and not designed to be
completely dry shall be resistant to water damage. Unfinished
masonry walls and concrete floors are preferred. Any finishes or
woodwork should be marine or water-resistant quality.
§ 460-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-24
1:477
(9) All electrical, heating and other mechanical equipment shall be
located at least 1 1/2 feet above the one-hundred-year flood level
and electrical distribution panels at least three feet above.
Separate electrical circuits shall be dropped from above to serve
areas below the one-hundred-year flood level. Gas and oil supply
and water and sanitary sewerage systems within structures shall
be designed to prevent infiltration of floodwaters and to facilitate
drainage of floodwater, if infiltration does occur.
G. Definitions of terms peculiar to this section. As used in this section, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CONSTRUCTION — The building, rebuilding, renovation, repair,
extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building or structure,
including the placement of manufactured homes. The "start of
construction" means the first placement of permanent materials,
beyond site preparation, provided such construction starts not more
than 180 days after the issuance of a building permit.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
property, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
the placement of mobile homes, streets; other paving, utilities, filling,
grading, excavation, dredging or drilling operations and the subdivision
of land.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — Any area subject to the one-hundred-year
flood as delineated on the FIRM map, including both the floodway and
floodway fringe areas and areas that do not have base flood elevations
determined.
FLOODPROOFING — The incorporation of special improvements into
the design or retrofitting of a building, utility or land surface to resist
flood inundation or damage, such as those recommended improvements
contained in the Corps of Engineers publication "Flood-proofing
Regulations" (June 1972). When walls and floors below the regulatory
flood level are impermeable to passage of water or water vapor, an
interior space shall be considered "completely dry," requiring no
restrictions on interior finishes. When walls and floors are
"substantially permeable," permitting some water and vapor seepage,
an interior space shall be considered "essentially dry," requiring some
restrictions on interior finishes and contents of the space. Whether
completely or substantially dry, structures shall be constructed to resist
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of
buoyancy.[Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
FLOODWAY — The area of any watercourse that includes the stream
channel, and the land on both sides that if obstructed would raise the
level of the one-hundred-year flood more than one foot.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term
§ 460-24 INDIANA CODE § 460-24
1:478
§ 460-25. Special residential uses.
"manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers and
other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive
days. For insurance purposes the term "manufactured home" does not
include park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel of land
or contiguous parcels divided into two or more manufactured home lots
for rent or sale.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that may occur any time but
is likely to happen once every 100 years, or has a one-percent chance
of occurring in any year.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year flood
elevation plus 1 1/2 feet.
H. The provisions of this § 460-24 do not guarantee that water levels
higher than those established as maximum will not occur, nor that
development outside areas designated as within the floodplain will not
suffer from high water. This section shall not create liability on the part
of the Borough or any of its officers or employees for any flood damages
that result from reliance on this section, or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
I. The replacement of existing work with equivalent materials for the
purpose of routine maintenance and upkeep shall be allowed in any
property within a floodplain without the need for adherence to the
requirements of this section. However, the removal or change of any
exterior wall, or structural of bearing member, or required exitway shall
adhere to the requirements of this section, as shall any alteration,
replacement or relocation of any water supply, sewage disposal, storm
drainage, gas or similar piping, or electrical wiring or other mechanical
system.
A. Individual mobile homes on their own lots.
(1) A "mobile home" for the purposes of this chapter shall be
considered a transportable single-family detached dwelling
intended for permanent occupancy contained in one unit, or in two
units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of being
separated later for movement to another site, such dwelling being
ready for occupancy upon arrival on its lot except for placement on
its foundation, attachment to utilities, and minor or incidental
unpacking and assembly operations.
(2) Mobile homes shall meet all requirements of this chapter and other
ordinances of Indiana Borough relative to single-family detached
dwellings, including but not limited to minimum lot area, depth and
frontage, setbacks from property lines, utility connections and offstreet
parking. The minimum width of a mobile home along its full
§ 460-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-25
1:479
length shall be not less than 20 feet. The wheels used in
transporting a mobile home to its site shall be removed when the
home is set upon its foundation, and the towing hitch shall be
either removed or hidden within the foundation. All mobile homes
shall meet applicable state regulations regarding construction, and
a certificate of compliance shall be shown to the Zoning Office
by the owner before the mobile home is occupied.165 [Amended
2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
(3) Mobile homes shall be supported upon a peripheral masonry wall
matching the exterior dimensions of the mobile home, or at least
two masonry piers located and designed to carry the full weight of
the mobile home. Walls or piers shall be built upon concrete footers
the bottom of which shall be at least three feet below finished
grade. Mobile homes shall be securely held to their foundations by
over-the-top built-in tie downs firmly imbedded in the foundation.
The space between the floor of a mobile home set on piers and the
ground below shall be enclosed by a continuous masonry wall or
metal skirting to match the exterior material of the mobile home
and such space shall be ventilated. Mobile homes shall be placed on
required foundations and skirted, if on piers, within 30 days of
arrival on the lot.
(4) No mobile home shall be occupied until it has received an
occupancy permit from the Zoning Office after connection to
municipal sewage disposal and water supply systems. No mobile
homes lacking toilet and washing facilities or cooking and food
storage facilities or any of these, shall be permitted for occupancy.
No self-propelled vehicles used as living accommodations or travel
trailers designed for temporary occupancy shall be permitted for
residential purposes for a period exceeding 14 days. [Amended
2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
(5) Any enclosed additions added later to a mobile home or not part of
the original construction shall require a building permit and shall
match the materials and colors of the original.
(6) No mobile home shall be removed from its lot until all taxes
assessed against the mobile home by any local taxing jurisdiction or
owed by any occupant of the mobile home have been paid in full.
Failure to pay said taxes prior to removal of a mobile home shall be
considered a violation of this chapter subject to penalties under
§ 460-56D.
(7) The electrical system serving a mobile home shall be installed by a
registered electrician to meet the electrical code standards
adopted by Indiana Borough. All heating and cooking devices shall
be installed and shall be operated in accordance with fire code
165. Editor's Note: Original Subsection 4.713, regarding the prohibition of mobile homes on
lots occupied by a dwelling structure, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-02.
§ 460-25 INDIANA CODE § 460-25
1:480
standards adopted by Indiana Borough. Gas service, if provided for
heating and cooking, shall be natural gas piped to the home in lines
of a public utility company serving all or a part of the Borough.
B. Dwellings in the C-1 and C-2 Zone Districts A single-family dwelling
may be erected on any zoning lot of official record prior to September 1,
1963, within the C-1 or C-2 Zone Districts, provided the Zoning Hearing
Board finds, after receiving an application for such proposal, that the
lot is too small in size or too irregular in shape or topography to
reasonably accommodate any use permitted in the zone district
containing the lot.
C. Occupancy of a dwelling unit by unrelated individuals.
(1) Occupancy of a dwelling unit by unrelated individuals (see also
definition in Article X). In the R-3, U-1, C-1 and C-2 Zone Districts, a
maximum of five unrelated individuals may occupy the dwelling
unit. A dwelling unit occupied by unrelated individuals may not in
addition be occupied by boarders and roomers whose number
would raise the occupancy of the dwelling above three in the R-1 or
R-2 Zones, or above five in the R-3, U-1, C-1 or C-2 Zones. All
dwelling units legally occupied prior to February 6, 1979, by more
unrelated individuals than authorized by this section may continue
to house that higher number of occupants as a nonconforming use.
If the number of unrelated individuals, boarders, or roomers in the
dwelling unit is subsequently reduced for longer than nine
consecutive months, the nonconforming use shall be modified to
restrict the number of legal occupants to the greater of the number
of legal occupants authorized by this section or the number of
unrelated individuals, boarders, or roomers that occupied the
dwelling unit for the previous nine consecutive months. [Amended
4-6-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-03; 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04;
4-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-02]
(2) After the effective date of this subsection, no boarding house,
rooming house, or building containing dwelling units within the R-1
or R-2 Zone Districts proposed for rental occupancy by three
unrelated individuals shall be located within a four-hundred-foot
radius of a second building containing dwelling units already
occupied by unrelated individuals. The center of the circle
describing the radius shall be located at the crossing of lines
connecting diagonally opposite corners of the lot proposed for
rental occupancy. Any part of a property that is within the fourhundred-
foot radius will qualify that property as being within 400
feet of the property proposed for rental housing. [Amended
12-8-1998 by Ord. No. 1744; 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-02]
(a) No property located within an R-1 or R-2 Zone shall be
converted to or created for or used for the purpose other than
that for a functional family. [Added 8-7-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-03166]
§ 460-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-25
1:481
(3) Developer's options in the R-3, U-1 and MU-1 Zone Districts.
[Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
(a) Developers wishing to build or remodel to provide housing for
unrelated individuals may base the maximum occupancy of
their projects on either number of bedrooms within each
dwelling unit, as provided for in Schedule 2 of this chapter167
or upon lot area as provided for in this section.
(b) If a developer selects occupancy by persons per bedroom, the
maximum occupancy shall be five unrelated individuals per
dwelling unit. If a developer selects occupancy based on lot
area, the maximum occupancy shall be one person for each 400
square feet of lot area, with a maximum occupancy of five
unrelated individuals per dwelling unit.
(c) Before receiving approval for a building permit, or an
occupancy permit to renovate an existing building, the
developer shall stipulate the method for calculating density he
has selected and the maximum number of total unrelated
residents his project shall accommodate.
(d) In either case, the developer shall comply with the minimum
lot size and setback, and maximum building height and
coverage requirements of Schedule 2.168
(e) Successor owners of properties developed in accordance with
this section shall be bound by deed to the decision made by the
original developer. The deed for the property shall state that
there are occupancy restrictions. Changes in occupancy or
rearrangement of dwelling units proposed by successor
owners shall be subject to review and decision as a special
exception.
(f) The legal maximum occupancy of each dwelling unit shall be
permanently posted inside the entrance to the dwelling unit.
(g) All properties along the peripheral edge of the MU-1 Zone
District abutting or adjacent to a residential district, park,
museum or other similar use shall have a maximum occupancy
of three unrelated residents per dwelling unit.
D. Conversion of an existing dwelling to two or more apartments.
All properties along the peripheral edge of the MU-1 Zone District
abutting or adjacent to a residential district, park, museum or other
similar use shall have a maximum occupancy of three unrelated
166. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that Subsection C(1) and (2), above, shall
remain in full force and effect as to all preexisting uses in the R-1 and R-2 Districts as of
the effective date of said ordinance.
167. Editor's Note: Schedule 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
168. Editor's Note: Schedule 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 460-25 INDIANA CODE § 460-25
1:482
residents per dwelling unit. [Amended 4-6-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-02; 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
(1) Within the R-2 or MU-1 Zone District, a single-family detached
dwelling may be converted to a two-family dwelling, provided:
(a) The conversion will remove any deficiencies in the building
that will prevent compliance with the Uniform Construction
Code as adopted by Indiana Borough;
(b) Each dwelling unit shall have two separate entrances leading
directly to the outside at grade or to a common vestibule at the
first floor level and shall have separate connections to public
utilities;
(c) Each dwelling shall be provided off-street parking as required
by Article VI;
(d) The building shall be located on a lot meeting at least the area
and width requirements for the zone district where the lot is
located; and
(e) Each dwelling within the building shall contain sufficient total
floor area and bedroom area to comply with the Uniform
Construction Code adopted by Indiana Borough.
(2) Within the MU-1, R-3 and U-1 Zone Districts, a building containing
one or more dwelling units may be converted to two or more
dwelling units, provided:
(a) The conversion will remove any deficiencies within the
building that prevent compliance with the Uniform
Construction Code as adopted by Indiana Borough;
(b) Each dwelling unit shall be provided off-street parking as
required by Article VI;
(c) Each dwelling unit shall contain at least sufficient floor area
and bedroom area required by the Uniform Construction Code
adopted by Indiana Borough; and
(d) Each dwelling unit shall be occupied by no more than five
unrelated individuals or a family, and the lot containing the
building shall at least meet the requirements of Schedule 2 of
this chapter,169 but provide not less than 400 square feet of lot
area for each individual to be housed in the building.
(e) Properties along the peripheral edge of the MU-1 Zone District
abutting or adjacent to a residential district, park, museum or
other similar use shall have a maximum occupancy of three
169. Editor's Note: Schedule 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 460-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-25
1:483
unrelated residents per dwelling unit and meet all other
regulations of this chapter and Schedule 1 and 2.170
E. Nursing or personal care homes and housing for the elderly.
(1) Nursing and personal care homes shall be certified to operate by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania before an occupancy permit
may be issued.
(2) A "nursing home" implies long-term skilled care and continuous
direct intervention with daily living. A "personal care home" implies
that the residents are mobile but need assistance with daily living
requirements within a residential setting.
(3) There shall be not more than one resident of a personal care home
for each 1,600 square feet of lot area, nor more than one patient of
a nursing home for each 1,000 square feet of lot area, and not more
than one dwelling unit for each 600 square feet of lot area for an
elderly housing complex.
(4) The developer of an elderly housing project shall guarantee,
through a covenant running with the property as developed, that
the occupancy shall be for elderly residents at least 90% of whom
shall be age 62 or older, and that no more than two residents shall
occupy a dwelling unit.
(5) Current federal and state law regulating construction and
management of subsidized housing for elderly occupants shall
apply to any elderly project whether subsidized or not.
(6) While requirements of this chapter for multifamily or high-rise
buildings shall apply, no additional setbacks for buildings over 40
feet or three stories in height will be required for an elderly
housing project, and off-street parking shall be provided as
required by Article VI.
F. Transitional residential facilities or group homes.
(1) Such housing shall be administered by a public agency or
appointed board of local citizens responsible to a national or
statewide organization.
(2) The premises shall be used strictly for residential purposes, with
occupancy limited by Chapter 327, Property Maintenance, of the
Code of the Borough of Indiana and the regulations of the operating
agency, whichever are more restrictive.
(3) The facility or home shall be operated in accordance with the
standards established by the national or state administering
agency for occupying and maintaining the property.
170. Editor's Note: Schedules 1 and 2 are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 460-25 INDIANA CODE § 460-25
1:484
G. Integrated residential-commercial developments.
(1) Integrated residential-commercial buildings are permitted by right
in the MU-1 and C-1 Zones and as a special exception in the C-2 and
U-1 Zones. [Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
(2) The ground floor (street level at front of building) shall be used
exclusively for retail and service business uses permitted by right
or by special exception in the zone district where the property is
located. All floors above may be used for either residential or retail
service or office uses permitted by right or by special exception in
the zone district. Mixed commercial and residential uses on any
one floor shall not be permitted; nor shall any commercial use
occur on a floor above residential uses.
(3) Parking required to serve an integrated development shall be the
total of the spaces required for business use plus those needed for
the dwelling units as stipulated by parking standards in Article VI.
H. Large-scale residential developments.
(1) This subsection shall apply when several buildings containing
dwelling units occupy the same lot, and assumes that nearly all
such buildings will be rectangular in shape. Large-scale residential
developments are permitted by right in the MU-1 Zone District and
possible as a special exception in the R-3, U-1, C-1 and C-2 Zone
Districts. [Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
(2) When walls of adjacent buildings on the same lot face each other
and each wall contains windows opening into dwelling units, such
walls shall be separated by at least 50 feet or the height of the
taller building, whichever is greater.
(3) In all other cases when walls of adjacent buildings on the same lot
face each other, such walls shall be separated by at least 20 feet,
including protruding balconies and/or porches.
(4) Buildings shall be considered as facing one another if their walls
are parallel, or if the walls were extended to intersect would form
an angle of not greater than 45°.
(5) The entrance to each residential building shall be connected to the
sidewalk abutting the lot and to the parking areas on the lot by
walkways not less than four feet wide. Such sidewalks shall be
constructed according to Borough Specifications. [Amended
2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
I. Joining of existing residential buildings. Two residential buildings, but
not more than two, both existing prior to September 1, 1963, may be
connected to create one building even though each building is on a
separate lot, provided the following regulations are adhered to.
§ 460-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-25
1:485
§ 460-26. Special exceptions. [Amended 10-5-1999 by Ord. No.
1999-07; 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-02]
(1) The two buildings shall be joined along a common side wall more
than 20 feet in length.
(2) The common wall shall be at least as high in its entirety as the
shortest of walls facing each other across the open space to receive
the joining construction.
(3) The joining construction shall contain useable interior space for
one or both original buildings.
(4) The joined buildings shall occupy one lot of record.
(5) The combining of the lots shall create a conforming lot if either or
both original lots are nonconforming.
(6) The joining of the buildings shall be reviewed as a special exception
in all zone districts but shall not be permitted in the R-1 District.
A. Home occupations other than no-impact home-based businesses.
[Amended 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-03]
(1) Where permitted. Home occupations may be permitted within a
dwelling as an accessory in the R-1, R-2, R-3, and U-1 Zone
Districts operated by the individual or family residing there,
providing that this is the only dwelling where the operator lives.
Only one home occupation shall be permitted for any dwelling and
not more than two persons who do not reside in the dwelling may
be employed there. Accessory buildings on the same lot as the
dwelling shall not be used in conjunction with the home occupation.
One off-street parking space shall be provided on the lot for each
300 square feet of floor area, or fraction thereof, devoted to the
home occupation exclusive of parking required for the persons
residing at the premises.
(2) Evidence of use. No indication of the home occupation shall be
visible outside the dwelling except that one sign not more than two
square feet in area may appear on the property attached to the
dwelling, to a fence or on a freestanding post.
(3) Extent of use. The home occupation shall not utilize an area of the
dwelling exceeding 1/2 of the area of the first floor in a two-story or
higher structure or exceeding 1/4 of the first floor area in a onestory
structure, measured using the outside wall dimensions of the
dwelling.
(4) Permitted home occupations.
(a) Medical, dental, chiropractic or osteopathic practice by an
individual doctor;
§ 460-25 INDIANA CODE § 460-26
1:486
(b) Architectural, engineering, or legal services; contracting for
building trades, insurance, public accountant, or computer
programming practiced by an individual;
(c) Business conducted entirely by phone or mail, provided there
are no retail sales on the premises;
(d) Custom dressmaking or tailoring;
(e) Foster family care for not more than six persons
simultaneously, assuming the persons are placed by the courts
or by public agencies;171
(f) Day-care center to accommodate simultaneously not more than
six children, not resident on the premises, provided regulations
of the Department of Public Welfare, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, for such facilities are met;
(g) Tutoring for not more than four students simultaneously,
except that musical instrument or dancing instruction shall be
to individuals only and between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m. daily;
(h) Bed-and-breakfast home containing no more than three guest
bedrooms, provided that one off-street parking space is
available on the property for each guest bedroom, that
breakfast is the only meal served to guests, that no guest stays
for more than 10 consecutive nights, and that the resident
operator is a member in good standing of the regional
organization of bed-and-breakfast homes. Guest bedrooms may
be on the second floor of the dwelling, regardless of the
stipulation of Subsection A(3).
(i) Home occupation similar to those that are listed above and
compatible within a residential neighborhood as creating little
or no traffic congestion or other damaging effects, such
proposal reviewed by the Planning Commission and acted upon
favorably by the Zoning Hearing Board.
B. Community buildings, clubs, social halls, lodges, fraternal
organizations and similar uses.
(1) Such uses may include fitness, health or recreation rooms, meeting
rooms, a kitchen/pantry, bar for members and guests only, rest
rooms, apartment of manager/caretaker, off-street parking and
outdoor recreation areas. Such use does not include residential
fraternity or sorority buildings serving a college or university.
171. Editor's Note: Original Subsection F, regarding rooming and boarding, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 8-7-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-03.
§ 460-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-26
1:487
(2) Required off-street parking may be off site or shared with another
use whose parking needs do not overlap with the needs of the club,
hall or lodge, at the discretion of the Planning Commission.
(3) A fraternity or sorority may be permitted only in the U-1 Zone
District as a special exception and in the MU-1 District as a
conditional use. Such a facility shall be related to Indiana
University of Pennsylvania and shall be recognized as meeting the
University's definition of a fraternity or sorority. [Amended
2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
C. Essential services.
(1) For purposes of this section "essential services" shall include
properties owned by any governmental entity, provider of publicly
funded emergency services, or public utilities, and above ground
improvements erected on such properties, except for overhead
distribution lines.
(2) Buildings or structures required for the efficient collection or
distribution of a public utility may be located in any zone district
and on lots less in area and/or width than normally required.
However, such buildings or structures shall be set back from
property lines as required for the zone district in which the
property is located.
(3) Public emergency services buildings may be located in any zone
district as long as the lot dimensions and building setbacks
required for the zone district are respected.
(4) Offices of any utility company shall be in the MU-1, C-1 or C-2 Zone
Districts but garages, warehouses and storage yards shall be
permitted only in the C-2 Zone. [Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-03]
D. Health clinics, churches, schools and not-for-profit institutions.
(1) Such uses shall front on streets with a pavement width of at least
38 feet.
(2) Corner lots will be preferred, with access points to parking and
servicing areas as remote from street intersections as possible.
(3) In the case of churches and schools, parking may be off site or
shared with another use whose parking needs do not overlap with
the needs of the school or church, at the discretion of the Planning
Commission.
(4) When the building area on the ground exceeds 6,000 square feet
and building walls exceed 20 feet in height, the building shall be set
back from side or rear property lines one additional foot for each
three feet of height above 20 feet.
§ 460-26 INDIANA CODE § 460-26
1:488
§ 460-27. No-impact home-based businesses. [Added 5-3-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-03]
No-impact home based businesses shall be permitted use in residential
zones. No permit shall be required, however, the no-impact home based
business use shall be subject to review by the Zoning Officer to determine
whether there is any impact. For there not be an impact, the following
requirements must be met:
E. Nursery schools and day-care centers.
(1) Such a facility shall be on a lot containing at least 8,000 square feet
and shall be capable of accommodating at least seven dependent
persons. A facility for fewer individuals shall be operated as a home
occupation.
(2) The facility shall be certified by the Pennsylvania Department of
Public Welfare before an occupancy permit shall be issued.
(3) The facility may be a freestanding building constructed for the
purpose or an existing building converted partly or wholly for the
facility.
(4) A dropoff and pickup location within the property shall be provided,
if space is available, or a curbside location shall be set aside.
F. Motels and hotels.
(1) Motels shall have required parking on the same property. Hotels
may utilize off-site parking.
(2) There shall not be less than 600 square feet of lot area for each
guest room.
(3) Motel and hotel guest rooms shall contain at least 250 square feet
of floor, including at least 50 square feet for an enclosed bathroom
equipped with shower or bathtub, lavatory and toilet.
(4) The building and/or the property may include indoor or outdoor
recreation facilities, a restaurant, bar, meeting rooms, and
reception area.
A. The business activity must be compatible with the residential use of the
property and surrounding residential uses.
B. The business shall employ no employees other than family members
residing in the dwelling.
C. There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or
inventory of a substantial nature.
D. There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including but
not limited to parking, signs or lights.
§ 460-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-27
1:489
§ 460-28. Special nonresidential uses.
E. The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic
interference, including interference with radio or television reception,
which is detectable in the neighborhood.
F. The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
G. The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and
may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
H. The business may not involve any illegal activity.
A. Outdoor sales, uses and storage.
(1) Outdoor sales shall be limited to the display of vehicles and
mechanized equipment except for sidewalk sales authorized by
Borough Council as part of a particular event.
(2) No outdoor sales or display, except authorized sidewalk sales, shall
occur on a public right-of-way, and such outdoor sales area, where
it abuts a residential zone, shall be set back from front, side and
rear property lines required in the abutting residential zone. Where
outdoor sales or display occur on a commercially zoned lot not
abutting a residential zone, they shall be set back as required for a
building in the commercial zone.
(3) All outdoor dining in the MU-1 District must be contained on
private property and maintained with approved barriers. [Added
2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03172]
(a) Barriers shall be a minimum height of 43 inches and
configured as to prevent a person from entering the contained
area. The appearance of the barrier shall match the theme of
the environment or other structures in the immediate vicinity.
(4) All outdoor storage areas, except those displaying vehicles and
mechanized equipment in drive-away condition, shall be enclosed
behind a fence erected on the property containing the outdoor
area, such fence not less than six feet in height above ground level
and with a surface not less than 50% opaque. Where the fence
abuts a residential zone, a five-foot wide strip on the commercial
property outside the fence shall be planted with evergreen hedging
15 feet on centers and maintained when mature at a height of six
feet. A building on the property may serve in place of a fence to
partly enclose an outdoor storage area.
172. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection
A(3) through (5) as Subsection A(4) through (6), respectively.
§ 460-27 INDIANA CODE § 460-28
1:490
(5) All stored materials that could be blown or washed away from the
property on which stored, or might attract animals, rodents or
insects, or produce metallic, chemical or putrefying odors shall be
tightly sealed in waterproof containers that will not rust or
deteriorate. Waste materials shall be disposed of off the property by
a licensed refuse hauler.
(6) Vessels or tanks containing liquids shall be surrounded by a dike
enclosing a volume at least as large as the volume within the
vessels or tanks that are enclosed, and shall be erected and
monitored as required by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
B. Service stations and auto repair.
(1) Access driveways shall be as remote as possible from street
intersections.
(2) All repair services, except adding of fluids, shall occur within a
building on the property where the services are provided.
(3) Pump islands may be in front yard areas but no part of an island
shall be closer to a property line than eight feet.
(4) A canopy covering a pump island shall not extend over any property
line, shall not be higher at the top of the roof than 15 feet. All
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code relative to
canopies shall also apply.173
C. Drive-through services and convenience sales.
(1) A driveway not less than eight feet wide and at least 80 feet long
shall be provided on the property for the exclusive use of traffic
approaching each drive-through window.
(2) In lieu of such a driveway, the property owner may utilize a
secondary street abutting his/her property, provided the street is
one-way, the paved width is at least 18 feet, and the drive-through
window is at least 80 feet from a street intersection.
(3) If the drive-through facility shares the property with off-street
parking, traffic using the drive-through window and traffic entering
and leaving the parking spaces shall be clearly segregated.
(4) On a property containing a convenience sales building and gasoline
sales, the vehicle circulation patterns approaching and leaving the
pump islands and the patterns maneuvering in and out of parking
serving the building shall be separated and clearly marked.
D. Amusement enterprises.174
173. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
174. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 133, Amusement Devices.
§ 460-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-28
1:491
(1) Where the enterprise includes coin-operated arcade machines,
such devices shall be separated from one another by at least three
feet, and no machine shall block or partially block any exit from the
building containing the machines.
(2) Outdoor recreation facilities within or abutting any residential zone
district shall be set back from all property lines by at least 20 feet.
An opaque fence and/or evergreen plantings erected and
maintained at a height of six feet shall be located along the side and
rear property lines when such lines abut or are within any
residential zone.
(3) Lighting shall be of the cutoff-luminary type with no fixture
mounted more than eight feet off the ground, and the pool of light
cast by any fixture shall be contained entirely within the property
on which the fixture is located.
E. Performance standards.
(1) Any process of manufacturing, assembly, repairing, mixing,
combining or packaging shall be subject to continuing compliance
with the standards of this section and other applicable ordinances
of Indiana Borough.
(2) Compliance shall be measured along the property line of any
business allegedly creating a violation. A verified violation shall be
subject to penalty under this chapter.
(3) Radioactivity and electrical disturbance. No process shall create
interference with radio or television reception.
(4) Glare. Any glare-producing process, such as welding or cutting,
shall be carried on within a completely enclosed room or building
without windows or skylights. Outdoor lighting shall be of the
cutoff-luminary type with no light falling beyond, and the light
source not visible from, the property line.
(5) Vibration. No process shall create vibration discernible along a
property line. Vibration-producing equipment shall be mounted so
as to be independent of the foundation of the building in which it is
located.
(6) Odor. No process shall emit a chemical, metallic or putrefying odor,
or odor of burning materials in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Air Quality Standards. [Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-03]
(7) Smoke. Emissions of fly ash, dust, fumes, vapor, gases or any
particulate shall meet all Pennsylvania Air Quality Standards.
[Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
(8) Noise emissions shall be subject to Chapter 275, Noise, of the Code
of the Borough of Indiana.
§ 460-28 INDIANA CODE § 460-28
1:492
F. Telecommunications towers.
(1) No two towers shall be within 1,000 feet of one another.
(2) No tower shall be located so that any part of a lot containing a
residential building is within a circle whose radius is 30% of the
tower's height above ground level.
(3) Before considering erection of a tower, the proposer shall make
every effort, and document that effort, to secure a location for his/
her equipment on an existing steeple, bell tower, light tower,
chimney, stack or other elevation location that provides acceptable
height.
(4) Before a tower, other than the first to be erected, can be approved,
the proposer shall make every effort, and document that effort, to
secure a location for his/her equipment on an existing tower.
(5) A proposed tower may be located on the same property that
contains the offices and facilities of the owner and operator of the
tower. However, if the tower is not so located, it shall be the sole
occupant, with any accessory structures, of a lot that at least meets
the minimum lot size and setback requirements of the zone district
in which it is located.
(6) The base of the tower, or the entire property on which the tower is
located, shall be surrounded by a chain link fence not less than
eight feet high. Guy anchor foundations if any shall be enclosed
behind the chain link fence on the property, or enclosed separately
by the same type and height of fence.
(7) Between the property lines surrounding the lot on which a tower is
located and the base of the tower, a dense planting of evergreen
trees not more than 15 feet on center shall be placed with a height
when planted of not less than four feet. Where buildings on the
same property are located between the property line and the tower,
such buildings may be used as part of the screen to the extent they
block the view of the tower base from adjacent properties and
streets.
(8) No tower shall be lighted, except as may be required by the Federal
Aviation Administration, and shall carry no advertising.
(9) When and if a tower is abandoned, it shall be demolished by the
then current owner within six months of the date of the
deactivation of the last piece of operating equipment on the tower.
Removal shall include all anchors, foundation and ground level
structures. Whenever the ownership of a tower changes, it shall be
the responsibility of the succeeding owner to inform the Borough
Zoning Office of the change and to submit to the Office the name,
address and phone number of the new owner, and the name of a
contact person. [Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
§ 460-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-28
1:493

ARTICLE V
Signs
[Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-05]
§ 460-29. Applicability; purpose.
The following sign regulations shall be observed in all districts. It is not
the purpose of this section to abridge commercial or noncommercial free
speech. The purpose of these regulations is to ensure that the time, place,
and manner of sign placement within the Borough is conducted with regard
to the safety of motorists and pedestrians (especially in avoiding
distractions or confusion in high-traffic areas), access to light and air by
neighboring properties, and avoidance of negative impact upon neighboring
properties, including unnecessary glare.
§ 460-30. Exempt signs.
The following types of signs are permitted in all zoning districts, and are
exempt from permitting requirements, but not from performance standards
relative to traffic safety or overall sign limitations of any specific sign type
or district.
A. Temporary signs announcing a campaign, drive or event of a civic,
philanthropic, educational or religious organization, provided such sign
shall not exceed 16 square feet in area and shall be removed
immediately upon the completion of the campaign, drive or event.
B. Temporary signs erected in connection with the development or
proposed development of the premises or property provided that the
area of any such sign shall not exceed 16 square feet. Not more than
one such sign shall be placed on property held in single and separate
ownership unless the property fronts on more than one street, in which
case one such sign shall be permitted on each separate street frontage.
Such signs shall be removed within 10 days after the development has
been completed and/or the last structure occupied. No such sign may
be erected until all zoning, subdivision, and land development
approvals have been obtained.
C. Political signs announcing candidates seeking public office, a
referendum, or similar political speech.
D. Religious or holiday displays or messages with no commercial content.
E. The flag of the United States, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any
state or nation.
F. Signs offering the sale or rental of the premises upon which the sign is
erected, provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed 10
square feet and not more than one such sign shall be placed on the
property unless such property fronts on more than one street, in which
case one sign may be erected on each street frontage.
§ 460-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-30
1:495
G. Auctions, garage, or yard sale signs, provided that they do not exceed
four square feet and are removed as soon as the event or activity has
occurred.
H. Directory signs which list all the occupants of a multi-tenant or
multiple-family building, or buildings in a multi-building development,
provided that the area of such signs does not exceed 1/2 square foot per
tenant or two square feet per individual building.
I. Temporary signs of contractors, developers, architects, engineers,
builders, and artisans, erected and maintained on the premises where
the work is being performed, provided that the area of such sign shall
not exceed 16 square feet in any residential district and 32 square feet
in all other districts. Such signs shall be removed upon completion of
the work.
J. Any signs not visible from outside a lot or building.
K. Displays of time and temperature, including electronic displays,
provided that they do not exceed four square feet and contain no other
message.
L. Rest room, exit, public telephone, handicapped parking or access, and
similar directional or informational signs emplaced for the benefit of
the public or building tenants.
M. No trespassing signs, signs indicating the private nature of a road,
driveway or premises, signs controlling fishing on the premises,
provided that the area of each such sign shall not exceed two square
feet.
N. House and address numbers, home occupation, or nameplate sign
displaying the name and address of the occupant or the profession or
activity of the occupant of a dwelling unit, provided that not more than
one such sign shall be erected for each permitted use, and provided
that the area of each such sign shall not exceed four square feet and
may not be illuminated.
O. Memorial signs or tablets denoting the date of erection of a building.
P. Temporary signs announcing the birth of a child, birthday
commemoration, marriage, graduation, or similar event in the life of a
householder shall be permitted, provided such signs do not exceed 32
square feet and are removed as soon as the event or activity has
occurred.
Q. Any sign warning of a hazard that contains no other information or
commercial content.
R. Signs erected by the Borough or an authorized entity that serve to
provide directions and explanations for public recreational purposes
and facilities, for dedication/memorial purposes, and to mark and
explain historical events, persons or structures. Such signs shall not
§ 460-30 INDIANA CODE § 460-30
1:496
§ 460-31. Performance standards.
Except where specifically noted, all signs shall adhere to all performance
standards.
exceed 16 square feet in area. Such signs may include the name or
logos of business or individuals who have sponsored a public
improvement or general support of such facility.
S. Traffic signs and similar regulatory notices placed by a duly constituted
governmental body.
T. Signs erected for the purpose of scoring an athletic event taking place
upon the site, which may include electronic scoring devices and names
and or logos of sponsors of the sign, provided there is no illumination of
the sign at times when the activity is not taking place.
A. Unless specifically exempted by § 460-30 of this article, a permit must
be obtained from the Borough for the erection or alteration of all signs.
Exemptions from the necessity of securing a permit, however, shall not
be construed to relieve the owner of the sign involved from
responsibility for its erection and maintenance in a safe manner and in
a manner in accord with all the other provisions of this article and other
applicable codes.
B. No signs shall be permitted within public rights-of-way, except
PennDOT-approved traffic signs and devices; signs and banners
specially approved by the Borough for decoration or promotion of
community events and activities; signs not exceeding nine square feet
placed temporarily to advertise the sale of real estate or a yard sale;
political signs not exceeding nine square feet placed temporarily; signs
not exceeding nine square feet placed temporarily to provide notice of
or direction to a civic, philanthropic, political, educational, or religious
event or activity, or other signs specifically permitted under
§ 460-32.4H of this article (projecting business signs). The Borough
may require proof of insurance for any sign within a Borough right-ofway.
C. No person shall construct, erect, place, use or permit the use of any
permanent or temporary sign or sign structure on private or public
property except for the property owner or tenant, or a person with the
express written consent of the property owner.
D. Construction and maintenance. All signs shall be constructed in a
workmanlike fashion using durable materials. Signs shall be designed
and constructed to withstand wind forces and in accordance with
appropriate mechanical or electrical standards. The owners of signs
shall keep them in safe and good repair. Signs which become
deteriorated or otherwise present a public hazard shall be removed or
repaired by the sign's owner. If the owner of a sign cannot be found or
§ 460-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-31
1:497
§ 460-32. Illumination.
identified, the owner of the property whereon the sign is located shall
be responsible for its repair or removal.
E. No sign structure may block a vehicular line of sight for a driveway,
access lane, or public street, or be placed at any location where, by its
position, shape, or color, it may interfere with or obstruct the view of or
be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device. Sign
structures erected directly upon the ground within 15 feet of any
vehicular driveway or street intersection shall meet all PennDOT
standards. [Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
F. No signs shall be permitted which are posted, stapled, or otherwise
attached to public utility poles or trees.
G. Nonconforming signs, once removed, shall be replaced only with
conforming signs. Nonconforming signs may be repainted or repaired,
providing such repainting or repairing does not exceed the dimensions
of the existing sign.
H. Abandonment of use. If a sign other than a billboard advertises a
business, service, commodity, accommodation, attraction or other
enterprise or activity that is no longer operating or being offered or
conducted, that sign shall be considered abandoned and shall, within
six months after such abandonment, be removed. Abandonment does
not include a premises where the business is being actively offered for
sale or rent, § 460-31D is adhered to, and the owner of the business or
premises has applied for a sign-continuation permit. Sign-continuation
permits shall be issued for a period of six months and may be renewed
for a total of 24 months.
A. Except as specifically provided for electronic signs granted by special
exception, no sign shall employ intermittent light, electronic or movable
text, strobes, or other animations that may serve to distract motorists
or abutting homeowners.
B. Lighting for signs shall not create a hazardous glare for pedestrians or
vehicles either in a public street or on any private premises.
C. Except as specifically provided for electronic signs granted by special
exception or the use of diffused neon, the light source, whether internal
to the sign or external, shall be shielded from view except for the use of
diffused neon or as has been specifically excepted for electronic signs
when a special exemption is granted.
D. Sign illumination for externally illuminated signs shall utilize focused
light fixtures that do not allow light or glare to shine above the
horizontal plane of the top of the sign or onto any public right-of-way or
adjoining property.
§ 460-31 INDIANA CODE § 460-32
1:498
§ 460-32.1. Sign permit application.
§ 460-32.2. Signs permitted in R-1 Single-Family Residential, R-2
Two-Family Residential, and R-3 Multifamily Residential Districts.
E. All electrical connections shall be shielded by underground or overhead
electrical wires which meet all relevant codes. No temporary signs shall
be illuminated by direct means.
A. All applications for signs as required under this section shall be
submitted to the Zoning Officer.
B. The application shall contain:
(1) Type, area, and number of signs proposed.
(2) Type of illumination proposed (if permitted), including the
luminance proposed and direction of lighting. This shall also be
depicted upon a map that illustrates the distance to any R-1, R-2 or
R-3 Zoning Districts.
(3) For freestanding signs, a sketch showing the placement of the sign
in relation to all driveways, vehicular rights of way, and cartways.
The developer shall submit current sight distances before and after
erection of the sign with sufficient information to show that sight
distances shall not be reduced.
(4) An elevation sketch showing the relationship of the sign to the
building, grade, all driveways, vehicular rights-of-way, and
cartways.
(5) The vehicular speed limit of traffic on all streets, from which the
sign would be visible, and estimated motorist reaction time (unless
the previous sketches clearly indicate that the sign is oriented
towards pedestrian traffic). This should be based upon the United
States Sign Council On-Premise Signs Guideline Standards, 2003
edition (or most current edition).
(6) A photograph or graphic rendition of the proposed sign copy,
including all symbols, letter, and graphic elements shown to scale
and all structural elements intended to anchor the sign.
C. The Borough must specifically approve signs within public rights-ofway.
In the case of temporary signs, the Zoning Official or his designee
shall review the application and grant approval if all applicable
standards of this article are met. In the case of permanent signs, the
Zoning Office shall refer the application to the Borough Council, who
may refer the application for advice to the Planning Commission or any
similar advisory committee. [Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-03]
§ 460-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-32.2
1:499
§ 460-32.3. Signs permitted in P-1 Public and Semipublic Zoning
District.
A. Subdivision identification signs, and/or signs identifying apartment or
condominium complexes, provided that the area of any such sign shall
not exceed 64 square feet, and further provided that one such sign shall
be permitted for each separate street and/or separate building frontage
occupied by the subdivision, apartment, or condominium complex and/
or for each means of entrance to or exit from the subdivision,
apartment, or condominium complex. Such signs may not be
illuminated.
B. Signs for permitted nonresidential or permitted institutional uses,
provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed 48 square feet,
and further provided that one such sign shall be permitted for each
separate street and/or separate building frontage occupied by the
permitted use and for each means of entrance to or exit from the
permitted use. Such signs may not be illuminated.
C. Institutional uses may have one changeable copy sign of no greater
than 16 square feet, either permanently attached to a building or as a
freestanding sign. Illumination of any such non-electronic changeable
copy sign shall be from external sources only, and shielded to prevent
unnecessary glare to neighboring properties. Luminance shall not
exceed 10 luxes (1 footcandle) measured at a distance of 10 feet from
the sign. No such sign may be illuminated between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and sunrise.
D. No freestanding signs within these districts may be erected within 10
feet of a side or rear lot line.
E. No freestanding signs within these districts may exceed six feet in
height.
A. All signs permitted in the R-1, R-2, and R-3 Districts.
B. Signs for permitted nonresidential or permitted institutional uses,
provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed 64 square feet,
and further provided that one such sign shall be permitted for each
separate street and/or separate building frontage occupied by the
permitted use and for each means of entrance to or exit from the
permitted use. Such signs may be illuminated by direct or indirect
means. Illumination of the sign face shall not exceed 10 luxes (1
footcandle) measured at a distance of 10 feet from the sign.
C. In multi-building institutional developments, each building may include
one freestanding or wall sign of up to 32 square feet, provide that only
wall signs may be internally illuminated. Such signs may be illuminated
by direct or indirect means.
D. No freestanding signs within this district may be erected within 10 feet
of a side or rear lot line.
§ 460-32.2 INDIANA CODE § 460-32.3
1:500
§ 460-32.4. Signs permitted in U-1, C-1, C-2, MU-1 and M-1 Zoning
Districts. [Amended 4-5-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-01; 2-2-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-03]
E. No freestanding signs within this district may exceed eight feet in
height.
A. All signs permitted in the R-1, R-2, R-3 and P-1 Districts.
B. Unless limited by special exception or traditional neighborhood
development design standards, the number of signs permitted shall be
consistent with the following table:
(1) Table:
U-1/C-1 2 permanent signs per street frontage
C-2/M-1/MU-1 3 permanent signs per street frontage and 1
additional sign per each street frontage of more
than 100 feet in width
(2) Buildings or properties with multiple businesses may have one
additional sign per each additional business located within the
building or property; however, all signs must remain within any
dimensional limits of Table 460-32.4C.
C. The dimensions of signs shall be consistent with the following table:
Table 460-32.4C Permitted Sign Dimensions, Height, and Setbacks
Sign
Type Freestanding Projecting
Facade
/ Wall Roof
District
Maximum
Area
(square
feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Minimum
Setback
(feet)
Maximum
Area
(square
feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Minimum
Setback
(feet)
Maximum
Area
Maximum
Area
Maximum
Height
C-1
32
(only one
freestanding
sign per
property)
12 5
9**
(only
one
projecting
sign per
property)
15
(See
§ 460-32.4H)
15% of
one
surface
per
street
frontage
Not
permitted
Not
permitted
C-2
64 (for
each 50
feet of
street
frontage)
to a
maximum
of 200
25 5 12 15 10
20% of
one
surface
per
street
frontage
Not
permitted
Not
permitted
§ 460-32.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-32.4
1:501
Table 460-32.4C Permitted Sign Dimensions, Height, and Setbacks
Sign
Type Freestanding Projecting
Facade
/ Wall Roof
District
Maximum
Area
(square
feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Minimum
Setback
(feet)
Maximum
Area
(square
feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Minimum
Setback
(feet)
Maximum
Area
Maximum
Area
Maximum
Height
U-1 32 15 5 9 15 10
15% of
one
surface
per
street
frontage
Not
permitted
Not
permitted
M-1 120 35 5
Not
permitted
15 10
20% of
one
surface
100
square
feet
10 feet
MU-1
64 (for
each 50
feet of
street
frontage)
to a
maximum
of 200
20 5
12 (Only
one
projecting
sign per
business)
15 10
20% of
one
surface
per
street
frontage
Not
permitted
Not
permitted
**Not permitted on any building facing Philadelphia Street.
D. Signs in the MU-1, U-1, C-1, C-2 and M-1 may be illuminated by direct
or indirect means. Illumination of the sign face shall not exceed 100
luxes (10 foot candles) measured at a distance of 10 feet from the sign,
unless any portion of the illuminated sign face is within 100 feet of an
R-1, R-2, or R-3 Residential District and visible from an occupied
dwelling of such district. In such cases, illumination shall be reduced to
10 luxes (one foot candle) measured at a distance of 10 feet from the
sign.
E. Temporary signs. Temporary signs shall be permitted in building
windows and shall not require a permit.
F. In the MU-1, C-1 and C-2 Districts, temporary sandwich board signs
having a maximum of eight square feet of area on either side are
permitted on sidewalks during the hours that the business is open. The
sign shall be located within 20 feet of the primary public entrance of the
business that the sign is advertising. Only one sandwich board shall be
permitted for each business. The sign shall be placed in such a manner
as to permit at least five feet of space for pedestrian traffic upon the
sidewalk.
§ 460-32.4 INDIANA CODE § 460-32.4
1:502
G. Permanent window signs. Permanent window signs are permitted in the
C-1, C-2, and U-1 Districts by right without a permit provided no more
than 50% of each window surface and 25% of all building windows
include such a signs. Such permanent window signs do not count
towards the allowed number of signs per district.
H. Projection of permanent signs into rights-of-way.
(1) Within the C-1 District, a sign attached to a building, otherwise
lawful under § 460-32.4C, may project into the public right-of-way
up to six feet, provided:
(a) No structural support or portion of the sign is within eight feet
of grade as measured vertically from the right-of-way line for a
pedestrian right-of-way and 14 feet of grade for a vehicular
right-of-way.
(b) Under no circumstances shall any portion of such projecting
signs be placed nearer than two feet to a vehicular cart way,
loading zone, or on-street parking lane.
(c) No such projecting sign may be attached to a portion of a
building fronting on Philadelphia Street.
(2) Awning and canopy signs may project into rights-of-way in areas
served by sidewalks, but shall be subject to the following
regulations
(a) No portion of an awning or canopy shall be less than eight feet
above the level of the public sidewalk.
(b) No awning or canopy shall be permitted within four feet of the
curb.
(c) Awnings and canopies shall be constructed of canvas, vinyl, or
similar flexible, cloth-like material. Backlit signs or signs on
metal awnings or canopies are prohibited within the rights-ofway.
(d) Awnings and canopies shall be securely attached to the
building. All frames and supports shall be made of metal or
other rigid material.
(e) The name of the business or logo may be printed on the portion
of the awning or canopy above the valance and shall be limited
to one awning or canopy only, except in the case of a corner lot
where one awning or canopy with printing above each valance
shall be permitted on each street frontage; such name or logo
printed above the valance shall be limited as follows:
[1] Lettering shall be limited to 25% of the awning or canopy,
as measured from the point of attachment to the building
to the bottom of the fully extended awning or canopy
§ 460-32.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-32.4
1:503
excluding the valance. Letters shall be limited to 50% of
the width of the awning or canopy.
[2] A logo shall be limited to 50% of the height of the awning
or canopy, as measured from the point of the attachment to
the building to the bottom of the fully extended awning or
canopy.
I. Electronic signs. The inherent characteristic of electronic signs is their
flexibility. The frequently changing messages coupled with their
characteristic brightness can create an undue distraction to motorists.
Signs with video, LED displays, or similar electronic changeable copy
messages are permitted as a special exception only in the C-2 and M-1
Zoning Districts.
(1) The sub-type of electronic signs shall be identified in accordance
with definitions provided for in this article. The developer shall
submit a programming plan that shows any proposed use of
animations, length of exposure for any message, and transition
time or proposed effects between individual messages. This shall
include estimated motorist reaction time to proposed messages and
symbols, based upon the United States Sign Council's On-Premise
Signs Guideline Standards, 2003 or most recent edition. For
planning purposes, the developer should assume all driving
environments in the Borough are "complex" as defined in the
guideline standards, except for multilane streets (such as
Philadelphia Street), which should be considered as such. The
Borough Council may establish limits upon use of any special
effects, transitions, or length of message exposure as a reasonable
additional condition and safeguard to the special exception.
(2) Electronic sign content. Electronic signs may contain permanent
content about any business located on the premises upon which the
sign is placed. They may also contain temporary messages with
content about such businesses, or temporary messages announcing
a campaign, drive, or event of a civic, philanthropic, educational or
religious organization, provided that such message is changed
upon the cessation of such a campaign, drive, or event. Electronic
signs may also contain messages permitted for temporary signs as
authorized under § 460-30C and D of this chapter. Electronic signs
may function as billboards only in the M-1 Zoning District.
(3) Electronic signs may be freestanding, facade, or wall signs; such a
sign shall meet all size, area, and setback limitations for the district
for which it is proposed. The size of an electronic sign shall be
calculated based upon the surface dimensions that have the ability
to display a symbol or message.
(4) Multi-vision signs are only permitted in the M-1 District.
§ 460-32.4 INDIANA CODE § 460-32.4
1:504
(5) Additional setback from residential districts. All portions of the sign
structure must be a minimum distance of 100 feet from an abutting
R-1, R-2, or R-3 Residential District boundary.
(6) Setback from other electronic changeable copy, electronic graphic
display or video display signs. Electronic signs must be separated
from other electronic signs by at least 35 feet. No more than one
electronic sign is permitted per each property, regardless of how
many tenants occupy that lot.
(7) Orientation. When located within 150 feet of a residentially used lot
in an R-1, R-2 or R-3 Residential Zone, all parts of the electronic
changeable copy sign must be oriented so that no portion of the
sign face is visible from an existing or permitted principal structure
on that lot.
(8) Audio or pyrotechnics. Audio speakers or any form of pyrotechnics
are prohibited in association with an electronic sign.
(9) The Borough may limit the hours of illumination or operation of
electronic signs within 200 feet of any occupied dwelling in an R-1,
R-2, or R-3 Residential District if a dwelling within the Residential
District is within view of the proposed sign.
(10) The developer shall show compliance with all applicable
regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation for
any proposed sign abutting a state highway.
(11) All multi-vision signs shall have a transition time between sign
faces of no more than two seconds.
(12) The developer shall show the ability to meet illumination standards
under § 460-32.4D of this article. The developer shall present
material detailing any differences in proposed LED light as
compared to standard light measurement.
J. Billboards. Billboards as defined by this article are a special exception
in the M-1 Zoning District. Such signs shall not exceed any dimensional
requirement for the M-1 District as stated in § 460-32.4C. In addition,
the proposed billboard must meet all lighting and setback requirements
for electronic signs under § 460-32.4I.
§ 460-32.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-32.4
1:505

ARTICLE VI
Off-Street Parking and Servicing
§ 460-33. When required. [Amended 10-7-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-04; 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
All parking is required at the rear of the property. In all districts, except
for commercial uses in the C-1 and C-2 Zones, there shall be provided,
in connection with any business, institutional, recreational, residential or
other use, off-street parking in accordance with the requirements of this
article at the time the use is erected, enlarged or increased in capacity.
When several businesses or other uses share the same property, a common
parking area may be created, provided the total number of spaces in the
common parking area is no less than required for all uses to be served
and in the common parking area. No parking space required for one use
shall be claimed as meeting the needs for a second use unless a variance
is requested and the Zoning Hearing Board finds that the two uses wishing
joint use of a parking area have substantially different times of parking
demand. In the event that the principal structure is redeveloped, enlarged
or increased in size, it shall conform to § 460-37 for the additional square
footage that is added to the structure or use.
§ 460-34. Dimensional standards for parking spaces.
A. Each parking space shall be not less than nine feet wide and 18 feet
long. [Amended 12-8-1998 by Ord. No. 1745]
B. For every 25 parking spaces or fraction thereof, one handicapped space
shall be provided. Each such space shall have a five-foot wide space
separating it from adjacent spaces for wheelchair maneuvering; shall
be the most accessible to an entrance to the use served; and shall have
a step-free path from the parking space to the entrance of the use. This
subsection shall not apply to single-family, two-family or townhouse
dwellings.
C. Each parking space in a parking lot intended to serve a business,
institutional or multifamily residential use shall abut an access aisle. No
spaces shall be accessible directly from a public street, except for the
rear of the property that has a street right-of-way that is not more than
25 feet wide and the depth of the parking area on private property,
measured at right angles to the street, is not less than 20 feet.
[Amended 10-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
D. Ground level projections. [Added 10-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04175]
(1) Paved areas, including driveways and parking areas, may extend up
to three feet from any side or rear property line. By written
agreement between neighboring property owners, filed with the
175. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections D
and E as Subsections E and F, respectively.
§ 460-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-34
1:507
Borough, paved areas may extend to the common property line.
Only a driveway, not more than 18 feet wide, and/or a walkway may
cross a front yard or side yard abutting a street. Paved parking
areas may abut a secondary access street with a right-of-way width
not more than 25 feet at the rear or side of a property.
(2) Any parking area for more than five vehicles in a residential zone
district that is less than seven feet from a side or rear property line
shall be bordered with a planted evergreen hedge screen or fence
between the edge of the paving and the adjacent property line in
accordance with § 460-23B. [Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-03]
(3) In the case of a corner lot, no paved areas except driveways shall
extend into the minimum yard areas abutting either street.
(4) Additional setbacks on lots in the C-1, C-2, and M-1 Zones abutting
any residential zone. Developers of lots in the C-1 or C-2 Zone
Districts that abut the side or rear lines of properties in a
residential zone shall set back buildings and paved areas along
such common lines as required for side or rear yard setbacks in the
abutting residential zone district.
(5) Additional setbacks on lots with five or more parking spaces in the
MU-1 Zone District along the peripheral edge of the district that is
abutting, adjacent and/or directly across the street from any
residential, park or historical structure shall have a brick or stone
street wall set back a minimum of 10 feet at the rear of the property
and require a well maintained grass planted buffer and vegetation
design elements on the street side of the wall. [Added 2-2-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-03]
(6) Additional setbacks on corner lots with five or more parking spaces
in the MU-1 Zone District along the peripheral edge of the district
that is abutting, adjacent and/or directly across the street from any
residential, park or historical structure shall have a brick or stone
street wall set back a minimum of 10 feet at the rear and side of the
property and require a well maintained grass planted buffer and
vegetation design elements on the street side of the wall. [Added
2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
(7) All access to garages and parking areas in the R-1 and R-2 zoning
districts must be paved where crossing the front yard area. [Added
2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
E. Parking lots shall be laid out in accordance with the following table and
diagram: [Amended 10-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
§ 460-34 INDIANA CODE § 460-34
1:508
Angle of
parking
Curb
length
Space
depth
Aisle
width
(feet)
1 row
1 aisle
2 rows
1 aisle
3 rows
2 aisles
4 rows
2 aisles
Curb 23 feet 9 feet 12 21 feet 30 feet 51 feet 60 feet
45 12 feet -
9 inches
19 feet -
10
inches
11 28 feet -
4 inches
45 feet -
8 inches
66 feet -
2 inches
83 feet -
6 inches
60 10 feet -
5 inches
21 feet 18 39 feet 60 feet 95
inches
116 feet
90 9 feet 18 feet 24 42 feet 60 feet 102 feet 120 feet
Angle of parking: angle in degrees relative to curb.
Curb length: length of space along curb in feet.
Space depth: depth at right angles to curb in feet.
Aisle width: width of aisle providing access to spaces in feet.
1 row, 1 aisle: width of one row of spaces plus the access aisle that abuts
them in feet.
Parking Lot Layout
Parking Lot Layout Diagram Key
A. Angle of Parking
B. Space Depth
C. Access Aisle
D. 9 foot Space Width
E. Parking Space
F. Curb Length
§ 460-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-34
1:509
§ 460-35. Surfacing, lighting and screening.
Parking Lot Layout Diagram Key
G. 1 Row: 1 Aisle
H. 2 Rows: 1 Aisle
G. 1 Row: 1 Aisle
H. 2 Rows: 1 Aisle
I. 3 Rows: 2 Aisles
J. 4 Rows: 2 Aisles
F. No parking spaces shall occur in the public street right-of-way if they
are required to meet minimum off-street standards, and spaces shall be
set back sufficiently on any property to allow drivers approaching and
leaving the parking lot entrance a full view in all directions of traffic
along the public street. Parking lots in residential zones shall be set
back from property lines and streets by at least three feet with a
planted buffer provided in the three-foot strip as stipulated by
§ 490-39.1. [Amended 10-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
A. If a parking or truck servicing area will be developed on land that
previously had a surface permitting passage of water through it into the
ground below, such area shall be paved with an asphaltic or cement
binder pavement if the area to be occupied by parking vehicles,
including access and maneuvering space, exceeds 2,000 square feet. All
paved surfaces shall be graded to assure positive drainage towards a
storm sewer or surface stream, designated in accordance with the
stormwater control standards in § 460-23D of this chapter. [Amended
9-8-1998 by Ord. No. 1736]
A parking area will cover or partly cover an area formerly undeveloped
or with a grass or vegetative surface. All designs will use the Soil
Conservation Services technical release 55 "Urban Hydrology for
Small Watersheds" in the design of all stormwater control measures.
B. Paved surfaces shall be at least two inches thick over at least eight
inches crushed stone, well choked and rolled. Surfaces shall slope not
more than 4% in any direction or less than 1/2 of 1%. All stormwater
falling on the paved surface shall be directed to a storm sewer or
stream.
C. The developer of a parking lot may request of the Zoning Officer that
paving of his/her lot be postponed for not more than one year because
of current financial problems or because future development of the site
with buildings is imminent. The developer may apply for not more than
one additional year of postponement to the Zoning Hearing Board near
the conclusion of the first year. Postponement of paving shall not relieve
the developer from providing the required crushed stone subbase and
grading the area of the lot.
§ 460-34 INDIANA CODE § 460-35
1:510
§ 460-36. Off-site parking facilities. [Added 10-7-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-04176]
D. Off-street parking areas for more than five vehicles and off-street
servicing areas shall be screened from view by observers on adjacent
residentially zoned lots, including those directly across an intervening
street. Screening may be a fence or hedging or a combination of each
across the full width of the edge of the lot abutting the residential lot or
street. A fence may be masonry, wood or metal, meeting the
requirements of § 460-23B(3). Not less than 50% of the fence shall be
opaque. If hedging is selected, it shall meet the standards of
§ 460-23B(4).
E. Lighting is optional but, if used in a parking lot or truck servicing area,
the light source shall not be visible from neighboring properties or
streets. Lighting shall be focused so no light created by a fixture shines
on surfaces not in the parking or servicing areas.
F. Off-street parking areas for more than five vehicles and off-street
servicing areas shall be screened from view by observers along
peripheral edge of the district that is abutting, adjacent and/or directly
across the street from any residential, park or historical structure and
require a brick or stone street wall with a well maintained grass planted
buffer and vegetation design elements. [Added 2-2-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-03]
A. All required parking spaces and access to them shall be located on the
same lot as the use they serve except for the following off-site options:
(1) All or part of the off-street parking required for a use within all
zones, except for the commercial C-1 and C-2 Zones, may find
existing off-street parking within 250 feet within the edge of the
property.
(2) The lease binding the owner of the property containing the use and
the leased property or leased parking spaces shall be initially for
five years, but shall be reviewable and shall run with the life of the
use and be irrevocable. Such lease shall be recorded in the office of
the Recorder of Deeds.
(3) Whenever a use relying in whole or in part upon leased off-site
facilities ceases, and the premises are devoted to a new use, the
owner shall provide the required off-street parking on his/her own
property and/or on leased property bound by a deed or irrevocable
document.
(4) Parking within the C-1, C-2 and MU-1 Zones shall meet all the
requirements of Subsection A(1) through (3), except that existing
off-street parking may be found within 800 feet of the edge of the
176. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 460-36, Parking, added 7-2-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-02.
§ 460-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-36
1:511
§ 460-37. Number of parking spaces required by use.
Where square footage is used as a measure for the minimum number of
required parking spaces in the standards below, the area of corridors, rest
room facilities, utility rooms and storage or shipping and receiving areas
shall not be included.
property, provided it is within the C-1, C-2 or MU-1 Zones.
[Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
(5) Development for private parking within the R-1 and R-2 Zones shall
not be permitted for more than five spaces on any lot within these
districts.
(6) The Borough Solicitor shall approve the form and content of any
deed or lease for off-street parking before it is recorded. Neither
the off-site parking protected by deed or lease nor the use served
by such parking shall be in operation until the deed or lease has
been recorded.
A. Residential uses.
(1) Dwelling occupied by a family related by blood, marriage or
adoption: one space per dwelling.
(2) Dwelling occupied by unrelated individuals aged 16 and over, or
dormitories, fraternities or sororities: one spaces for each two
residents. [Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
(3) Convalescent or nursing home: one space for each four beds.
(4) Retirement home: one space for each two dwelling units.
(5) Group home: two spaces per dwelling unit.
(6) Boarding or lodging home: one space for each two boarders or
lodgers plus resident family spaces.
B. Institutional uses.
(1) Churches and similar places of enclosed public assembly: one
space for each 50 square feet of floor area in the main assembly
hall.
(2) Schools, nonresident: one space for each of the maximum number
of faculty members plus staff persons on the premises at any given
time.
(3) School, trade: one space for each two students plus one space for
each of the maximum number of full-time faculty persons on the
premises at any given time.
(4) Libraries and museums: one space for each 1,000 square feet of
floor area.
§ 460-36 INDIANA CODE § 460-37
1:512
(5) Clubs, lodges and social halls: one space for each 100 square feet in
bar area, dining room and assembly room.
C. Recreational uses. [Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
(1) Theaters: one space for each four seats.
(2) Dance halls: one space for each 100 square feet of floor area in the
hall.
(3) Bowling alleys: three spaces for each lane.
(4) Billiard halls: two spaces for each table.
(5) Bingo halls: one space for each four persons at maximum capacity.
(6) Swim clubs: one space for each 100 square feet of water surface in
the pool.
(7) Tennis clubs: two spaces for each court.
(8) Health or fitness clubs: one space for each 300 square feet of floor
area.
(9) Amusement center: one space for each 300 square feet of floor
area.
D. Office uses.
(1) Medical, dental or chiropractic office or clinic: one space for each
300 square feet of floor area. [Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-03]
(2) Offices with walk-in customer services, including banks, insurance
sales, etc.: one space for each 300 square feet of floor area.
(3) Offices not providing customer walk-in services: one space for each
600 square feet of floor area.
E. Retail sales and services.
(1) Retail sales and personal services stores without drive-through
facilities: one space for each 300 square feet of floor area.
(2) Retail sales outdoors, including auto sales: one space for each 600
square feet of enclosed floor area plus one space for each 2,000
square feet of outdoor display area.
(3) Drive-through bank, carry away food, beer distributorship or car
wash: five spaces approaching the service bays plus one space for
each employee on the largest shift.
(4) Convenience or take-out establishment: one space for each 300
square feet of floor area.
§ 460-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-37
1:513
§ 460-38. Off-street servicing.
(5) Restaurants and taverns: one space for each 3 1/2 persons who can
be seated simultaneously. [Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-03]
(6) Motels, hotels or bed-and-breakfasts: one space for each sleeping
room.
(7) Funeral home: 10 spaces for each reception parlor.
(8) Automobile service station: two spaces for each service bay not
including the bay itself plus one space approaching each pump
island.
F. Business and manufacturing.
(1) Manufacturing, wholesale, warehousing or storage business,
freight terminal, or research and development facility: two spaces
for each three employees on the largest shift, plus one space for
each company vehicle normally stored on the property.
(2) Building materials sales or contractor's yard: one space for each
400 square feet of floor area in sales building, plus one space for
each 1,000 square feet of area in the materials storage area, plus
one space for each company vehicle normally stored on the
property.
(3) Public utilities: one space for each 400 square feet of office space,
plus one space for each company vehicle normally stored on the
property.
G. The Code and Planning Directors may, when considering off-street
parking needs for a use not addressed by Subsections A through F,
make a reasonable determination based on square footage, vehicle
dependence and similarity to a use for which parking standards are
stated. [Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
A. In connection with the development of any property for a retail sales,
manufacturing or distribution business, where the building contains at
least 5,000 square feet, or any expansion of a building so that its floor
area exceeds 5,000 square feet, there shall be provided off-street
loading or servicing areas in accordance with this section.
B. Such servicing areas shall not contain any required off-street parking
spaces and shall not be less than 10 feet wide, by 35 feet long, by 14
feet high. Servicing areas may be located on the lot anywhere available
for off-street parking but shall be convenient to service entrances of the
business. Servicing areas may be partly or wholly within the building.
C. All the requirements for surfacing, lighting and screening contained in
§ 460-35 shall apply to servicing areas.
§ 460-37 INDIANA CODE § 460-38
1:514
§ 460-39. Automobile storage.
No motor vehicle or portion thereof shall be stored outdoors unless it bears
a current inspection sticker, has a current registration and is in running
order. If the vehicle is not in running order, but the parts have been ordered
for the vehicle, it may be kept outdoors for a period not to exceed 60 days.
If the vehicle has not been repaired within 60 days and does not have a
current inspection sticker and current registration, it may be stored within
a building or can be stored in an area completely surrounded by a solid
fence not less than six feet in height.
§ 460-39.1. Lot development. [Added 10-7-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-04]
D. One servicing space shall be provided for each business containing at
least 5,000 square feet of floor area up to 25,000 square feet. For each
additional 20,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof one
additional servicing space shall be provided.
E. Where several business buildings share the same property, servicing
may occur at one location, provided the square footage of all the
buildings is used to determine the number of servicing spaces required.
F. Unpaved parking spaces are permitted on lots containing single-family
or two-family dwellings. Such paved spaces shall be surfaced with
shale, crushed limestone, or other material approved by the permit
officer. The edges of the surfaced area shall be contained by railroad
ties, concrete blocks, the side of a building, or other device that will
prevent the scattering of the surfacing material beyond the parking
spaces. [Added 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
G. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle on private
property unless an approved parking location, on a surface other than a
grass surface, has been used continually prior to the enactment of
Chapter 293 for parking. Grass areas shall not be considered an
approved parking location. [Added 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
A. Optional fencing, walls and perimeter planting.
(1) A fence or wall may be built along a property line, but all parts of
the wall or fence, including foundations, shall be on the property of
the wall or fence owner unless adjacent owners agree, in writing,
that the wall or fence may straddle the common property line. Any
hedge plantings along property lines shall be installed entirely
within the property of the owner installing the plant materials
unless adjacent owners agree, in writing, to plantings on the
common property line, in which both property owners would be
responsible for the maintenance of the hedge line. This agreement
shall be made in writing, notarized and be continued by each
property owner and/or each successor for the life of the planting.
§ 460-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-39.1
1:515
The agreement shall be kept in a file at the Borough Planning and
Code Office. [Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
(2) Fences, walls, and perimeter hedge plantings shall be no higher
than eight feet above grade at any point within three feet of any
rear or side property line, and no more than four feet above grade
at any point within three feet of any front property line. Trees
planted along, but inside, a property line are exempt from height
restrictions. If any fence or wall has a finished or decorative side,
such side shall face the adjacent property or street if the property
is residentially zoned or the property across the street is
residentially zoned. No fence, wall, or hedge shall be so high as to
violate the provisions of § 460-19D(3) or to interfere with the vision
of drivers backing out from a driveway.
(3) Any retaining wall whose exposed face is over four feet high shall
be designed or approved by a registered professional engineer. A
building permit shall be required for the erection of such a wall.
(4) Chain-link fencing shall not be used for buffering of parking in the
Borough.
B. Required fencing and perimeter planting.
(1) Buffering by fencing or plantings shall be required wherever a
parking lot for more than five vehicles, an off-street loading area, or
a lot in a C-1, C-2, R-3, M-1 and MU-1 Zone District abuts a lot in a
residential zone district. [Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-03]
(2) Such buffering shall be installed by the developer of the parking
lot, loading area or use in the C-1, C-2 or MU-1 Zone District on his
property and at his expense and maintained thereafter by him and
his successors in good condition. In the case of a fence, the
decorative or finished side shall face the residential zone district.
No advertising shall be placed on the fence. [Amended 2-2-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-03]
(3) Fences, if used, shall be no less than four feet nor more than eight
feet high. Also, such fences shall effectively screen the property
when viewed in elevation. The bottom rail shall be no more than
four inches above ground level, topography permitting, and the
fence supports shall be no more than eight feet apart. Chain-link
fencing shall not be used for buffering of parking in the Borough;
instead, vinyl or wood shall be used.
(4) Perimeter planting, when selected instead of or in combination
with fencing, shall be placed in a strip of land not less than three
feet wide along the property line or lines abutting and/or directly
across the street from any residential zone. Any hedge materials
used shall be maintained when mature at a height of not less than
§ 460-39.1 INDIANA CODE § 460-39.1
1:516
§ 460-39.2. Special residential uses. [Added 10-7-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-04]
§ 460-39.3. Setback variations and yard encroachments. [Added
10-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
four feet or more than eight feet. Within the planting strip, the
following shall be placed for each 100 feet of strip length:
(a) Three canopy (shade) trees selected from the Borough list
titled "Trees Suitable for Urban Street Plantings, Medium
Trees (30 feet to 45 feet).
(b) Three understory (ornamental) trees selected from the
Borough list for small trees (under 30 feet).
(c) Nine shrubs, such as azaleas, forsythias, rhododendrons, etc.
(d) Any portion of a perimeter strip more or less than 100 feet in
length shall be planted proportionately.
(e) In lieu of the plantings required by Subsection B(4)(a), (b) and
(c) above, evergreen trees, shrubs or hedging planted on sixfoot
centers may be substituted.
(f) Canopy trees shall have a diameter of at least 2 1/2 inches
when planted, measured four feet above ground level.
Understory trees shall have a diameter of at least 1 1/2 inches
four feet above the ground. Shrubs shall be at least three feet
high when planted, while evergreens shall be at least five feet
high when planted.
A. Large-scale residential developments.
(1) This subsection shall apply when several buildings containing
dwelling units occupy the same lot, and assumes that nearly all
such buildings will be rectangular in shape. Large-scale residential
developments are possible as a special exception in the R-3, U-1,
C-1, C-2 and MU-1 Zone Districts. [Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-03]
(2) Parking lots on the property and access drives shall be separated
from adjacent property by a planted strip at least three feet wide.
(3) Parking lots must be constructed at the rear of the structure.
(4) In the MU-1 District, parking areas must maintain a minimum
distance of eight feet from any structure. [Added 2-2-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-03]
A. Permitted projections into minimum yard areas.
(1) Ground level projections (in accordance with § 460-21).
§ 460-39.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-39.3
1:517
(a) Paved areas, including driveways and parking areas, may
extend up to three feet from any side or rear property line. By
written agreement between neighboring property owners, filed
with the Borough, paved areas may extend to the common
property line. Only a driveway, not more than 18 feet wide,
and/or a walkway may cross a front yard or side yard abutting
a street. Paved parking areas may abut a secondary access
street with a right-of-way width not more than 25 feet at the
rear of a property.
(b) Any parking area in a residential zone district that is less than
six feet from a side or rear property line shall be bordered with
a planted evergreen hedge screen or fence between the edge
of the paving and the adjacent property line in accordance with
§ 460-39.1.
(c) In the case of a corner lot, no paved areas except driveways
and a secondary access street with a right-of-way width not
more than 25 feet at the rear of the property shall extend into
the minimum yard areas abutting either street.
(d) In the case of a corner lot, when a property cannot access
parking from the front or rear of the property, it may, with
written approval from the Planning and Zoning Department,
access parking from a side street with a right-of-way width not
more than 25 feet.
(e) Additional setbacks on lots in the C-1, C-2, and M-1 Zones
abutting any residential zone. Developers of lots in the C-1 or
C-2 Zone Districts that abut the side or rear lines of properties
in a residential zone shall set back buildings and paved areas
along such common lines as required for side or rear yard
setbacks in the abutting residential zone district.
(f) In the MU-1 District parking areas must maintain a minimum
distance of eight feet from any structure. [Added 2-2-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-03]
(g) All access to garages and parking areas in the R-1 and R-2
Zoning Districts must be paved when crossing the front yard
area. [Added 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
§ 460-39.3 INDIANA CODE § 460-39.3
1:518
ARTICLE VII
Nonconforming Uses
§ 460-40. Continuance.
The use of a property or building lawfully in existence prior to the effective
date of this chapter (September 3, 1963) but made nonconforming as the
result of the adoption of this chapter or any subsequent amendments may
be continued indefinitely except as provided by this article.
§ 460-41. Restoration.
Any nonconforming building or structure which is accidentally damaged or
destroyed in any way or is in a dilapidated condition may be restored or
rebuilt to be used as before, provided that the restoration or rebuilding does
not make the building or structure more nonconforming than previously
as to its height or setback from property lines, and provided further that
the restoration or rebuilding is completed within one year of the date the
damage or destruction occurred or the date of insurance settlement, unless
the Zoning Hearing Board finds a hardship is created by the one-year limit
and authorizes an additional year to complete the work.
§ 460-42. Expansion.
§ 460-43. Displacement.
A nonconforming use shall not be extended to displace or diminish a
conforming use.
§ 460-44. Discontinuance.
A. A nonconforming use or building may be expanded not more than 50%
over and above the area on the ground it occupied when this chapter
was adopted or amended to create the nonconformity, provided the
expansion does not violate any required minimum setbacks from
property lines, maximum lot coverage or maximum building height, or
§ 460-21B of this chapter regarding the extension of nonconforming
walls.
B. If one or more additional stories are to be added to the building to
accommodate the nonconforming use, the total floor area within the
building shall not be increased by more than 50%.
C. While expansion may occur incrementally over a period of time, the
total expansion of ground area and floor area for the nonconforming use
shall not exceed 50% over the area occupied when the nonconformity
was created.
D. Outside areas used in the conduct of a nonconforming use are subject
to the limitations of Subsection C.
§ 460-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-44
1:519
§ 460-45. Change of use.
§ 460-46. Transfer of ownership.
§ 460-47. Repair and maintenance.
A. If a nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of at least nine
months for any reason, use of the property thereafter shall be in
conformance with the regulations of this chapter.
B. Removal of stock-in-trade, furnishings and/or equipment used in the
nonconforming operation shall establish the date of discontinuance. A
good faith-active effort backed by written documentation on the part of
the owner to sell the nonconforming use in the same location shall
indicate an intent not to abandon. However, no active attempt to sell, or
lack of documentation, shall indicate an attempt to abandon.
C. The property owner may petition the Zoning Hearing Board for an
extension of up to nine additional months if he/she can prove illness or
financial crisis have created a hardship.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board may approve the change of a nonconforming
use to a second, less nonconforming use. The Board shall review the
proposal and may approve it, reject it or approve it with specific
conditions. [Amended 11-7-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-011; 5-3-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-02]
B. If a nonconforming use is changed to a conforming use, it may not
thereafter be changed to a nonconforming use.
C. Once a nonconforming use has been converted to a less nonconforming
use, it may not be changed to a more nonconforming use. Any time that
a nonconforming use is changed to a less nonconforming use, a
certificate shall be obtained from the Zoning Officer. [Amended
5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-02]
D. When a nonconforming use of a building or structure and outside area
of the same property exist in combination, the removal of the building
or structure shall terminate the nonconforming use of the premises
unless the owner files notice with the Zoning Officer that he/she intends
to replace the building or structure within one year of the date of
removal. The same shall apply to the removal of the nonconforming use
from the building or structure.
A. A nonconforming use may be sold, leased or bequeathed by one owner
to another party.
B. Each succeeding owner of a business nonconforming use shall request
approval from the Zoning Officer before commencing operation, to
assure that the use will be operated in the same manner as formerly. If
not, the Zoning Officer shall refer the owner to the Planning
Commission for a decision on the proposed changed use.
§ 460-44 INDIANA CODE § 460-47
1:520
§ 460-48. Letter of nonconformity. [Amended 5-3-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-02; 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
All nonconforming uses shall be issued a certificate documenting the
nonconforming use. The certificate shall be issued by the Zoning Office
to establish a nonconforming use status and its eligibilities for the rights
accorded to nonconforming uses by this article.
A. Normal maintenance and repair, and incidental alteration of a building
or structure containing a nonconforming use is permitted, provided it
does not extend the land or floor areas or volume of space occupied by
the nonconforming use.
B. Each succeeding owner of a business nonconforming use shall request
approval from the Zoning Office before commencing operation, to
assure that the use will be operated in the same manner as formerly. If
not, the Zoning Office shall refer the owner to the Zoning Hearing
Board for a decision on the proposed changed use. [Amended
2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
C. If a property owner secures a permit for a building to contain a use that
is permitted in the zone district where the property is located, he/she
may commence and complete construction within six months of getting
the permit, and may apply for permit renewals, even though this
chapter may be amended after the permit is issued that makes the use
and/or building nonconforming.
§ 460-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-48
1:521

ARTICLE VIII
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 460-49. Operation of Board.
A. Membership of the Zoning Hearing Board.
(1) Number; appointment; terms.
(a) The membership of the Board shall be five persons, all
residents of Indiana Borough, who shall be appointed by
resolution of Borough Council and may succeed themselves.
(b) Council may reduce the number of members to three, at its
option, by advertising as for a public hearing its intent to
reduce the membership at a specific regular meeting and then
by resolution, approved by a majority of the full Council, taking
such action. Existing terms shall be allowed to expire and
future terms of the three-member Board shall be for three
years with one appointment to fill an expired term each year.
(2) Members of the Board shall hold no other office in Indiana
Borough, either elective or appointed.
(3) Members of the Board shall be appointed for five-year staggered
terms, with not more than one appointment each year not later
than the March regular meeting of Council to refill a completed
term.
(4) Any member may be reappointed to another five-year term when a
preceding term is completed.
(5) Appointments to fill vacancies shall be made by Council for the
unexpired portion of a term only. The Zoning Hearing Board shall
promptly notify Council when a vacancy occurs.
B. Alternate members.
(1) Council may appoint by resolution one, two or three persons who
are residents of Indiana Borough as alternate members of the
Zoning Hearing Board for three-year terms. Such person or
persons may, at the direction of the Hearing Board Chairman,
replace a regular member who is unable to participate at the
beginning of a proceeding before the Board, and shall during the
proceeding function with the full authority of a regular Board
member. Alternate members shall serve on a case-by-case basis in
rotation beginning with the first alternate appointed.
(2) Such alternates shall hold no other office in Indiana Borough,
either elective or appointed. Any alternate may participate in any
proceeding or discussion of the Board but shall not be entitled to
vote unless designated as a voting replacement member.
§ 460-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-49
1:523
C. Removal of members.
(1) Any Board member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance
or nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of
the Borough Council, taken after the Board member has received at
least 15 days notice such vote will be taken.
(2) "Malfeasance" implies a deliberate illegal act; "misfeasance" means
acting mistakenly when there is a clearly correct way to act; and
"nonfeasance" means failure to act when an act is required.
Generally a pattern of misfeasance or nonfeasance could result in
Borough Council action, but one alleged act of malfeasance would
be sufficient for Council investigation.
(3) The Board member thus accused may request, by written
communication to the Borough Secretary no later than 15 days
prior to the meeting of the Council at which the vote for removal is
to be taken, hearing before Council after which Council, at its
discretion, may take a vote for removal of the Board member.
D. Organization of the Board.
(1) The Board shall elect officers from among its membership, to
include a Chairman and Vice Chairman.
(2) The Secretary shall call for a hearing upon receiving notice that a
request for a hearing has been made.
(3) The Board shall reorganize at its first meeting in each calendar
year.
(4) Board members may succeed themselves in their positions.
(5) The Chairman shall chair all meetings of the Board.
(6) The Vice Chairman shall act in the absence of the Chairman.
(7) A quorum shall be not less than a majority of all members of the
Board.
(8) The Board may make, alter, or rescind rules and forms for its
procedure consistent with this and other ordinances of Indiana
Borough and the law of the commonwealth.
(9) In conducting its business, the Board shall utilize Roberts Rules of
Order when procedural conflicts arise that are not addressed by
this article.
E. Secretary of the Board.
(1) Borough Council shall annually, not later than the March regular
meeting, appoint or reappoint the Secretary of the Zoning Hearing
Board, who shall not be a member of the Board.
§ 460-49 INDIANA CODE § 460-49
1:524
(2) The Secretary shall be responsible for scheduling public hearings,
placing of newspaper and letter notices and posting properties
affected by variance or special exception requests. In addition, the
Secretary shall arrange for a stenographer to record hearing
testimony verbatim, and shall distribute copies of the hearing
record requested by the parties.
(3) The Secretary shall keep minutes of the Board's proceedings,
noting the vote of each member on every motion, and shall
distribute the Board's decisions.
(4) A written record, noting the location and exact nature of each
variance and special exception, shall be kept by the Secretary and
be a public record.
(5) The Secretary shall keep full public records of the Board's business
and shall submit reports to Borough Council on the Board's actions
within 30 days after each action is taken.
F. Conflicts of interest.
(1) A member who has a conflict of interest with a case to be heard
shall excuse himself/herself from the hearing, in which case an
alternate, if such exists, may be appointed by the Chairman to hear
the case in place of the excused member.
(2) When the Board is unable to produce a quorum (three members) to
conduct a hearing because of conflict of interest, illness or
previously planned absence from the municipality, and sufficient
alternate members are not available, for the same reasons, to
complete the quorum, the Chairman may appoint one of the
available members or designate himself as a Hearing Officer to act
on behalf of the Board.
(3) The Hearing Officer shall conduct the hearing, and the parties to
the hearing, including the Borough, may prior to release of the
findings or decision, mutually agree to waive further action by the
Board as a whole and accept the findings or decision of the Hearing
Officer as final.
G. Expenditures for services.
(1) Within the limits of its annual budget, the Board may employ
secretarial, legal, technical, or other consulting services to assist it
in carrying out its duties.
(2) In setting fees for public hearings, Council may not include the
costs of legal services for the Board or expenses for technical
consultants or expert witnesses.
(3) The attorney retained by Borough Council shall not also provide
legal services for the Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 460-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-50
1:525
§ 460-50. Functions of Board.
A. General rules.
(1) Before acting on any request for a decision, the Zoning Hearing
Board shall consider the recommendations of the Planning
Commission which shall review each request and indicate to the
Board, as expressed in its meeting minutes, a favorable,
unfavorable or conditional reaction to the request, as well as a
record of its discussion on the matter.
(2) If the Board approves an action that will authorize the issuance of a
building permit, such a permit shall be in the possession of the
applicant within six months of the date of the Board's decision
unless the Board's decision grants a specific longer delay.
(3) If the Board denies an action, the applicant or his agent may not
resubmit the same or substantially the same request for action for
at least one year after the date of denial unless the Board
determines conditions affecting the application, such as changes in
the State Planning Code, warrant a rehearing.
B. Appeals from decisions of the Zoning Officer.
(1) The Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the
appellant that the Zoning Office has failed to follow prescribed
procedures or has misrepresented or misapplied any provision of
any ordinance governing land development adopted by Indiana
Borough. [Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
(2) Appeals may include, but are not limited to, the granting or denial
of a permit or failure to act on the application therefor; the
issuance or failure to issue any cease and desist order; or failure to
administer or improper administration of the flood hazard area
regulations.
C. Variances.
(1) The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is alleged that
the provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship upon the
applicant.
(2) Variance from the terms of this chapter shall not be granted by the
Board unless a written application for a variance is submitted in
advance of the hearing to the Secretary of the Board demonstrating
all of the following findings where relevant:
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including but not limited to irregularity, narrowness or
shallowness of lot size or shape or exceptional topographical or
other physical conditions peculiar to the particular property
and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions
and not the circumstances or conditions generally created by
§ 460-50 INDIANA CODE § 460-50
1:526
the provisions of this chapter in the neighborhood in which the
property is located;
(b) That, because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed in
strict conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that
the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable
the reasonable use of the property;
(c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant; and
(d) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood in which the property is located
nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or
development of adjacent property nor be detrimental to the
public welfare.
(3) In addition to the written statement described above, the applicant
shall submit a sketch plan prepared by a registered surveyor
showing the location of all boundary lines on the property proposed
for the variance, the position of building walls, and the required
and proposed dimensions between boundary line and wall that are
the subject of the variance.
(4) If authorized, the variance shall represent the least deviation from
the regulations that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in question.
(5) In granting a variance the Board may attach appropriate conditions
necessary to protect the intent of this chapter, the Comprehensive
Plan of Indiana Borough and the public health and safety.
D. Special exceptions.
(1) Special exceptions are listed for each zone district in Article III of
this chapter. Only those uses expressly listed as special exceptions
in a particular zone district may be considered for property within
that zone district.
(2) A landowner proposing a special exception to a particular property
shall submit a written statement and a site plan in support of the
project to the Zoning Hearing Board with copies of each provided
to the Board. [Amended 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-02]
(3) The written statement shall demonstrate, where applicable
considering the site, that the following concerns will be addressed:
(a) The applicant is the owner of record of the property to receive
the proposed use;
(b) The proposed use is a bona fide special exception based on a
detailed description of all aspects of the use;
§ 460-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-50
1:527
(c) The use will not endanger the public health, safety or welfare if
located where proposed, and will not deteriorate the
environment or generate nuisance conditions;
(d) The use is compatible with or will support the existing and
projected development in the neighborhood of the site;
(e) The use can be accommodated on the site within the lot area,
setback and coverage requirements of the zone district with
no, or at worst, minor variances from the terms of this chapter;
(f) The use will have access to public sanitary sewer and water
lines, and will drain to a storm sewer or established drainageway;
[Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
(g) The use will not create excessive traffic congestion or
dangerous conditions on streets abutting the property, unless
such congestion or dangerous conditions will be mitigated by
off-site improvements provided by the developer;
(h) Areas of the property to be disturbed but not to be covered by
buildings, driveways or parking will be landscaped and
maintained;
(i) Adequate off-street parking will be provided on the same
property as the use, in accordance with Article VI; and
(j) Access points to the property will be located as remote as
possible from street intersections, and adequate sight
distances will be available at access points for entering and
departing vehicles as well as for through traffic on abutting
roads.
(4) The accurately drawn and scaled illustrative site plan shall show
the arrangement of the proposed use on the site, including:
(a) Property lines around the periphery of the site;
(b) Uses on adjacent properties and across streets abutting the
applicant's property;
(c) Abutting streets, including paved and right-of-way widths and
intersections;
(d) Buildings existing and proposed on the site by use, height, and
number of stores;
(e) Point or points of access into the site from abutting streets;
(f) Internal driveways and parking area layout with each parking
space delineated;
(g) Signs to remain or proposed, indicating sign area, location
relative to road and property lines, and height;
§ 460-50 INDIANA CODE § 460-50
1:528
(h) Location of public sanitary sewer and water lines and storm
sewer lines or drainageways to which the property has access,
including sewer laterals serving the building on the property;
(i) Plan for collecting and disposing of stormwater; and
(j) If the proposal is commercial, business or institutional, the
location of proposed landscaping and other pertinent
information to illustrate the proposal.
(5) The Planning Commission shall review the written statement and
plan, and shall make recommendations to the Zoning Hearing
Board. The Commission's meeting minutes shall indicate that the
Commission views the proposal favorably, with reservations, or
without comments, and may include conditions recommended to be
attached to the Board's approval.
(6) The Zoning Hearing Board shall review the applicants presentation
and shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions, the proposed
special exception. Conditions shall be noted on the building permit
issued to erect the special exception. If the applicant does not
accept any or all of the conditions, the application shall be
considered denied. The conditions shall be designed to protect the
intent of this chapter and the public health and safety. [Amended
5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-02]
(7) Expansion of special exceptions.
(a) When approving a special exception application, the Board
shall be specific about exactly what is approved. Approval may
include future expansion, if requested by the applicant and
agreed to by the Board, but only for specific expansions on land
already owned by the applicant or under option to be
purchased by him/her.
(b) Any expansion proposed after the initial specific approval shall
require reapplication to the Board for approval.
(c) Any property in a use which is listed as a special exception in
Article III of this chapter for the zone district where the
property is located at the time of adoption of this chapter or
subsequent amendment affecting the property, may continue to
operate as usual, but if the owner proposes to expand the use,
he/she shall apply to the Board for special exception approval.
E. Challenges to the validity of this chapter.
(1) The Board shall hear substantive challenges to the validity of this
chapter, except those brought as curative amendments, which shall
be considered by Borough Council; and challenges raising
procedural questions or alleged defects in the process of
enactment or adoption of an ordinance or an amendment, provided
§ 460-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-50
1:529
such challenge is brought to the Board within 30 days after the
effective date of the ordinance or amendment.
(2) A substantive challenge may be brought by a landowner who
contends that any part of a land development ordinance prohibits
or restricts the proposed use or development of his land, or by
persons aggrieved by a use or development permitted on lands of
another party by any part of such an ordinance.
(3) The appellant shall file a written request with the Secretary of the
Board for a hearing on his challenge. Such a request shall include
the reasons for the challenge, the use or development proposed in
lieu of that permitted by the challenged section of the ordinance,
and other relevant materials in support of the challenge.
(4) In making its decision on a substantive challenge, the Board shall
consider, in addition to the filed statement, evidence of the impact
of the proposed use or development on municipal services and
facilities; the extent to which the use or development provides lowand/
or moderate-income housing units if it is a residential plan; the
suitability of the site for the proposed intensity of the use; and the
effect of the development or use upon soils, slopes, woodlands,
drainage, floodplains, aquifers, and natural features.
(5) If the Board finds the challenge has merit, the Board's decision
shall include recommended amendments to the challenged
ordinance which will cure the defects found.
(6) The public notice on a hearing for a challenge shall state that the
validity of the ordinance is challenged and shall specify the specific
part of the particular ordinance whose validity is in question. The
notice shall also indicate where and when plans, documents and/or
proposed amendments may be examined prior to the hearing.
(7) The challenge shall be deemed to have been denied if the Board
fails to commence the hearing within 60 days of receiving the
request, or the Board fails to act on the request within 45 days after
the end of the hearing.
F. Determinations upon nonconforming uses.
(1) The Board shall hear appeals when an applicant proposes to
change an existing legitimate nonconforming use to a second
nonconforming use.
(2) If approving a nonconforming use, the Board shall determine that
the proposed nonconforming use is more compatible with the uses
permitted in the zone district than the preceding nonconforming
use and will not downgrade the neighborhood of which it is a part.
§ 460-50 INDIANA CODE § 460-50
1:530
§ 460-51. Hearings; preliminary activities.
§ 460-52. Hearing procedures.
(3) The Board may attach conditions to approval designed to minimize
or eliminate any negative impacts of the proposed nonconforming
use.
A. An appeal, challenge, or request for a variance or special exception or
other action may be filed, in writing, with the Secretary of the Board by,
or on behalf of, any owner of land in the Borough, by any tenant wishing
a variance with the permission of his landowner, by any officer or
agency of the Borough, or by any aggrieved person.
B. When a request for a hearing is received by the Secretary of the Zoning
Hearing Board, the Board shall schedule and commence the hearing
within 60 days, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an
extension.
C. Hearings shall be conducted by the Board or by a Hearing Officer
member, whose decision, or findings where no decision is required, may
be considered final by the parties prior to the decision, requiring no
further action by the Board.
D. The parties to a hearing shall be the Borough, the appellant, and
anyone affected by the application and/or any civic or community
organization who or which requests, in writing, the opportunity to
appear prior to the hearing, or on appearance forms provided at the
hearing.
E. Notice of a hearing shall be mailed at least 14 days before the hearing
to all parties of the hearing, and in addition to the Zoning Office,
Borough Council and to owners of properties within 100 feet of any
boundary of the property or properties affected by the hearing, and
within 200 feet from the boundaries along both sides of the street upon
which the property or properties front, as well as to others who have
filed a timely request to receive notice. [Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-03]
F. Public notice shall be placed twice in a newspaper of general local
circulation, once in each of two consecutive weeks, the first not more
than 30 days and the second notice not less than seven days before the
hearing. In addition, if a variance or special exception approval is
sought, or an appeal requested, notice shall be placed conspicuously on
the affected property and posted at the Borough Building at least seven
days before the hearing.
G. Newspaper and letter notices shall indicate the date, time, and place of
the hearing and the specific nature of the matter to be heard.
A. The Chairman or Hearing Officer shall conduct the hearing and shall
have the power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel
§ 460-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-52
1:531
attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant documents,
including those witnesses and documents requested by the parties.
B. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall
have the opportunity to respond and present evidence and arguments,
and to cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues. Formal
rules of evidence shall not apply but irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence may be excluded.
C. The Board shall cause to have kept a stenographic record of the
proceedings. The appearance fee for a stenographer shall be shared
equally by the applicant and the Board. The cost of the original
transcript shall be paid for by the Board, if the Board requests it, or by
the appellant if contesting a decision of the Board. Any other transcript
of the proceedings and/or copies of graphic or written material received
in evidence shall be made available to any party at cost to that party.
D. The Board or the Hearing Officer shall not communicate, directly or
indirectly, with any party and/or representatives of any party in
connection with any issue relevant to the hearing, except upon notice
and opportunity for all parties to participate; shall not take notice of any
communications, reports or other materials, except advice from the
Board's solicitor, unless all parties are afforded an opportunity to
contest the material so noticed; and shall not inspect any site or its
surroundings with any party and/or representative of any party after
the start of hearings unless all parties are given an opportunity to be
present.
E. The Board or Hearing Officer shall render a written decision, or, when
no decision is required, written findings on the application within 45
days after the conclusion of the hearing before the Board or Hearing
Officer. When the application is contested or denied, the decision shall
be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based on them
together with the reasons therefor.
F. If the hearing is conducted by a Hearing Officer and there has been no
stipulation that the Hearing Officer's decision or findings are final, the
Board shall make the Officer's report and recommendations available
within 45 days after the hearing to the parties who shall be entitled to
make written representations thereon to the Board which shall convene
as a whole and render a final decision and entry of findings not later
than 30 days after the Hearing Officer's decision.
G. When the Board or Hearing Officer fails to render a decision within 45
days after hearing the application, or fails to hold the public hearing
within 60 days of receiving the request for one, the decision shall be
deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant, unless the
applicant and Board have agreed, in writing, to a specific time
extension.
H. A copy of the final decision, or the findings if no decision is required,
shall be mailed to the applicant no later than the day after the date of
§ 460-52 INDIANA CODE § 460-52
1:532
§ 460-53. Zoning appeals.
the decision. All others requesting notice of the decision not later than
the last day of the hearing shall receive by mail a brief summary of
the findings or decision and a statement of the place at which the full
decision or findings may be examined.
A. Once the Zoning Office has acted on a development proposal pursuant
to the regulations of this chapter, any party may appeal the decision to
the Zoning Hearing Board not later than 30 days after the Zoning Office
has issued a permit, unless the appealing party can prove he/she had no
knowledge of the decision within the thirty-day period. Before taking
action, the Board shall consider recommendations and a written record
from the Planning Commission. A second party succeeding in interest
shall be bound by the first party's knowledge. [Amended 2-2-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-03]
B. Upon the filing of an appeal to overturn or limit an approved action, and
while an appeal is pending before the Board, any development affected
by the appeal shall be halted unless the Zoning Office certifies to the
Board that suspension would cause imminent peril to life and property.
In this case, suspension will occur only by a restraining order granted
by the Board or Indiana County Court. When an application for
development has been duly approved, and proceedings intended to
reverse or limit the approval are filed with the Board by persons other
than the applicant, the applicant shall have the right to petition the
Court to require the appealing party to post a bond as a condition of
continuing the appeal, the amount to be determined by the Court. The
Court shall hear the petition, determine whether the appeal is frivolous,
and if so, may require the posting of the bond. [Amended 2-2-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-03]
C. Appeals from decision of the Board, or upon reports of the Board in
proceedings to challenge the validity of any ordinance, shall be filed
within 30 days of the decision or completion of the report, with the
Clerk of Indiana County Court of Common Pleas.
§ 460-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-53
1:533

ARTICLE IX
Administration
§ 460-54. Duties of Zoning Official. [Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-03]
§ 460-55. Zoning permits. [Amended 6-22-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-07; 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-02]
A. The Zoning Office shall administer, enforce, and interpret this chapter
in accordance with its literal terms. He shall be appointed by and be
responsible to Borough Council, shall demonstrate to Council a working
knowledge of municipal zoning, and shall hold no elective office in the
Borough. The Zoning Office need not be a resident of Indiana Borough,
and compensation for the position shall be at the discretion of Council.
B. The Zoning Office shall receive and process applications for building
permits and permission to occupy in accordance with this chapter, and
shall not permit any construction or any use or change of use which
does not conform to this chapter.
C. The Zoning Office shall investigate alleged violations and take action in
accordance with § 460-57 of this chapter. He shall also testify before the
Zoning Hearing Board on contested decisions he has made or when
otherwise called to testify.
D. All questions of interpretation of this chapter shall be first presented to
the Zoning Office, who shall make a decision thereon based on literal
interpretation. The decision may be appealed to the Zoning Hearing
Board, which shall act after receiving recommendations and a written
record from the Planning Commission.
E. The Zoning Official shall attend all meetings of the Planning
Commission and the Zoning Hearing Board, and meetings of the
Borough Council, as required by the Borough Manager.
F. In addition, the Zoning Official shall represent the Borough at hearings
before the Magisterial District Judge (see § 460-56C), shall maintain
public files of all permits issued and applications processed, shall
attend meetings of Council at its request to provide reports of his
activities (see § 460-55H), and shall examine permitted work in
progress (see § 460-55D).
A. No person shall erect, alter or convert any structure or building or part
thereof, nor alter the use of any land until a zoning permit has been
issued by the Zoning Office. [Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-03]
B. An application for a zoning permit shall include the following in
duplicate on forms provided by the Zoning Office. A site plan may be
waived by the Zoning Office if the application includes no construction
§ 460-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-55
1:535
outside the existing buildings on the lot. [Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-03]
(1) A site plan drawn to scale showing the location of the proposed new
construction on the property relative to property boundaries and
abutting street with distances indicated; the location of driveway
entrances, signs, and off-street parking areas noting the
arrangement and number of spaces; method of collecting and
draining stormwater runoff, and any grading contemplated;
(2) A statement describing the proposed use of the new construction
and the length, width, and height of its components, as well as the
number of dwellings and/or commercial units to be included;
(3) Evidence of compliance with the Indiana Borough Building Code
and State Department of Labor and Industry if appropriate;
(4) Highway occupancy permit, if access to property is from a state
highway, as well as method of maintaining flow line along edge of
road to which property has access where driveway will intersect
road; and
(5) Such additional information as the Zoning Officer may require to
secure conformance with other Borough ordinances; and/or to alert
the applicant to regulations of state or federal agencies that may
impact his project.
C. If the application is satisfactory, the Zoning Office shall inspect the
premises where the construction is proposed to occur. It shall be the
responsibility of the property owner to locate proposed edges of
construction and adjacent property lines. [Amended 2-2-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-03]
D. The Zoning Office may from time to time visit the property whereon the
approved construction is taking place in order to assure himself that the
work is proceeding in accordance with the Zoning permit. The Zoning
Office shall not be denied access to the property during normal working
hours in order to inspect the construction in progress, and may order
the work corrected to conform to the permit or halted pending appeal
to the Zoning Hearing Board. [Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-03]
E. If an applicant wishes to amend the use, arrangement or construction of
his building from that shown on the permit after the permit is approved,
he shall file with the Zoning Office an application for an amended
zoning permit. [Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
F. Zoning permits shall have a life of six months from the date of issue. A
permit may be renewed indefinitely every six months thereafter at no
charge to the applicant until the permitted work is complete. No work
shall be done after a permit has become void and before a replacement
permit has been issued.
§ 460-55 INDIANA CODE § 460-55
1:536
§ 460-56. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
G. A demolition permit shall be required for the removal of any building or
part of any building on a permanent foundation. The application shall
secure a bond acceptable to the Borough to guarantee that the
excavation is backfilled, debris removed, and that sanitary sewers are
blocked and inspected, all within 60 days of the demolition permit's
date of issue.
H. The Zoning Office shall keep records of all applications, either approved
or disapproved, including one copy of each permit issued, and shall
maintain a journal of his activities. [Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-03]
A. If the Zoning Officer finds any provisions of this chapter are being
violated, such as the operation of an illegal use or the locating of a
structure illegally on a lot, he shall notify the owner of record of the
property upon which the alleged violation is occurring by mail or handdelivered
notice, with a copy to the Borough Secretary and to others
requested by the property owner.
B. The enforcement notice shall state:
(1) The owner's name and that of any other person against whom the
Borough intends to take action;
(2) The location of the property in violation;
(3) The specific violation with a description of the requirements that
have not been met, citing applicable provisions of this chapter;
(4) The dates before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and completed;
(5) A statement that the recipient may appeal the notice to the Zoning
Hearing Board within 30 days of the notice's date; and
(6) A statement that failure to comply with the notice constitutes a
violation subject to § 460-56D of this chapter.
C. At the end of the period within which the violation is to be corrected,
the Zoning Officer shall inspect the property to determine if the
violation has been removed. If the violation has not been corrected and
the owner has not appealed to the Zoning Hearing Board to reverse the
Zoning Officer's decision, modify it, or grant a time extension, the
Zoning Officer shall take the owner before the Magisterial District
Judge, who, if he finds the owner guilty, shall assess penalties and/or
order appropriate action in accord with Subsection D below.
D. Continuation of a violation beyond the period within which it is to be
corrected, without an appeal having been filed, shall constitute a civil
offense. While an appeal is in process, development shall not continue
on the contested portion of the project. Any person, partnership, or
§ 460-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-56
1:537
§ 460-57. Amendments.
corporation who or which has violated or permitted the violation of
the provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor
in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Borough, pay
a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough as a result thereof.
No judgment shall be imposed or payable until the date of the
determination of the violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Borough
may enforce the judgment pursuant to applicable rules of civil
procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation. The Magisterial District Judge shall determine on
which day the violation actually commenced. All judgments, costs and
reasonable attorneys' fees collected for a violation shall be paid over to
the Borough.
E. The owner or tenant of any structure, premises or part thereof and any
architect, engineer, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who
commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains a violation may each
be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein
provided.
F. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Borough from taking such
other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation or
to bring action to enjoin any violation of this chapter.
G. The Zoning Official or the designated staff member shall notify the new
owner at the time of transfer, in writing, advising the new owner of the
number of legal occupants. Such notification should meet all the
requirements of this chapter to notify the owner of the number of legal
occupants for the property. [Added 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-02;
amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
A. An amendment of this chapter may be initiated by the Planning
Commission, by the Borough Council or by petition presented to the
Planning Commission by a property owner or owners, or by a person or
corporation who or which has an option to purchase property in the
Borough. The proposed amendment or petition shall be written as
proposed to be adopted. Revisions to the Zoning Map shall be specified,
in writing, citing particular boundaries. Spot zoning shall be prohibited
unless backed by a Planning Commission report on the future land use
of the neighborhood within which the proposed zoning is located,
supporting the amendment.
B. The Planning Commission shall review an amendment petition or a
proposal by Borough Council and prepare recommendations to Council
not later than the Commission's second regular meeting after receiving
the proposal. The Commission may recommend approval of the
proposal as presented, approval with specific changes, or rejection. If
the proposal is made by Borough Council, Council shall allow the
§ 460-56 INDIANA CODE § 460-57
1:538
Commission at least 30 days to review and comment on the proposal
before taking action. [Amended 10-5-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-06]
(1) In order for an amendment to the text of this chapter of the
Borough of Indiana to be considered by the Planning Commission, a
petition containing a minimum of 40 signatures must be presented
for the Planning Commission to consider such a change.
(2) In order for an amendment to the Tax Map for the boundaries of a
zoned area to be considered for rezoning by the Planning
Commission of the Borough of Indiana, a petition containing the
signatures of the owners of a minimum of 60% of the lot front
footage of those property owners within the area proposed for the
rezoning must be presented to the Planning Commission to
consider such a change.
C. Borough Council, if it finds the amendment proposal has merit, shall
call and hold a public hearing after reviewing the Commission's
recommendations. In addition, the Board shall send the proposal to the
Indiana County Planning Commission for review and comment at least
30 days before the hearing.
D. Borough Council shall advertise for its hearing twice in a newspaper of
general local circulation, once in each of two consecutive weeks, the
first notice not more than 30 days and the second notice not less than
seven days before the hearing. The notice shall contain the full text of
the amendment or a summary, reference to a place and times where
and when the amendment may be examined free of charge before the
hearing, and the date, time, place, and purpose of the hearing.
E. In addition, where a change of zoning district boundary is sought, the
property or group of properties affected shall be posted in at least one
conspicuous location not less than seven days before the hearing with
the same information as in the hearing advertisement, owners of
property within, abutting, or directly across a street from the
boundaries of an area proposed for a change of zoning classification
shall be informed by hand delivered notice or by mail at least 14 days
before the hearing with the same information. The applicant shall
receive his/her notice by certified mail.
F. Borough Council shall hold the hearing, keeping a written or sound
record of the testimony, and shall make a decision by majority vote to
adopt or reject the amendment within 90 days after the vote. Council
shall submit a copy of the adopted ordinance to the County Planning
Commission, indicating the date of adoption and the numerical vote
favoring adoption.
G. At least seven days but not more than 60 days before adoption of an
amendment, Council shall advertise once in a newspaper of general
local circulation a notice of its intention to adopt the amendment. The
notice shall include the date, time and place of the meeting at which
§ 460-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-57
1:539
adoption will be considered, and reference to a place in the Borough,
and times and dates where and when the amendment may be examined
prior to adoption. The notice shall either contain the full text of the
amendment or a brief summary prepared by the Borough Solicitor. If
the full text is not used, a copy of the full text shall be provided to the
newspaper running the notice, and an attested copy of the full text shall
be filed in the County Law Library.
H. If an amendment is substantially revised before the vote to adopt,
Borough Council shall, at least 10 days prior to adoption re-advertise,
noting a brief summary of the amendment and specifying the final
changes proposed. Appeal from a decision by Council on an amendment
proposal shall be to the Indiana County Court of Common Pleas.
[Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
I. Curative amendment.
(1) An owner of land in the Borough who wishes to challenge on
substantive grounds the validity of any part of this chapter or map
which prohibits or restricts the use or development of his/her land
may submit a curative amendment to Borough Council with a
written request that the challenge and proposed amendment be
heard and decided.
(2) Council shall commence the hearing after public notice within 60
days of receiving the request. The hearing shall be conducted in
accordance with § 460-52 of this chapter but the words "Borough
Council" shall be substituted for "Zoning Hearing Board." Council,
at least 30 days before the hearing, shall refer the amendment
proposal to both the Borough and County Planning Commissions
for recommendations.
(3) Council may accept a landowner curative amendment with or
without revision, or may adopt an alternate amendment to cure the
challenge. In making its decision, the Board shall consider the
factors contained in § 460-50D(4). Within 45 days after the
conclusion of the hearing, Council shall render its decision and
immediately notify the landowner.
(4) The curative amendment will be deemed to have been denied if
Council fails to commence the hearing within 60 days, notifies the
landowner it will not adopt the amendment, adopts an amendment
unacceptable to the landowner, or fails to act on the request within
45 days after the end of the hearing.
(5) If the curative amendment is accepted, the landowner shall file for
a building permit based on such acceptance within one year of the
decision, or if land development or subdivision plans are required a
two-year lapse shall be permitted. In either case, during these
periods, no amendment to this chapter or any land development
§ 460-57 INDIANA CODE § 460-57
1:540
§ 460-58. Schedule of fees.
§ 460-59. Enactment.
ordinance shall be applied to adversely affect the owner's rights as
granted by the curative amendment.
(6) If Borough Council determines that this chapter or any specific
part, including the map or a part thereof, is substantially invalid,
Council shall so declare, and propose to prepare amendments to
cure the invalidities.
(7) Within 30 days after the declaration, Council shall by resolution
make findings specifying the invalidities which it proposes to cure,
referring to uses which are not permitted or not permitted in
sufficient quantity, classes of uses which require revision, or to the
entire ordinance.
(8) Within 180 days of the declaration, Council shall enact a curative
amendment to cure the invalidity or reaffirm the ordinance as it
stood prior to the declaration.
(9) From the date of the declaration; neither Council nor the Zoning
Hearing Board shall be required to receive curative amendments or
substantive challenges until either the amendment under
consideration has been adopted or the ordinance has been
reaffirmed. Council shall not declare a second municipal curative
amendment until at least three years after disposing of a previous
amendment, unless changes in the State Planning Code or a court
decision in the interim require amendment of the ordinance.
A. Borough Council shall establish, by resolution, a schedule of fees to
cover the cost of permits, special exception approvals, petitions to
amend this chapter, or any action brought before the Zoning Hearing
Board.
B. The current fee schedule shall be available at the Borough office and
may be amended only by official resolution of Council.
C. No permit shall be issued nor any action taken on proceedings before
Council or the Zoning Hearing Board until the appropriate fees have
been paid in full.
A. This chapter is required for the immediate protection of the public
health, safety, and welfare and shall be effective upon its passage and
signing by the President of Borough Council and the Borough Secretary.
B. This chapter has been duly presented after public hearings and adopted
at a regular meeting of the Borough Council of Indiana Borough,
Indiana County, Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania, held on the third day of
March 1998.
§ 460-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-60
1:541
§ 460-60. Conditional uses. [Added 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-04]
A. Filing of conditional use. For any use permitted by conditional use, a
conditional use must be obtained from the Borough Council. In addition
to the information required on the zoning permit application, the
conditional use application must show:
(1) Ground floor plans and elevations of proposed structures;
(2) Names and addresses of adjoining property owners, including
properties directly across a public right-of-way;
(3) A scaled drawing (site plan) of the site with sufficient detail and
accuracy to demonstrate compliance with all applicable provisions
of this chapter; and
(4) A written description of the proposed use in sufficient detail to
demonstrate compliance with all applicable provisions of this
chapter.
B. General criteria. Each applicant must demonstrate compliance with the
following:
(1) The proposed use shall be consistent with the purpose and intent of
this chapter;
(2) The proposed use shall not detract from the use and enjoyment of
adjoining or nearby properties;
(3) The proposed use will not effect a change in the character of the
subject property's neighborhood;
(4) Adequate public facilities are available to serve the proposed use
(e.g., schools, fire, police and ambulance protection, sewer, water,
and other utilities, vehicular access, etc.);
(5) The proposed use must comply with all applicable regulations of
this chapter; and
(6) The proposed use will not substantially impair the integrity of the
Borough's Comprehensive Plan.
C. Conditions. Borough Council, in approving conditional use applications,
may attach conditions considered necessary to protect the public
welfare and the purposes listed above, including conditions which are
more restrictive than those established for other uses in the same zone.
These conditions shall be enforceable by the Zoning Office, and failure
to comply with such conditions shall constitute a violation of this
chapter and be subject to the penalties described in this chapter.
[Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
D. Site plan approval. Any site plan presented in support of the conditional
use pursuant to Subsection A shall become an official part of the record
for said conditional use. Approval of any conditional use will also bind
§ 460-60 INDIANA CODE § 460-60
1:542
the use in accordance with the submitted site plan; therefore, should
a change in the site plan be required as part of the approval of the
use, the applicant shall revise the site plan prior to the issuance of
a building permit. Any subsequent change to the use on the subject
property not reflected on the originally approved site plan shall require
the obtainment of another conditional use approval.
E. Hearing procedures.
(1) Before voting on the approval of a conditional use, Borough Council
shall hold a public hearing thereon pursuant to public notice.
Borough Council shall submit each such application to the Borough
Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to the hearing on such
application, to provide the Borough Planning Commission an
opportunity to submit recommendations. If after any public hearing
held upon an application, the proposed application is revised,
Borough Council shall hold another public hearing, pursuant to
public notice, before proceeding to vote on the application.
(2) Public notice, as defined herein, and written notice shall be given to
the applicant, the Zoning Officer, such other persons as the
Borough Council shall designate by ordinance, and to any person
who has made timely request for the same. Written notices shall be
given at such time and in such manner as shall be prescribed by
ordinance or, in the absence of an ordinance provision, by rules of
Borough Council. In addition to the written notice provide herein,
public notice shall also include the posting of a sign at conspicuous
locations along the perimeter of the subject property deemed
sufficient by the Borough to notify potentially interested citizens.
This sign(s) shall be posted at least one week prior to the hearing
and will include the nature, date, time, and location of the hearing.
(3) Borough Council may prescribe reasonable fees with respect to
hearings. Fees for said hearings may include compensation for the
Secretary, notice, and advertising costs, and necessary
administrative overhead connected with the hearing. The costs,
however, shall not include legal expenses, expenses for
engineering, architectural, or other technical consultants, or
expert witness costs.
(4) The parties to the hearing shall be the Borough, any person
affected by the application who has made timely appearance of
record before the Borough Council, and any other person, including
civic or community organizations permitted to appear by the
Borough Council. The Borough Council shall have power to require
that all persons who wish to be considered parties enter
appearances, in writing, on forms provided by the Borough Council
for that purpose.
(5) The President of Borough Council shall have power to administer
oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses
§ 460-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-60
1:543
and the production of relevant documents and papers, including
witnesses and documents requested by the parties.
(6) The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel, and
shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence
and argument, and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant
issues.
(7) Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial,
or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
(8) Borough Council may keep a stenographic record of the
proceedings. The appearance fee for a stenographer shall be
shared equally by the applicant and Borough Council. The cost of
the original transcript shall be paid by Borough Council, if the
transcript is ordered by Borough Council; or shall be paid by the
person appealing the decision of Borough Council, if such appeal is
made, and, in either event, the cost of additional copies shall be
paid by the person requesting such copy or copies. In other cases,
the party requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost
thereof.
(9) Borough Council shall not communicate, directly or indirectly, with
any party or his representative in connection with any issue
involved, except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to
participate, shall not take notice of any communication, reports,
staff memoranda, or other materials, except advice from their
solicitor, unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest
the material so noticed and shall not inspect the site or its
surroundings after the commencement of hearing with any party or
his representative, unless all parties are given an opportunity to be
present.
F. Time limitation.
(1) If a conditional use is granted, the necessary permit shall be
secured, and the authorized action begun within two years after
the date when the conditional use is finally granted, and the
building or alteration, as the case may be, shall be completed
within three years of that date. For good cause, Borough Council
may at any time, upon application in writing, extend either of these
deadlines.
(2) Should the appellant or applicant fail to obtain the necessary
permits within the two-year period, or having obtained the permit,
should he fail to commence work thereunder within such two-year
period, it shall be conclusively presumed that the appellant or
applicant has waived, withdrawn, or abandoned his application,
and all approvals and permits granted to him shall be deemed
automatically rescinded by Borough Council.
§ 460-60 INDIANA CODE § 460-60
1:544
(3) Should the appellant commence construction or alteration within
the two-year period, but should he fail to complete such
construction or alteration within the three-year period, Borough
Council may, upon 10 days' notice, in writing, rescind or revoke the
granted conditional use, if Borough Council finds that no good
cause appears for the failure to complete within such three-year
period, and if Borough Council further finds that conditions have
altered or changed in the interval since the granting of the
conditional use that revocation or rescission of the action is
justified.
(4) As an alternative to the preceding, an applicant can request, as
part of the original application before Borough Council, the
granting of a timetable associated with the request which would
supersede the deadlines imposed in Subsection E. In so doing, the
applicant must demonstrate that the times requested are logically
related to normal and expected progress of the project. In
approving a timetable under this section, Borough Council must
establish a definite time frame for issuance of a zoning permit and
completion of construction of the project.
§ 460-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-60
1:545

ARTICLE X
Terminology
§ 460-61. Word usage.
The following definitions shall be used in the interpretation and
construction of this chapter. Words used in the present tense include the
future tense; the singular includes the plural and the plural the singular;
the words "person" or "developer" include a firm, association, partnership,
trust, company or corporation as well as an individual; the masculine
includes the feminine; the word "shall" is mandatory and not optional and
the word "may" is permissive; the words "used" or "occupied" include
the words "arranged, designed, constructed, altered, converted, rented,
leased, maintained, or intended to be" used or occupied; and words used in
this chapter and not otherwise defined in this article shall have the same
meaning as in a standard dictionary.
§ 460-62. Definitions.
ABUTTING — Touching along a common boundary line, including directly
across an intervening street.
ACCESS AISLE — An unobstructed vehicular passage in a parking lot,
directly abutting a row of parking spaces and connecting to other aisles
and to public streets, designed to provide maneuvering space for drivers
entering and leaving the parking spaces.
ACCESSORY USE — An activity or use that is incidental to, and generally
found in connection with the principal use on the lot (see § 460-22). An
accessory building contains an accessory use.
AMENDMENT — Any addition, deletion or revision of this chapter text or
Map officially adopted by the Borough Council after public hearing (see
§ 460-57).
AMUSEMENT ENTERPRISE — A leisure activity or recreation, usually in a
confined area, for which a charge is assessed for the use of the facility and/
or equipment.
APARTMENT BUILDING — A building containing at least three dwelling
units; also a multiple-family dwelling.
APPEAL — A petition made to the next higher level of authority by a party
wishing to pursue or protest a development issue that has been denied or
approved at a lower level or by a public official, asking for reversal of the
earlier decision.
APPELLANT — A party with the legal standing to file a petition to appeal an
official action of a public body.
APPLICATION — A comprehensive description in words and precise
drawings of a proposed development of a property as a basis for the
municipality to approve or deny the plan or require conditions to be
attached to approval.
§ 460-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-62
1:547
ATHLETIC COMPLEX — A facility wholly devoted to the provision of
equipped spaces, athletic equipment, and supporting services designed to
promote physical fitness and athletic competition, usually on a membership
basis or provided by an institution.
AUTO SERVICE STATION — A business facility that provides fuel and oil for
vehicles and may sell auto accessories and traveler convenience goods and
provide minor auto service and maintenance, but does not offer collision
repair or painting or the storage of damaged or abandoned vehicles. Minor
service shall be limited to spark plug, battery and tire repair and servicing;
replacement of mufflers, tailpipes, hoses, belts, fluids, bulbs, windshield
wipers and minor fittings; radiator cleaning and flushing; washing,
polishing and lubrication, brake adjustment or installation; carburetor, fuel
pump and fuel line replacement or servicing; minor engine tuning; and
emergency starting services.[Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
BACK-OFFICE OPERATIONS — Business activities in an office setting that
do not allow face-to-face contact with clients or customers, usually involving
record keeping, billing, bookkeeping and similar operations.
BALCONY — A platform without enclosing walls attached to a building
along one or more edges, but with no supporting connection to the ground.
BASEMENT — The story within a building whose floor level is not more than
1/2 the vertical distance below the average finished grade of the outside
ground level, and has windows not within window wells on at least one
wall. Apartments with such windows may occupy basements, but not cellars
where the floor level is more than 1/2 the distance below the average
finished grade outside.
BAY WINDOW — A projection from the wall of a building containing
windows and supported only by the wall.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A single-family detached dwelling the owneroccupant
of which accepts a limited number of overnight paying guests
occupying existing bedrooms in the dwelling, and serves only breakfast to
the guests.
BEDROOM — A room within a dwelling used permanently or occasionally
for sleeping purposes and at least meeting area and window opening
requirements of Chapter 327, Property Maintenance, of the Code of the
Borough of Indiana for the number of occupants using the room.
BLIGHTING CONDITIONS — A combination of physical and environmental
conditions that creates deterioration of a property and discourages
maintenance.
BOARDINGHOUSE/ROOMING HOUSE — A single-family detached dwelling
whose owner accepts not more than two persons not related to the family
occupying the dwelling as permanent residents in the dwelling in return for
compensation to the family and in accordance with Chapter 327, Property
Maintenance, of the Code of the Borough of Indiana. If meals are not
provided such persons, the dwelling shall be considered a rooming house.
§ 460-62 INDIANA CODE § 460-62
1:548
BOROUGH — All the land and improvements within the corporate
boundaries of Indiana Borough, Indiana County, PA.
BUFFERING — Natural plantings, fences and/or walls placed along the
perimeter of a property to protect residential development from abutting
commercial or other activity that would deteriorate the enjoyment or value
of the residential property (see § 460-23B).
BUILDING — Any man-made structure attached to or into the ground
and having a roof supported by columns or walls used for the shelter
or enclosure of persons, businesses or other enterprises and activities
associated with any of them.
BUILDING OR SETBACK LINE — A line, or part of such line, that describes
the limits of building construction within a lot, set back from lot lines the
depths of front, side and rear yards for each property, depending upon
which zone district the lot is located in.
BUILDING, FRONT WALL OF — The wall facing the primary street to which
the lot containing the building has its access, or, if the lot does not abut a
primary street, the wall containing the principal entrance to the building.
BUILDING PRINCIPAL — The building in which is conducted the principal
use of the lot on which it is located. A dwelling shall be considered the
principal building on a residential lot. In some business or multifamily
dwelling developments there may be several principal buildings containing
the same use.
BUSINESS SCHOOL — A facility providing vocational training and
instruction not affiliated with or supported by any public school district, and
operated as a business.
CANOPY — A lightweight device attached to and extending from the wall of
a building, usually to protect windows and doors, and capable of supporting
only its own weight. Canopies include awnings, which are retractable
canopies.
CANOPY TREE — A deciduous tree with umbrella-like upper branch
systems that creates shade on the ground and allows pedestrian circulation
around the trunk of the tree when mature.
CELLAR — See "basement."
CHALLENGE, PROCEDURAL — An appeal challenging the actions taken
by elected officials or appointed bodies of the Borough for failing to follow
prescribed procedures in the adoption of an ordinance or amendment,
scheduling or holding a public hearing, or enforcement of the ordinance.
CHALLENGE, SUBSTANTIVE — An appeal brought against an ordinance
or amendment on the grounds that such ordinance or amendment unfairly
places a heavy burden on one or more private property interests without
compensation or advance of the public health and safety.
CLEAR SIGHT LINES — A visual path kept free of obstructions that allows
vehicle drivers approaching an intersection to see one another and thus
avoid a potential collision.
§ 460-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-62
1:549
CLINIC, HEALTH SERVICES — An establishment offering medical, dental,
or chiropractic services employing not more than three licensed doctors,
dentists or chiropractors, not including assistants directed by the
principals.
CLUBS, LODGES and NONUNIVERSITY FRATERNAL ORGANIZATIONS —
An establishment operated for social, recreational or educational purposes,
open only to members and their guests, but not the general public unless
invited, and not affiliated with or sanctioned by Indiana University of
Pennsylvania.
CHURCH — The building, containing as the central room, the sanctuary and
meeting place of a religious congregation, including no dwelling in the same
building.
COMMON WALL, FLOOR OR CEILING — A common wall is a vertical
monolithic wall whose surfaces on either side are interior walls of separate
dwelling units or other occupancy units, without connections through the
wall between the units. A common floor and ceiling is a horizontal
monolithic element separating units above and below, such element free of
openings except for chimneys, pipe chases, or stair or elevator connections
between floors.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES — A statement attaching this
chapter to the municipal Comprehensive Plan with reference to land use,
density of population, and location and function of streets, utilities, and
community facilities.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A document based on an analysis of past trends
and current conditions in a municipality, projecting growth and change in
population, economic conditions and land use, and recommending measure
to improve streets, utilities and community facilities, and allocate land to
cope with such growth and change.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use which may not be appropriate to a particular
zoning district as a whole, but which may be suitable in certain localities
within the district only when specific conditions and criteria prescribed
for such uses have been complied with. Conditional uses are reviewed by
Borough Council after recommendations by the Planning Commission, in
accordance with § 460-60 of this chapter.[Added 5-3-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-04]
CONVENIENCE SALE — Retail sales of popular everyday disposable
products with limited choices, and available over a much wider time frame
than usual retail sales outlets, including gasoline sales from pump islands.
CONVERSION APARTMENT — A dwelling unit created from within a singlefamily
detached dwelling (see § 460-25D).
COUNCIL — The duly elected governing body of Indiana Borough, Indiana
County, PA, with specific duties in connection with this chapter (see
§ 460-7A).
COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission and staff
of Indiana County, PA.
§ 460-62 INDIANA CODE § 460-62
1:550
COVERAGE — The extent to which a building occupies the lot on which the
building is located, expressed as a percentage of the building's area on the
lot to the total lot area.
CREMATORY — A building fitted with proper appliances for the purpose of
the incineration or cremation of dead human bodies.[Added 2-2-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-03]
CURATIVE AMENDMENT — An amendment proposed by a property owner
challenging the validity of zoning regulations as they apply to property in
which he has an interest and requiring municipal action on his petition or
a municipal curative amendment, in which the Borough Council declares a
moratorium on specific parts of this chapter in order to cure alleged defects
(see § 460-57I).
CUTOFF LUMINAIRE LIGHTING — Light fixtures shielded so the source of
the light is not visible from off the property on which the fixture is located,
and no light is allowed to escape upward from the source.
DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility for the care of dependent persons operated
by a qualified individual or staff while parents or guardians are at work.
DECK — An open platform, without permanent roof or walls, raised above
ground level and usually attached along one or more edges to a building.
DENSITY — A measure of the number of dwellings on a given area of
land, usually expressed as the minimum number of square feet of lot area
established by this chapter for each dwelling unit. Density may also be the
minimum area of a bedroom required to allow occupancy by one or more
individuals.
DEVELOPER — An individual landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant
with the landowner's permission, who or which causes development to
occur upon a lot and who is responsible for compliance of such development
with the terms of this chapter and other Borough regulations.
DEVELOPMENT — The erection, expansion or alteration of a building or
structure; the altering of the land surface to receive construction; the
subdividing of land in anticipation of its receiving construction or the
offering of land for such purpose; or any man-made change to improved or
unimproved property within a flood hazard area, including but not limited
to paving, placing of utilities, filling, grading, or excavating.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The written and graphic provisions describing a
proposed development in sufficient detail so that its compliance with the
requirements of this chapter may be conclusively judged.
DISTRICT REGULATIONS — The group of standards, including lot size,
building setback and coverage, and land use limitations that govern
development in a particular zone district.
DORMITORY — A residential facility designed for student use containing
bedrooms, suites of rooms, shared bathrooms and common facilities, such
as a recreation room, kitchen, dining area and laundry, arranged as
§ 460-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-62
1:551
required by Chapter 327, Property Maintenance, of the Code of the Borough
of Indiana.
DRIVEWAY — The vehicular entrance to a property connecting to the
adjacent public street.
DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICES — An arrangement which permits customers
to transact business without leaving their cars.
DWELLING — A group of connecting rooms in a building for the exclusive
residential use of one family, containing its own private cooking, food
storage, bathing and toilet facilities, and connecting either directly or by
a common hall and/or stairs to the outside, but not including hotels,
dormitories, or nursing homes.
EARTH MOVEMENT — The rearranging of the elevations of a site to
accommodate a development on the site, involving a site plan addressing
erosion control and stormwater management; also called "grading."
EROSION — The removal of soil particles by action of wind, rain, freezing
and thawing, and the movement of such particles downhill to be deposited
on lower ground or in streams.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Any element in the system or of a service
provided or maintained by a public utility or a government agency for the
public's health, safety and welfare, including, but not limited to, systems
to convey water, sewage, gas, electricity, telephone, or communications
systems, or services related thereto, including, but not limited to, road
maintenance and repair, law enforcement, and fire protection and including
DWELLING, SINGLE-FUNCTIONAL FAMILY DETACHED — A building
containing only one dwelling and no other principal uses surrounded on
all sides and above by open space and occupied by a functional family.
[Amended 8-7-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-03]
A.
DWELLING, TWO-FUNCTIONAL FAMILY — A detached building,
surrounded by outside space on all sides and above containing only two
dwellings, situated side by side and separated by a common wall, or
one above the other separated by a common horizontal element serving
as the floor of the upper dwelling and ceiling of the lower dwelling,
such element free of opening except for utility lines, chimney stacks,
and stairways connecting the upper dwelling to the ground level. Each
dwelling shall be independent of the other in terms of access, except
that the two units may have a common foyer entrance, porch, driveway
and/or common utility entrance. Each unit shall be occupied by a
functional family. [Amended 8-7-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-03]
B.
DWELLING MULTIPLE FAMILY — A building containing at least three
dwelling units with either separate access to the outside from each
unit, or with common access via halls, stairways and/or elevators to the
outside.
C.
DWELLING UNIT — One of a group of dwellings in a building or group
of buildings.
D.
§ 460-62 INDIANA CODE § 460-62
1:552
structures or buildings specifically located and used to treat, store, transfer,
regulate, maintain, or otherwise operate the aforementioned systems or
services.177
FINISHED GRADE — The contour of the land at the conclusion of a
development project.
FLOODPLAIN — See § 460-24G.
FLOOR AREA — The total horizontal interior area that is owned or leased
as a unit except for storage and stock areas, rest rooms, receiving/shipping
and merchandise repair/alteration areas, utility rooms, corridors not open
to the public, and display windows, such total floor area used to determine
the minimum number of parking spaces needed to serve the use.
FRATERNITY OR SORORITY, UNIVERSITY-RELATED — An organization
that is recognized by Indiana University of Pennsylvania as meeting the
University's definition of a fraternity or sorority.
FUNCTIONAL FAMILY — Either an individual or a group of people plus
their offspring, having a relationship which is functionally equivalent to a
family. The relationship must be of a permanent and distinct character with
a demonstrable and recognizable bond characteristic of a cohesive unit.
Functional family does not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority,
association, lodge, organization or students where the common living
arrangement or basis for the establishment of the housekeeping unit is
temporary.[Added 8-7-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-03178]
FUNERAL HOME — A place or premise wherein a licensed funeral director
conducts the professional practice of funeral directing, including the
preparation, care and funeral services for the human dead.[Added
2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building on a residential lot attached
to or detached from the dwelling, or a room within the dwelling, intended
for the storage and maintenance of vehicles and equipment owned and
operated by the residents of the dwelling and not for repair of vehicles for
profit, or a garage on a business property as an accessory use to serve only
the parking needs of employees and customers.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A principal use of a property providing vehicle parking
and open to the public for a fee or by lease, but not including an auto repair
facility or automobile sales or display.
HARDSHIP — A condition created by the size, width or configuration of
a lot and/or its surface characteristics that make development of the lot
conforming to the requirements of this chapter very difficult or impossible.
HEARING OFFICER — An individual member of the Zoning Hearing Board
appointed by the Board Chairman to hear and decide a particular appeal or
177. Editor's Note: The former definition of "family," which immediately followed this
definition, was repeated 8-7-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-03.
178. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the words “functional family” shall be
considered the equivalent to the word “family” in this chapter.
§ 460-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-62
1:553
request brought to the Board because one or more Board members have a
conflict of interest or are otherwise unable to hear the matter resulting in
the lack of a quorum.
HEDGE, PERIMETER PLANTING — A linear arrangement of plantings
along a property boundary that grow together to present, when viewed in
elevation, a surface at least 50% opaque from ground level to the minimum
height of the top of the hedge, if such planting is required as a buffer
separating residential from business premises, or of a certain maximum
height but optional opaqueness if the hedge is not required (see § 460-23A
and B).
HIGHWAY OCCUPANCY PERMIT — Written permission granted to a
property owner abutting a public road giving the owner the right to enter
the road from his property at a location approved by the public agency
having jurisdiction over the road.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure or property, collection of
structures, and their associated accessory structures deemed of importance
to the history, architecture or culture of an area(s) by an appropriate
local or state governmental jurisdiction.[Added 2-2-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-03]
HOME OCCUPATION — A service type small business conducted within a
dwelling by residents of the dwelling, involving no exterior manifestation
of the business, except for a sign (see § 460-30A) or expansion of the
dwelling to accommodate it without creating nuisance conditions in the
neighborhood where it is located (see § 460-26A).[Amended 10-5-1999 by
Ord. No. 1999-07]
HOSPITAL — An establishment that provides a full range of medical and
support services, both inpatient and outpatient, for general and/or
specialized practice.
HOTEL — A building or complex of buildings laid out in rooms and/or suites
for overnight accommodation of guests. A hotel may include as part of
the operation a dining room, bar, conference rooms, fitness facilities and
parking lot. The term "hotel" includes motel.
LANDOWNER — The individual, corporation or other entity whose name
appears on the current deed for a property as the owner of record.
LAND USE — The principal activity or activities for which a lot or property
and the buildings or structures on it are devoted.
LARGE-SCALE DEVELOPMENT — Any development of 86,000 square feet
or more in area.[Added 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
LITERAL MEANING — Interpretation of the contents of this chapter to the
letter without judgment or opinion that would shade or slant the meaning of
any section, clause, phrase or word.
LOT — An area of contiguous land surface which abuts a street, whose
ownership and legal description are of record in the office of the County
Recorder of Deeds, and which is intended to contain one principal use.
§ 460-62 INDIANA CODE § 460-62
1:554
A lot implies one of a number of similarly sized properties in a plan, but
may include any property, tract or parcel of land regardless of size or
configuration for the purposes of this chapter.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — The revision or addition of any lot line consisting
of more than three properties.[Added 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
MINI-STORAGE — Storage units available for rent, appealing to
householders and small businesses for short- or long-term use, normally in
a grouping of many units in a secure setting with a variety of small storage
rooms.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — The revision or addition of any lot line consisting
of three or less properties.[Added 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one integral unit, or in two or more
units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of later being
separated and towed on its own chassis and wheels to another site. Such
LOT AREA — The total horizontal surface area within the lot boundary
lines, measured in square feet and determined by deed, survey or
county lot and block map descriptions.
A.
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting two streets which intersect at one
corner of the lot. A corner lot has two front yards and two side yards
(see also § 460-19D).
B.
LOT DEPTH — The dimension between the center of the front lot line
and the center of the rear lot line.
C.
LOT FRONTAGE — The distance across the front of a lot between side
lot lines where they intersect the right-of-way line of the street to which
the lot is oriented and which carries its street address.
D.
E. LOT LINE — Any of the lines describing the perimeter of a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The line abutting the street to which the lot is
oriented.
F.
G. LOT LINE, REAR — The line most distant from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — The lines on either side of a lot connecting the front
and rear lot lines, and called an interior lot line when abutting another
lot or a secondary street lot line when abutting a secondary street in
the case of a corner lot.
H.
LOT OF RECORD — A lot duly recorded in the office of the Indiana
County Recorder of Deeds.
I.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot whose front and rear lines abut street rightsof-
way.
J.
LOT WIDTH — The distance across a lot measured along the front
setback line between the side lot lines.
K.
§ 460-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-62
1:555
mobile home arrives ready for occupancy except for utility connections and
minor assembly operations (see § 460-25A).
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — A business or commercial activity
administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary
to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client,
or patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or
removal functions to or from the premises, in excess of those normally
associated with residential use.[Added 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-03]
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot whose area and/or width or depth are
less than the minimum dimensions established by this chapter for the zone
district in which the lot is located. Such lots are otherwise lawfully in
existence but have become nonconforming either by the initial adoption of
this chapter or by subsequent amendment.[Amended 4-6-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-02]
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A building or structure whose height
and/or placement on its lot relative to setback from one or more property
lines is in violation of the minimum setback and/or maximum heights
established by this chapter for the zone district in which the lot is located.
A building or group of buildings that cover more area on their lot than
permitted by this chapter would also be nonconforming buildings. Such
structures are otherwise lawfully in existence but have become
nonconforming either by the initial adoption of this chapter or by
subsequent amendment.[Amended 4-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-02]
NONCONFORMING USE — A use of land or buildings or both which is not
listed as a permitted use in Article III of this chapter for the zone district in
which the lot containing the use is located. Such uses are otherwise lawfully
in existence but have become nonconforming either by the initial adoption
of this chapter or by subsequent amendments.
NURSING HOME — An establishment where persons are lodged and
furnished with meals and appropriate support, licensed for operation by
the Commonwealth. The term "nursing home" includes an extended care
facility where skilled nursing care is provided to bed-ridden or convalescent
individuals, or a hospice, where terminally ill individuals are provided
supporting and specialty skilled care.
OFFICE, HEALTH SERVICES — An establishment offering medical, dental
or chiropractic services operated by a single licensed doctor, dentist or
chiropractor on the premises.
OFF-SITE PARKING — Parking spaces that are permanently available to
serve a land use, as required by this chapter, but are located on a lot other
than that on which the use is located; such spaces guaranteed by a lease
(see § 460-36).
PARKING LOT, PRIVATE — An accessory use of off-street parking spaces
reserved for the exclusive use of tenants, employees, or customers of the
property.[Amended 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-04]
§ 460-62 INDIANA CODE § 460-62
1:556
PARKING LOT, PUBLIC — A group of off-street parking spaces that are
available for the general public and are usually the principal use of the
property on which they are located.
PARKING, OFF-STREET — Parking spaces located entirely outside of any
public right-of-way.
PARKING SPACE — An area within a parking lot or garage of sufficient
width and depth to accommodate one vehicle, abutting an access aisle (see
§ 460-34).
PATIO — An outdoor area, paved or otherwise surfaced, at or in close
proximity to the surrounding ground level. Patios may be protected by an
awning but shall not have permanent roofs or walls, and may occupy no
more than 10% of the lot area.
PAVED SURFACE — An impervious surface that is a horizontal area that
does not permit the passage of water through it. A pervious surface allows
water to pass through it.
PENNSYLVANIA MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE — Legislation
adopted by the state in 1968, and amended on several occasions since,179
which provides a uniform procedure enabling municipalities to implement
regulations, such as this chapter, to control the development and use of
land.
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS — Limitations on noise, glare, smoke
emission, vibration, odor and similar effects of business operations that
may downgrade nearby residential or other properties if not regulated (see
§ 460-28E).
PERIPHERAL EDGE — The external boundary or edge of a zoning district
that faces a residential district, museum, historic structure or other similar
use.[Added 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
PERMANENT RESIDENCE — Primary domicile occupied by the owner for
at least 10 months out of a twelve-month period.[Added 8-7-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-03]
PERMITTED USE, PRINCIPAL — A use allowed by right under the terms of
this chapter to occur on a lot because of the lot's location in a particular
zoning district. Principal permitted uses are listed for each zone district
and imply that all other activity on the lot is or will be secondary to the
principal use. Such uses may be approved directly by the Zoning Officer
without reference to other review bodies.
PERSONAL CARE HOME — A residence licensed by the commonwealth
which provides accommodations, including meals, as regulated by Chapter
327, Property Maintenance, of the Code of the Borough of Indiana, for a
limited number of persons who are mobile but need help with daily living
requirements.
179. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 460-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-62
1:557
PETITION — A written request to Borough Council presented by property
owners asking for consideration of an amendment of this chapter.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The body appointed by Borough Council from
residents of Indiana Borough with specific duties in connection with this
chapter (see § 460-7B).
PLANNING DEPARTMENT — The personnel directed by Borough Council
to perform specific duties in connection with this chapter (see
§ 460-7B).[Added 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
PLANNING DIRECTOR — The person hired by Borough Council to oversee
the Planning Department with specific duties in connection with this
chapter (see § 460-7B).[Added 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
PORCH — An outdoor attachment to a building raised above the
surrounding ground level, which may have a permanent roof but is not
enclosed.
POSTING — The placement of a notice upon a signboard or upon a building
or structure on a property calling public attention to proposed changes
in the zoning status or the property, or to a request for a variance, and
indicating the date, time and place of the hearing at which the matter will
be heard.
PRINCIPAL ACCESS — The principal entry and/or egress to a development
or parcel. If development or parcel bordered by two or more streets, it will
be determined by the street with the larger right-of-way and/or legal street
address.[Added 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE — The building or structure containing the
principal permitted use on the lot, such use possibly occurring in more than
one building or structure.
PROPERTY — For purposes of this chapter, land whose boundary is clearly
described and closes on itself, is in one ownership, and may include
structures and buildings thereon. A lot is a property.
PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, AND GENERAL WELFARE — The protection
of these values is the legal basis for zoning and implies that zoning is
needed to prevent the spread of fire, disease and blighting conditions, and
to prevent the encouragement of hazards and the development of land
uses and land use relationships that would reduce property values and/or
interfere with the normal enjoyment and enhancement of private property.
PUBLIC HEARING — An official meeting, properly advertised in advance,
called by the Borough Council, Planning Commission, or Zoning Hearing
Board, for the purpose of taking testimony on the matter being heard, as a
basis for the calling body to make a later recommendation or decision.
PUBLIC NOTICE — An announcement published in the legal section of the
principal newspaper serving the Indiana Borough area, such announcement
appearing once each week for two consecutive weeks the first time not
more than 30 days and the second time not less than seven days before the
hearing, stating the date, time, and place of the hearing and a description
§ 460-62 INDIANA CODE § 460-62
1:558
of the matter to be heard; also the posting of a notice upon an affected
property with the same information.
PUBLIC UTILITY — A system providing distribution of potable water, gas,
electronic, telephone, telecommunications or cable TV services, or the
collection, treatment, and disposal of wastewater.
PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITY — Any building housing equipment that
intervenes in, or enhances the flow over a public utility line, but not
including the actual transmission pipes or lines or their supports.
RESTRICTIVE COVENANT — An agreement between a developer and
purchasers of lots or units in a plan, such agreement restricting the use
of the lots or units but applying uniformly to all the lots or units, recorded
with the plan, applicable for a specific time period, and modified only
upon approval of the agreement signers. Restrictive covenants are not
enforceable by the Borough. Where requirements of a restrictive covenant
are in conflict with another regulation, the more restrictive regulation shall
prevail.
RETAINING WALL — An engineered structure designed to hold back earth
behind it [see § 460-23D(3)].
RETIREMENT HOME — Housing for persons generally aged 65 and over
not requiring constant medical supervision, in a communal setting which
may include dining facilities and meeting rooms, as well as individual
apartments.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land dedicated to, and usually improved for
vehicular and/or pedestrian travel by the public, as opposed to an easement,
which is a strip of land dedicated for one or more public utilities or for
private access and is not open to the public.
SCHEDULE OF FEES — The list of charges adopted by resolution of the
Borough Council, and not a part of this chapter, to cover the costs of
administering the review, decision and/or appeal processes required for a
development proposal, such costs to be borne by the developer, paid in
advance, and subject to periodic revision by the Council.
SCREENING — See "buffering."
SERVICING AREA — An area on a business lot set aside to maneuver
and position trucks to load and unload products required or made by the
business.
SETBACK — The minimum distance a building or structure must be
removed from an adjacent lot line as required by this chapter in the various
zone districts. Distance between lot line and building shall be measured
along a line at right angles to the lot line.
SIGN — Any structure, building, wall, or other outdoor surface, or any
device or part thereof, which displays or includes any letter, word, model,
banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device, or other representations used for
announcement, direction, advertisement or identification. The actual area
of any sign shall be measured in square feet and determined by the sum
§ 460-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-62
1:559
of the geometrically computed area(s) encompassing separate individual
letters, words, or graphic elements on the background.[Amended
9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-05]
SIGN, BILLBOARD — A sign that directs attention to a business, commodity,
service, or entertainment, conducted, sold, or offered other than upon the
premises on which the sign is located.[Added 9-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-05]
SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY — A sign or portion thereof which has a
readerboard for the display of text information in which each alphanumeric
character, graphic or symbol is defined by objects, not consisting of an
illumination device and may be changed or rearranged manually or
mechanically with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed
or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign.[Added
9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-05]
SIGN, ELECTRONIC — Electronic signs are identified by their subtype:
electronic changeable copy signs, electronic graphic display signs, multivision
signs, or video display signs.[Added 9-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-05]
SIGN, ELECTRONIC CHANGEABLE COPY — A sign or portion thereof that
displays single-color electronic information in which each alphanumeric
character, graphic, or symbol is defined by a small number of matrix
elements using different combinations of single color light emitting diodes
(LEDs), fiber optics, light bulbs or other illumination devices within the
display area. Electronic changeable copy signs include computer
programmable, microprocessor controlled electronic displays. Electronic
changeable copy signs do not include official or time and temperature signs.
Electronic changeable copy signs include projected images or messages
with these characteristics onto buildings or other objects.[Added 9-8-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-05]
SIGN, ELECTRONIC GRAPHIC DISPLAY — A sign or portion thereof that
displays multiple-color electronic, static images, static graphics or static
pictures, with or without text information, defined by a small number of
matrix elements using different combinations of light-emitting diodes
(LEDs), fiber optics, light bulbs or other illumination devices within the
display area where the message change sequence is accomplished
immediately or by means of fade, repixalization or dissolve modes.
Electronic graphic display signs include computer programmable,
microprocessor controlled electronic or digital displays. Electronic graphic
display signs include projected images or messages with these
characteristics onto buildings or other objects.[Added 9-8-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-05]
SIGN, FACADE, FASCIA, OR WALL — A sign that is in any manner affixed to
any exterior wall of a building or structure and that projects not more than
18 inches from the building or structure wall. Also includes signs affixed
to architectural projections that project from a building, provided the copy
area of such signs remains on a parallel plane to the face of the building
facade or to the face or faces of the architectural projection to which it is
§ 460-62 INDIANA CODE § 460-62
1:560
affixed.[Added 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-05; amended 2-2-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-03]
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A sign principally supported by one or more
columns, poles, or braces placed in or upon the ground.[Added 9-8-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-05; amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
SIGN, MULTI-VISION — Any sign composed in whole or in part of a series of
vertical or horizontal slats or cylinders that are capable of being rotated at
intervals so that partial rotation of the group of slats or cylinders produces
a different image and when properly functioning allows on a single sign
structure the display at any given time one of two or more images.[Added
9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-05]
SIGN, PROJECTING — A sign other than a wall sign that is attached to
or projects more than 18 inches from a building face or wall or from a
structure the primary purpose of which is other than the support of a
sign.[Added 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-05; amended 2-2-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-03
SIGN, ROOF — A sign mounted on the main roof portion of a building or on
the uppermost edge of a parapet wall of a building and which is wholly or
partially supported by such building. Signs mounted on mansard facades,
pent eaves, and architectural projections, such as canopies or marquees,
shall not be considered to be roof signs.[Added 9-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-05; amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03
§ 460-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-62
1:561
SIGN, SANDWICH BOARD — A temporary sign created by attaching two
sign faces at a single point, intended to be self-supporting.[Added
9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-05]
SIGN, VIDEO DISPLAY — A sign that changes its message or background in
a manner or method of display characterized by motion or pictorial imagery,
which may or may not include text and depicts action or a special effect to
imitate movement, the presentation of pictorials or graphics displayed in a
progression of frames which give the illusion of motion, including, but not
limited to, the illusion of moving objects, moving patterns or bands of light,
or expanding or contracting shapes, not including electronic changeable
copy signs. Video display signs include projected images or messages with
these characteristics onto buildings or other objects.[Added 9-8-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-05]
SIGN, WINDOW — A sign affixed to the surface of a window with its
message intended to be visible to exterior environment.[Added 9-8-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-05]
SITE PLAN — The proposed layout of a lot showing on a scaled drawing all
elements of the site development as well as utility and drainage lines, site
grading and existing buildings and structures to remain.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — Such uses are listed for each zone district in
Article III of this chapter and may be approved by the Zoning Hearing Board
after receiving recommendations from the Planning Commission. Special
exceptions are site specific and require extra consideration because they
have, in the wrong location, the potential to create conditions that could
degrade adjoining properties and/or the surrounding neighborhood.
SPOT ZONING — The rezoning of a lot or several contiguous lots into a
substantially different zoning classification with development opportunities
not shared by surrounding properties, for the benefit of one or several
adjacent landowners who have an interest in the rezoning.
STENOGRAPHIC RECORD — A verbatim transcription of testimony taken
at a public hearing by a professional stenographer.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan to govern the collection,
retention and release of stormwater in a manner to minimize damage of
downstream property (see § 460-23D).
STORY — The volume of space between the surface of any floor and the
surface of the floor directly above it, or if no floor above, then the ceiling
above. For a story to be used for residential purposes, the minimum floor
to ceiling height shall be not less than seven feet. Any floor area with less
than five feet clear floor to ceiling height shall not be used in calculating
§ 460-62 INDIANA CODE § 460-62
1:562
required minimum floor area for a dwelling unit. The ground or first story
shall be considered the one on which is located the principal access to the
building, usually oriented toward the street upon which the building fronts.
STREET — A public right-of-way adopted by Indiana Borough as a vehicular
and/or pedestrian way, maintained in perpetuity by the Borough or the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, connecting to other streets to create the
Borough's circulation system, and providing access to abutting lots.
STREET WALL — An architecturally designed freestanding wall six feet to
10 feet in height and constructed of either brick or stone, built to obstruct
the view of a parking area from the street that is faces.[Added 2-2-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-03]
STRUCTURE — Any man-made construction in, on, or over the ground and
attached thereto. The term "structure" includes buildings.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS — Revisions to a building or structure that
change the dimensions of the exterior envelope or that change the interior
components that support the building or structure.
SUBDIVISION — The reduction of a property into two or more separate
conforming lots.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER — A freestanding structure supporting
its own weight, the principal use of which is to elevate telecommunications
equipment owned and operated by an entity not regulated by the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission, including accessory buildings at
ground level necessary for the elevated equipments operation but not
including ground-mounted satellite dishes or antennas for private,
noncommercial use.
TOWNHOUSE or ROW HOUSE — One of at least three but not more than
eight attached dwelling units, each unit with at least two means of egress
directly to the outside, and with no part of one unit above or below another
unit.
TRANSITIONAL RESIDENTIAL FACILITY — A dwelling which is a
temporary residence for persons who are moving from an institutional to an
unsupervised setting.
UNRELATED INDIVIDUAL — A person who is not a member of the family
occupying the same dwelling unit. Where unrelated individuals occupy a
dwelling unit, they may not accommodate boarders, as provided for in
§§ 460-11C(7) and 460-12C(9) of this chapter, if such accommodation would
raise the total number of unrelated individuals in the dwelling unit above
three in the R-1 and R-2 Zones, or above five in all other cases.
VARIANCE — A grant by the Zoning Hearing Board permitting an owner
to use a lot not wholly in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
because the Board finds, after receiving recommendations from the
Planning Commission, that strict conformance would be an unusual
hardship not created by the owner, but depriving him of reasonable use
of the lot. Such a grant specifies a minimum deviation or deviations from
§ 460-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-62
1:563
the regulations intended to cure the hardship but not create detrimental
conditions affecting abutting property owners or the public at large.
YARD — The open space along the front, sides and rear of a lot, between
the lot lines and adjacent setback or building lines, the width of which is
specified for each type of yard within each zoning district by this chapter.
Development within yard areas is restricted.
ZONING CLASSIFICATION — The controls imposed by this chapter that
define the uses of land and buildings and the intensity of such uses that
may occur within a zoning district, such controls to be applied uniformly
throughout the district.
ZONING DISTRICT — A contiguous area of land on all parts of which the
same uniform opportunities for development apply.
ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARY — The perimeter line completely enclosing
a zoning district.
ZONING HEARING BOARD — A body appointed by the Borough Council
to examine and decide requests for special exceptions and appeals for
variances or from decisions of the Zoning Officer, to hear testimony
regarding the validity of this chapter upon development, and to decide other
issues specified in this chapter, conditioned by recommendations received
from the Planning Commission.
ZONING MAP — The plan of zoning districts for Indiana Borough as initially
adopted and subsequently amended. The official Zoning Map (see § 460-8),
located in the Borough Office, shows the current zoning district boundaries
and supersedes all other Zoning Maps.180
ZONING OFFICIAL — A person appointed by and responsible to Borough
Council to enforce the regulations of this chapter in accordance with its
literal terms, and to carry out other duties as specified by this chapter (see
§ 460-54), and as directed by Council.[Amended 2-2-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-03]
ZONING PERMIT — A document attesting that a proposal for development
has been reviewed and approved in accordance with the requirements
of this chapter and allowing the construction to commence.181[Amended
6-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-07]
YARD, FRONT — The area of a lot between the front lot line and front
setback line the full width of the lot between the side lot lines.
A.
YARD, REAR — The area of a lot between the rear lot line and rear
setback line the full width of the lot between the side lot lines.
B.
YARD, SIDE — The area of a lot between the side lot line and side
setback line extending from the front to the rear yards.
C.
YARD DEPTH — The distance between the lot line and adjacent parallel
setback line, measured at right angles to the lot line.
D.
180. Editor's Note: A copy of the Zoning Map is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 460-62 INDIANA CODE § 460-62
1:564
181. Editor's Note: Former Art. XI, Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay Zone, added
9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-05, which immediately followed, as amended, was repealed
7-2-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-03.
§ 460-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-62
1:565
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1971 Code of Ordinances to 2009 Code
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. I.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title From 1971 Code of
Ordinances Location in 2009 Code
Chapter I, Administration and
Government
Part 1, Elected Officers
Section 1, Salary of Mayor Ch. 99, Art. II
Section 2, Tax Collector's
Commission
Ch. 99, Art. I
Part 2, Appointed Officers
Sections 11 to 19, Borough
Manager
Ch. 55, Art. I
Sections 20 to 22, Independent
Auditor
Ch. 55, Art. II
Sections 23 to 30, Reserved N/A
Part 3, Authorities
Sections 31 to 32, Parking
Authority
Repealed by Ord. No. 2008-06
Sections 33 to 34, Municipal
Authority
Repealed by Ord. No. 2008-06
Sections 35 to 50, Reserved N/A
Part 4, Boards and Commissions
Section 51, Borough Planning
Commission Created
Ch. 78
Sections 52 to 60, Reserved N/A
Part 5, Police Department
Sections 61 to 63, Police
Department
Repealed by Ord. No. 2004-04
Sections 65 to 74, Reserved N/A
Part 6, Firemen's Relief
§ 460-62 INDIANA CODE § DT-1
1:566
Chapter/Title From 1971 Code of
Ordinances Location in 2009 Code
Sections 71 to 72, Firemen's
Relief Association and Duties of
Borough Treasurer
Ch. 32
Sections 73 to 80, Reserved N/A
Part 7, Social Security, Pensions and
Retirement
Subpart A, Social Security for
Borough Officers and Employees
Sections 81 to 83, Social
Security
Ch. 67, Art. I
Sections 84 to 90, Reserved N/A
Subpart B, Police Pensions and
Benefits
Sections 91 to 130, Reserved N/A
Part 8, Employee Regulations and
Benefits
Sections 131 to 136, Group
Insurance Benefits
REP
Sections 137 to 160, Reserved N/A
Part 9, Fiscal Affairs
Sections 161 to 168, Capital
Reserve Fund
NCM
Sections 169 to 170, State
Purchase Contracts
Ch. 90
Sections 171 to 190, Reserved N/A
Part 10, Libraries
Section 191 to 195, Library Ch. 44
Section 196 to 220, Reserved N/A
Part 11, Federal Flood Insurance
Section 221, Implementation of
National Flood Insurance
Program
REP
Part 12, Educational Services Agency
Sections 251 to 260, Educational
Service Agency
Repealed by Ord. No. 2008-06
Chapter II, Air Pollution
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:567
Chapter/Title From 1971 Code of
Ordinances Location in 2009 Code
Sections 1 to 2, Burning of
Substances Causing Odor or Dense
Smoke Prohibited and Penalty for
Violation
Superseded by Ord. No. 1711
Chapter III, Animals
Part 1, Nuisances
Sections 1 to 7, Animal
Nuisances
Superseded by Ord. No.
2000-08
Part 2, Police Dogs
Sections 21 to 24, Abuse and
Attempted Abuse Prohibited
REP
Chapter IV, Bicycles
Sections 1 to 11, Bicycle
Requirements
Repealed by Ord. No. 2005-05
Chapter V, Buildings
Part 1, Building Code
Sections 1 to 9, Building
Construction
REP
Sections 10 to 20, Reserved N/A
Part 2, Electrical Code
Sections 21 to 25, Electrical
Standards
REP
Sections 26 to 30, Reserved N/A
Part 3, Mechanical Code
Sections 31 to 32, Mechanical
Standards
REP
Chapter VI, Conduct
Part 1, Disorderly Conduct
Sections 1 to 3, Disorderly
Conduct
Ch. 184
Section 4, Use of Firearms
Restricted
Ch. 210
Section 5, Ball Playing,
Snowballing and Throwing
Stones and Other Missiles upon
on onto Streets, Alleys and
Sidewalks Prohibited
Ch. 400, Art. IV
Sections 6 to 11, Tampering with
Public Property
REP
§ DT-1 INDIANA CODE § DT-1
1:568
Chapter/Title From 1971 Code of
Ordinances Location in 2009 Code
Sections 12 to 16, Noise Ch. 275
Sections 17 to 19, Aircraft Ch. 120
Section 20, Reserved N/A
Part 2, Pornography Promotion
Sections 21 to 25, Promoting
Pornography
REP
Chapter VII, Curfew
Sections 1 to 8, Curfew Ch. 176
Chapter VIII, Fire Prevention and Fire
Protection
Part 1, Fire Prevention
Sections 1 to 10, Fire Prevention
Code
REP
Sections 11 to 50, Reserved N/A
Part 2, Fire Protection
Section 51, Members of Fire
Department Authorized to do
Certain Things
Ch. 28, Art. I
Chapter IX, Franchises
Part 1, Electric NCM
Part 2, Gas NCM
Part 3, Telephone NCM
Part 4, Television NCM
Part 5, Water NCM
Chapter X, Garbage and Refuse
Part 1, Garbage Superseded by Ord. No. 1541
Part 2, Rubbish Superseded by Ord. No. 1541
Part 3, Recycling Program
Sections 32 to 38, Recycling Ch. 388, Art. I
Chapter XI, Health and Sanitation
Part 1, Burial of Dead Bodies and
Carcasses
Sections 1 to 3, Burial Ch. 152
Sections 4 to 10, Reserved N/A
Part 2, Food Handlers
Sections 11 to 13, Food Handlers REP
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:569
Chapter/Title From 1971 Code of
Ordinances Location in 2009 Code
Part 3, Grass and Weeds
Sections 31 to 35, Grass, Weeds
and Other Vegetation
Ch. 234
Chapter XII, Housing
Part 1, Property Maintenance Code
Sections 1 to 2, Adoption of
Property Maintenance Code
Ch. 327
Sections 3 to 50, Reserved N/A
Part 2, Listing of Persons Living in
Properties
Sections 51 to 53, Owners,
Operators or Managers to List
Residents and Owner, Operator
or Manager Exempt for Own Unit
Superseded by Ord. No. 1723
Chapter XIII, Licenses, Permits and
General Business Regulations
Part 1, Amusement Devices Superseded by Ord. No. 1677
Sections 1 to 11, Amusement
Devices
Part 2, Junk Dealers
Sections 21 to 29, Junk Dealers Ch. 249
Sections 30 to 40, Reserved N/A
Part 3, Transient Retail Business
Sections 41 to 53, Transient
Retail Businesses
Ch. 301, Art. I
Sections 54 to 70, Reserved N/A
Part 4, Service Stations Repealed by Ord. No. 1395
Chapter XIV, Littering
Sections 1 to 23, Littering Ch. 263
Chapter XV, Mobile Homes and Mobile
Home Parks
(Reserved)
N/A
Chapter XVI, Motor Vehicles and Traffic
Parts 1 and 3, Traffic and Parking
Regulations and Removal and
Impounding of Illegally Parked
Vehicles
Ch. 440
Part 2, Parking Meters Ch. 288
§ DT-1 INDIANA CODE § DT-1
1:570
Chapter/Title From 1971 Code of
Ordinances Location in 2009 Code
Chapter XVII, Parks and Recreation
(Reserved)
N/A
Chapter XVIII, Plumbing
Sections 1 to 10, Plumbing Standards REP
Chapter XIX, Sewers and Sewage
Disposal
Part 1, Sewer Service Within
Borough Limits
Sections 1 to 6, Repealed N/A
Sections 7 to 50, Reserved N/A
Part 2, Sewer Service Outside
Borough Limits
Sections 51 to 56, Sewer Service
Outside Borough Limits
Ch. 360, Part 1
Sections 57 to 70, Reserved N/A
Part 3, Sewer Service Inside and
Outside Borough
Sections 71 to 177, Sewer
Service Inside and Outside
Borough
Ch. 360, Part 2
Chapter XX, Signs and Billboards
(Reserved)
N/A
Chapter XXI, Streets and Sidewalks
Part 1, Streets
Sections 1 to 12, Street Plan;
Street Names
Ch. 400, Art. I
Sections 13 to 50, Reserved N/A
Part 2, Sidewalks
Subpart A, Sidewalk Construction
Sections 51 to 57, Sidewalk
Construction and Repair
Repealed by Ord. No. 1612
Sections 58 to 70, Reserved N/A
Subpart B, Driveways Crossing
Sidewalks
Sections 71 to 75, Driveways
Crossing Sidewalks
Ch. 400, Art. III
Sections 76 to 80, Reserved N/A
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:571
Chapter/Title From 1971 Code of
Ordinances Location in 2009 Code
Subpart C, Snow and Ice
Removal
Sections 81 to 83, Snow and
Ice Removal
Repealed by Ord. No. 1606
Sections 84 to 100, Reserved N/A
Part 3, Streets and Sidewalks
Subpart A, Street and Sidewalk
Obstructions
Section 101, Restriction on
Blocking Streets, Alleys and
Sidewalks by Railroad
Engines, Cars and Trains
REP
Sections 102 to 110,
Reserved
N/A
Subpart B, Street and Sidewalk
Openings and Excavations
Sections 111 to 118,
Openings and Excavations
Ch. 400, Art. II
Sections 119 to 130,
Reserved
N/A
Subpart C, Uses of Streets and
Sidewalks
Section 131, Sledding
Prohibited on Sidewalks,
Restricted on Streets and
Alleys
Repealed by Ord. No. 2005-05
Chapter XXII, Subdivision and Land
Development
NI; NLP
Chapter XXIII, Swimming Pools
(Reserved)
N/A
Chapter XXIV, Taxation, Special
Part 1, Occupation Privilege Superseded by Ord. No.
2004-13
Part 2, Realty Transfer Tax
Sections 31 to 49, Realty
Transfer Tax
Ch. 414, Art. III
Section 50, Reserved N/A
Part 3, Earned Income
§ DT-1 INDIANA CODE § DT-1
1:572
Chapter/Title From 1971 Code of
Ordinances Location in 2009 Code
Sections 51 to 63, Earned Income
Tax
Ch. 414, Art. I
Part 4, Tax Abatement
Sections 71 to 76, Tax Abatement
for Improvements
Ch. 414, Art. II
Chapter XXV, Trees
Parts 1 and 2, Shade Tree
Commission and Shade Tree
Commission Rules and Regulations
Repealed by Ord. No. 2006-04
Chapter XXVI, Water
(Reserved)
N/A
Chapter XXVII, Zoning Repealed by Ord. No. 1722
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2009-04 9-8-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 460
2009-05 9-8-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 460
2009-06 11-3-2009 Management Employees
Pension Plan amendment
See Ch. 67, Art. V
2009-07 11-3-2009 General Employees Pension
Plan amendment
See Ch. 67, Art. IV
2009-08 12-8-2009 Real estate tax rate 2010 NCM
2010-01 3-2-2010 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 67, Art. III
2010-02 4-6-2010 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
2010-03 6-8-2010 Disorderly conduct
amendment
Ch. 184
2010-04 7-12-2010 Nonmanagement Employees
Pension Plan amendment
See Ch. 67, Art. IV
2010-05 7-12-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 440
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:573
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2010-06 7-12-2010 Pretreatment standards
amendment
Ch. 360 Part 3,
reference only
2010-07 8-3-2010 Subdivision and land
development
Ch. 405
2010-08 8-3-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 440
2010-09 12-21-2010 Real estate tax rate 2011 NCM
2011-01 4-5-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 460
2011-02 4-5-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 460
2011-03 6-7-2011 Outdoor fires Ch. 212
2011-04 8-2-2011 Designation of business
improvement district;
designation of management
association
NCM
2011-05 11-8-2011 Nonmanagement Employees
Pension Plan amendment
See Ch. 67, Art. IV
2011-06 11-8-2011 Management Employees
Pension Plan amendment
See Ch. 67, Art. V
2011-07 11-8-2011 Nonmanagement Employees
Pension Plan amendment
See Ch. 67, Art. IV
2011-08 12-6-2011 Real estate tax rate 2012 NCM
2012-01 3-6-2012 Nonmanagement Employees
Pension Plan amendment
See Ch. 67, Art. IV
2012-02 4-3-2012 Flood damage prevention Ch. 220
2012-03 6-5-2012 Intergovernmental agreement NCM
2012-04 11-6-2012 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 67, Art. III
2012-05 12-11-2012 Real estate tax rate 2013 NCM
2012-06 12-11-2012 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 67, Art. III
2012-07 12-11-2012 Transient retail businesses;
soliciting and canvassing
amendment
Ch. 301, Arts. I; II
2013-01 7-2-2013 Bond NCM
2013-02 7-2-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 460
2013-03 7-2-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 460
2013-04 8-6-2013 General Employees Pension
Plan amendment
See Ch. 67, Art. IV
§ DL-1 INDIANA CODE § DL-1
1:574
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2013-05 9-3-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 440
2013-06 12-3-2013 Real estate tax rate 2014 NCM
2014-01 5-6-2014 Planning amendment Ch. 78
2014-02 9-2-2014 Police and code enforcement
services: disorderly gatherings
on private property
amendment; nuisance
properties amendment
Ch. 314, Art. I;
Ch. 314, Art. II
2014-03 9-2-2014 Violations and penalties
amendment
Ch. 184; Ch. 263;
Ch. 275; Ch. 400,
Art. IV; Ch. 434
2014-04 10-7-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 460
2014-05 10-7-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 440
2014-06 11-4-2014 Sewers: pretreatment
standards amendment
See Ch. 360, Part
3
2014-07 11-4-2014 General Employees Pension
Plan amendment
See Ch. 67, Art. IV
2014-08 11-4-2014 Management Employees
Pension Plan amendment
See Ch. 67, Art. V
2014-09 11-4-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 460
2014-010 12-2-2014 Real estate tax rate 2015 NCM
2014-011 12-2-2014 Real estate tax rate 2015: fire
protection services
NCM
2014-012 12-2-2014 Stormwater management
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2017-04
2015-01 4-7-2015 Trees amendment Ch. 427
2015-02 4-7-2015 Nonmanagement Employees
Pension Plan amendment
See Ch. 67, Art. IV
2015-03 7-7-2015 Bond NCM
2015-04 11-3-2015 Bond NCM
2015-05 12-8-2015 Real estate tax rate 2016 NCM
2015-06 12-8-2015 Planning amendment Ch. 78
2016-01 2-2-2016 Planning amendment Ch. 78
2016-02 2-2-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2016-03 2-2-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 460
2016-04 4-5-2016 Officers and employees:
Borough Manager amendment
Ch. 55, Art. I
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:575
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2016-05 6-21-2016 Real estate tax rate 2016
amendment
NCM
2016-06 9-6-2016 Peddling and soliciting:
transient retail business
amendment
Ch. 301, Art. I
2017-01 4-4-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 440
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2017-02 6-6-2017 Grass, Weeds and
Other Vegetation
Repealer
Ch. 234,
reference
only
10
2017-03 6-6-2017 Streets and
Sidewalks: Street
Excavation
Ch. 400,
Art. II
10
2017-04 6-6-2017 Stormwater
Management
Ch. 395 10
2017-05 7-11-2017 Becoming Settlor of
Pennsylvania Local
Government
Investment Trust
NCM 10
2017-06 9-5-2017 General Obligation
Note
NCM 10
2017-07 11-21-2017 Loan; Transfer of
Funds
NCM 10
2017-08 12-5-2017 Real Estate Tax Rate
2018
NCM 10
2017-09 12-5-2017 Capital
Improvement Plan
Budget
NCM 10
2018-01 2-6-2018 Property
Maintenance
Amendment
Ch. 327 10
2018-02 4-3-2018 Construction Codes,
Uniform: Uniform
Construction Code
Administration and
Enforcement
Amendment
Ch. 170,
Art. I
10
2018-03 4-3-2018 Noise Amendment Ch. 275 10
§ DL-1 INDIANA CODE § DL-1
1:576
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2018-04 4-17-2018 General Obligation
Note
NCM 10
2018-05 4-17-2018 Management
Employees Pension
Plan Amendment
See Ch. 67,
Art. V
10
2018-06 4-17-2018 Solid Waste:
Recycling
Amendment;
Storage, Collection
and Transportation
Amendment
Ch. 388,
Art. I; Ch.
388, Art. II
10
2018-07 4-17-2018 Trees Amendment Ch. 427 10
2018-08 6-5-2018 Emergency Access
to Structures
NCM 10
2018-09 9-4-2018 Parking Meters
Amendment
Ch. 288 10
2018-010 12-4-2018 Loan Revision NCM 10
2018-011 12-4-2018 Real Estate Tax Rate
2019
NCM 10
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:577
ZONING

460 Attachment 1
Borough of Indiana
Schedule 1

Zone standards
R-1 R-2 R-3 U-1 C-1 C-2 M-1 MU-1
Minimum lot size 6,000 6,000 5,000 5,000 N/A N/A N/A 6,000
All other permitted and
special use lots
10,000 10,000 8,000 8,000 N/A N/A 45,000 8,000
Minimum yard widths
Front yard (feet) 25 20 20 20 N/A 10 10 12
Side yard each (feet) 6 5 5 5 N/A 5 10 5
Rear yard (feet) 25 25 25 25 N/A 15 15 10
Detached retail building
Front yard (feet) N/A N/A N/A *10 N/A N/A N/A N/A
Side yard (feet) N/A N/A N/A 10 N/A N/A N/A N/A
Rear yard (feet) N/A N/A N/A 10 N/A N/A N/A N/A
Minimum lot frontage
(feet)
50 50 50 50 N/A N/A N/A **50-
65
Minimum lot depth (feet) 100 100 100 100 N/A N/A N/A N/A
Maximum building
coverage
Percent of lot area 40 40 40 40 80 80 65 40
Maximum building height 2 1/2 2 1/2 2 1/2 2 1/2 N/A 5 4 *
Number of stories (feet) 35 35 35 35 75 50 40 *
(* See Number 4 in NOTES)
(** See Number 5 in NOTES)
NOTES:
1. N/A means not applicable: no dimension.
2. In the P-1, University District, no dimensional standards shall apply except building height shall not
exceed 85 feet and eight stories.
3. Any building height over 65 feet shall require approval of a variance by the Zoning Hearing Board,
and no variance for a height greater than 75 feet shall be approved for any reason.
4. All structures in the MU-1 District. West of South 7th Street from School to South Street and West of
Wayne Avenue from South to Maple Street shall have a maximum height of 50 feet or four stories.
Structures in the MU-1 District along the peripheral edge and the area East of Flemming Avenue to
South 7th Street between Grant Street and Carter Avenue shall have a maximum height of 30 feet or
2 1/2 stories. All other structures in the MU-1 district shall have a maximum height of 40 feet or
three stories.
5. All parcels over 10,000 square feet or more shall have a reduction to the minimum lot frontage to 50
feet.
460 Attachment 1:1 04 - 01 - 2017

ZONING
460 Attachment 1
Borough of Indiana
Schedule 1

Zone standards
R-1 R-2 R-3 U-1 C-1 C-2 M-1 MU-1
Minimum lot size 6,000 6,000 5,000 5,000 N/A N/A N/A 6,000
All other permitted and
special use lots
10,000 10,000 8,000 8,000 N/A N/A 45,000 8,000
Minimum yard widths
Front yard (feet) 25 20 20 20 N/A 10 10 12
Side yard each (feet) 6 5 5 5 N/A 5 10 5
Rear yard (feet) 25 25 25 25 N/A 15 15 10
Detached retail building
Front yard (feet) N/A N/A N/A *10 N/A N/A N/A N/A
Side yard (feet) N/A N/A N/A 10 N/A N/A N/A N/A
Rear yard (feet) N/A N/A N/A 10 N/A N/A N/A N/A
Minimum lot frontage
(feet)
50 50 50 50 N/A N/A N/A **50-
65
Minimum lot depth (feet) 100 100 100 100 N/A N/A N/A N/A
Maximum building
coverage
Percent of lot area 40 40 40 40 80 80 65 40
Maximum building height 2 1/2 2 1/2 2 1/2 2 1/2 N/A 5 4 *
Number of stories (feet) 35 35 35 35 75 50 40 *
(* See Number 4 in NOTES)
(** See Number 5 in NOTES)
NOTES:
1. N/A means not applicable: no dimension.
2. In the P-1, University District, no dimensional standards shall apply except building height shall not
exceed 85 feet and eight stories.
3. Any building height over 65 feet shall require approval of a variance by the Zoning Hearing Board,
and no variance for a height greater than 75 feet shall be approved for any reason.
4. All structures in the MU-1 District. West of South 7th Street from School to South Street and West of
Wayne Avenue from South to Maple Street shall have a maximum height of 50 feet or four stories.
Structures in the MU-1 District along the peripheral edge and the area East of Flemming Avenue to
South 7th Street between Grant Street and Carter Avenue shall have a maximum height of 30 feet or
2 1/2 stories. All other structures in the MU-1 district shall have a maximum height of 40 feet or
three stories.
5. All parcels over 10,000 square feet or more shall have a reduction to the minimum lot frontage to 50
feet.
460 Attachment 1:1 04 - 01 - 2017